















































Hansard: December 10, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2853 
 December 10, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the negative consequences the signing of the Kyoto 
Protocol would have on the people and the economy of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition is signed by residents of Codette and Carrot River. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present a petition from citizens throughout the province 
who resist signing on to the Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Weyburn, Tribune, and McTaggart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present 
today from citizens who are concerned about the Kyoto accord. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to immediately take all necessary action to 
protect our province’s economy and work to halt the 
federal government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord 
in its current form. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Kelvington, and Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to ensure the responsible use of natural 
resources by all citizens. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Langenburg, Stockholm, Bredenbury, and Yarbo. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to immediately take all necessary action to 
protect our province’s economy and work to halt the 
federal government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord 
in its current form. 
 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from the 
communities of Pleasantdale, Naicam, and Spalding. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with a petition 
signed by citizens concerned with the economic impact the 
Kyoto Protocol may have on Saskatchewan. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Drinkwater, Marquis, Spring Valley, Cairn, 
Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
imposition of the Kyoto accord on the people of Saskatchewan 
is of considerable concern to the residents of Cypress Hills. And 
they have signed, in large numbers, petitions to that effect. And 
I’d like to read the prayer if I may, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of the 
community of Gull Lake, primarily, and I have many more to 
present in days ahead. 
 



2854 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Just before I recognize the next 
petition, I’d ask members to just keep their voices down a bit so 
we could hear these petitions properly. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of the people in my area 
that have grave concerns with the Kyoto accord in its present 
state. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And this is signed by people in my constituency, namely 
Estevan, and a place where the natural gas plant is situated, 
Steelman. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present numerous petitions that have been signed by residents 
of the constituency of Weyburn as well as throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan, who are very concerned about the 
devastating effects that Kyoto will have on our economy. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitions are signed by residents of Weyburn, Osage, 
Stoughton, Kisbey, Oungre. More from Weyburn, from 
Kipling, Corning, Bengough. More from Bengough, Regina. 
More from Weyburn, McTaggart, Moose Jaw, Bienfait, 
Asquith, Brooks, Alberta, Calgary, Alberta, North Battleford, 
and again Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
residents very concerned about the Kyoto accord and its effect 
on the province and specifically in this case its impact on my 
region of Saskatchewan, the southwest corner of the province. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads as follows, that: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And the petitioners today are from Wymark and the city of 
Swift Current. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise 
with a petition from citizens from my constituency that are very 
concerned about the economic impact that the Kyoto accord is 
going to have on our province. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Mankota. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise with a petition on 
Kyoto with many signatures. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Saskatoon, Davidson, Bladworth, 
Girvin, Regina, Calgary, Lethbridge, Rosetown, North 
Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the economic 
impact of the Kyoto accord. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition of citizens concerned about the proposed Kyoto 
accord. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary action to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2855 

 

government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Davidson, Smiley, and the city of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed on behalf 
of citizens from my constituency that are concerned with the 
signing of the Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Shell Lake, and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petition for a 
private Bill has been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) it is 
hereby read and received: 
 

Of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995. 

 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12 are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Petition concerning the Kyoto accord; 
 
Petition concerning grasshopper spray penalties assessed to 
farmers by Saskatchewan Crop Insurance; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 11, 18, and no. 169. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 85 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: how many new 
people has the Sask Water authority hired since its 
inception? 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 85 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: (1) what are the 

names of all separately identified and/or separately named 
funds administered directly or indirectly by your 
department; how many of these funds had surplus and/or 
retained earnings at the conclusion of their most recent 
completed fiscal year; which of these funds had some or a 
portion of their surpluses taken away through government 
action and how much money was affected in each case; in 
each case where the government took some or all of the 
surplus of one of these funds, what is the money being used 
for; what programs previously paid out of departmental 
budgets are now being paid with the surpluses from these 
funds; which positions in the public service that were being 
funded through the departmental budgets are now being 
funded through one of these funds or with the proceeds 
from these funds? 
 
And I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister 
of Labour, the Minister of Learning, and all other 
departments. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 85 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Learning: in the year 2002 
how many government-owned or leased vehicles have been 
made available to the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology for the use of its employees; how 
many of these vehicles have been painted with special 
effects and/or logos for the purpose of advertising the 
institution; does the minister sanction the practice of 
purchasing personalized licence plates for these 
government-owned vehicles; and what has been the cost of 
this project in dollars and in-kind services? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have this question for the year 2001-2002, 
and a similar question will apply to the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 85 ask the government the following question: 
 

In the year 2001-2002 fiscal year, did any First Nations that 
are not members of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations receive any money from the First Nations Fund? 
 
And I have a similar question for the year to date for 
2002-2003. 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to give 
notice that I shall on day no. 85 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming: for the 
fiscal year 2001-2002 and referencing the 1.5 million in 
travel expenses as outlined in your supplementary financial 
report, what was the identity and the departmental rank of 
all those who travelled; what were the specific costs 
incurred by each individual; what was the destination of 
each individual; and what was the purpose for each 



2856 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

individual’s trip? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 85 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: what is the current status of CIC’s plan to 
purchase property for the forestry centre in Prince Albert 
that was announced this past summer? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 85 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for CIC: has CIC President 
Frank Hart solicited and/or accepted any gifts, tokens, or 
gestures from EDS since the year 2000, including tickets to 
PGA events such as the Masters in Augusta, Georgia, 
transportation and/or accommodation? 

 
(13:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you, representatives of 
the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission who are here 
with us today on the occasion of the human rights . . . of Human 
Rights Day in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are Christine Lwanga of 
Saskatoon, Marjorie Hutchinson of Fort Qu’Appelle, who are 
commissioners of the Human Rights Commission; and Rebecca 
McLellan, who’s the manager of operations. 
 
And I’d ask you to join me in welcoming them to the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to 
introduce three students who are articling with the Department 
of Justice — Erin Hobday, Joanne Khan, and Carla Nokusis. 
They’re observing today’s proceedings — I hope that Mr. 
Speaker doesn’t deter them from their career in law — from the 
Speaker’s gallery. They’re joined by Elizabeth Smith, who is 
executive assistant to the deputy minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the three — Erin, Joanne, and Carla — are 
graduates of the University of Saskatchewan College of Law 
and they began articling with the department in 2002 . . . in 
June of 2002. Mr. Speaker, we’re very pleased that we have 
students of such high calibre articling with the Government of 
Saskatchewan — I guess we shouldn’t really call them students 
quite any more — articling with the Department of Justice and 
the government. I hope that they will find their time with us 
interesting, satisfying, and enhancing in their practical 
knowledge of the justice system and how it works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask you to join us . . . ask members to join 
with me in welcoming Erin, Joanne, Carla, and Elizabeth to the 
House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
opposition, I would also like to welcome to the Assembly the 
representatives from the Human Rights Commission this 
afternoon. I hope they enjoy our procedures and we really 
appreciate their attendance here this afternoon. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the Saskatchewan Party opposition, I too would like to join 
the minister in welcoming the articling students from the 
Department of Justice. We do hope you enjoy your stay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In your gallery is seated Mrs. Isabelle 
Muzichuk. She’s a constituent of the Canora constituency and 
spends a fair bit of time in my office talking about the 
environmental issues around the province. And I appreciate the 
fact that she chooses my office to do that in and to say that Ms. 
Muzichuk is clearly someone who understands the 
environmental issues of the province and spent a lot of time as a 
professional, teaching students in our province for many years 
before she retired, nursing students. 
 
And I want to commend her on the work that they do, keeping 
governments and opposition honest about the kinds of work that 
needs to be done to sustain good environmental standards 
across the province. 
 
Welcome to the Assembly and enjoy your time here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the member from Yorkton as well in 
welcoming Mrs. Muzichuk to the Assembly. I’ve done so on 
numerous occasions. And I’d like to also inform the legislature 
that Mrs. Muzichuk spends a lot of time on the phone with me, 
as well as visiting my office. And I’d like to also ask members 
to welcome her here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Melfort’s Coming Home Campaign 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and 
members of the legislature, I recently had the pleasure of 
attending the kickoff of a fundraising campaign in Melfort. The 
goal of the Coming Home Campaign is to raise $1 million to 
equip and furnish Parkland Place, our new 105-bed, long-term 
care facility. 
 
The campaign board placed their trust in the generosity and 
commitment of the people of the district to respond to the needs 
of the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the results were remarkable. Before the project 
was even official, Mary Stasiuk contributed $45,000. A further 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2857 

 

anonymous donation of $275,000, 100,000 donation from 
Edythe Campbell, $100,000 donation from Tom and Laura 
Smith, and other generous donations fast-tracked the project. 
 
I’m delighted to tell you that the campaign Chair announced at 
the kickoff ceremony that 700,000 of the $1 million had already 
been raised. 
 
Please join me as I thank the many extraordinary generous 
people for the enormous amount of time, energy, and money 
that they’ve invested in quality, long-term care for our 
community. I would also like to extend best wishes for the 
continued success of the Coming Home Campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Record Set For Natural Gas Wells Drilled 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has set another 
record for the number of natural gas wells drilled in the 
province. So far, 1,725 natural gas wells have been drilled, 
exceeding last year’s record of 1,409. This is the fourth 
consecutive year of natural gas drilling records set in the 
province. 
 
Increased drilling levels benefit the provincial economy by 
attracting investment, creating jobs, and generating revenue for 
the province. Favourable gas prices and a recent gas 
development in the Shackleton area of southwestern 
Saskatchewan have contributed to this new achievement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas industry is one of the largest 
contributors to the Saskatchewan economy. Of the 1,725 gas 
wells drilled to date, 1,515 were in the Swift Current area, 127 
in the Kindersley area, 81 in the Lloydminster area, and 2 in the 
Estevan area. 
 
In 2001, oil and natural gas companies invested 1.4 billion in 
exploration and development, accounting for 22,000 direct and 
indirect jobs and generating $684 million in revenues for the 
province. These revenues help fund health, education, and other 
valuable social programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recent royalty and tax changes by this government 
for oil and natural gas will further encourage exploration and 
development of Saskatchewan resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members will agree that our future is 
wide open and this is more good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Developments in Gaming Industry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 
members aware of developments in the gambling industry in 
Nova Scotia. That province has introduced new VLTs (video 
lottery terminal) called responsible machines. 
 
The new Nova Scotia VLTs are equipped with four features to 
encourage responsible gaming. They include: (1) a permanent 
clock showing the time of day; (2) a display of betting activity 
in cash rather than credits; (3) pop-up reminders of the time 

spent playing after 60, 90, and 120 minutes; (4) a five-minute 
cash out warning at 145 minutes of continuous play and a 
mandatory cash out at 150 minutes. 
 
Forty per cent of VLT users in Nova Scotia have said that the 
new machines help them to keep track and to gamble 
responsibly. Showing credits as opposed to cash was initially 
introduced to mask from gamblers the full extent of their losses. 
 
Gaming is going to be part of our society but we must do 
everything possible to minimize the negative effects. If the 
government is serious about discouraging uncontrolled gaming 
and not just wanting to rake in money from the vulnerable, it 
will adopt these measures. If the government isn’t totally 
addicted to gambling revenues, it will adopt the new Nova 
Scotia machines. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Tourism in Cumberland Constituency 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, here is good news for tourism in 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tourism has become an important part of our 
economy. Employment in the tourism industry has grown by 23 
per cent from 1997 to 2002. There are also over 3,400 
tourism-related events, attractions, and organizations in 
Saskatchewan. In addition there are hundreds of businesses 
which depend on the tourism industry. Mr. Speaker, there is a 
grand total of 1.3 billion spent each year in tourism. This is a 
spending increase of 22 per cent from ’97. 
 
I am particularly proud of the contribution made by my 
constituency of Cumberland in particular and the North in 
general, in attracting tourism dollars. Five hundred and 
sixty-nine residents of Cumberland constituency were 
employed this year in tourism-related industries. This is an 
increase of 26 per cent over the 452 employed in 2001. 
 
There are 227 tourism businesses, attractions, and events in the 
Cumberland constituency. Travellers spent an estimated 44 
million directly in the Cumberland constituency in 2001, an 
increase of 9 per cent. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to the tourist outfitters, guides, 
their industry, and everyone involved in this vital Saskatchewan 
story. Yes, Saskatchewan is wide open for tourism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gordon McRae Awarded Air Cadet 
League Certificate of Honour 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to talk about a great honour received by one of my 
constituents from Davidson. On October 26, Mr. Gordon 
McRae was awarded the Canadian Air Cadet League Certificate 
of Honour for over 18 years of highly dedicated service. 
 
The award, presented by Lieutenant Governor Lynda 
Haverstock, recognized Mr. McRae’s remarkable contribution 
to the Air Cadet League as an honorary director. And indeed 



2858 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

this award is only the seventh time in the last 61 years that such 
a high honour has been bestowed for duty in the Canadian Air 
Cadet League. This certainly attests to the character of this 
gentleman who believes in the duty on ongoing community 
service. 
 
In addition to helping the air cadets, Mr. McRae has served for 
several years on the National Aviation Committee of the 
Department of National Defence. On the local level, Gordon 
McRae has been actively involved with the Davidson branch of 
the Royal Canadian Legion and has served as chairman of 
Davidson-Craik community consultative group that works with 
the area RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) detachment. 
 
Clearly this man has demonstrated his dedicated service to the 
community as well as Saskatchewan and Canada. Mr. McRae 
adds that his wife, Eileen, has been helping him with all these 
tasks over the years and is very deserving of this award as well. 
 
These folks have provided a great role model of volunteerism 
and community spirit for other Canadians to follow. I would ask 
that all members join me in congratulating Mr. and Mrs. 
Gordon McRae for their outstanding service to their fellow 
citizens. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cornwall Alternative School Wins 
Donner Foundation Award 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is not only 
Saskatchewan people who are announcing our unique qualities 
to Canada and beyond. Others are also recognizing the high 
level of achievement in our province. 
 
A case in point, Mr. Speaker, exists right here in Regina. On 
November 1 of this year, the Donner Canadian Foundation 
Awards for Excellence in the Delivery of Social Services were 
presented at a reception in Toronto. These awards were 
established in 1998 to recognize and reward excellence and 
innovation among non-profit agencies at the community level.  
 
The recipients were chosen from 282 applicants from 103 
locations across Canada. The prestigious Overall — overall, 
Mr. Speaker — Award for Excellence was presented to the 
Cornwall Alternative School of Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — This school was established in 1972 as a 
community response to the need for alternative learning for 
students not attending traditional schools. It began as a drop-in 
centre which quickly evolved into an educational facility, now 
working with over 180 students a year — students, I should 
add, who might be lost without the environment provided by 
Cornwall Alternative School. 
 
We have much to be both proud of and grateful for, Mr. 
Speaker, and I congratulate the Cornwall Alternative School, its 
staff, and its principal, Eunice Cameron. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Louis Rebels Hockey Marathon 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people 
of the Humboldt constituency are very innovative. And that is 
certainly true for the people of St. Louis. 
 
The St. Louis arena was in need of repairs, so the old-timers 
hockey team, the St. Louis Rebels, sponsored a hockey 
marathon to raise funds and possibly break the record in the 
Guinness world book of records. 
 
The marathon began the evening of Friday, November 29 and 
finished the following night. There were approximately 40 
players between the ages of 14 and 40 that participated in that 
marathon. Players came from Domremy, Bellevue, St. Louis, 
and Hoey, bringing pledges as well as donations of cash and 
food. 
 
A pancake breakfast was held Saturday morning as well as a 
supper Saturday evening for the players and the general public. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when the marathon ended there were some 
fairly tired people but a new record was set. They played 26 
hours, 30 minutes, and 47 seconds, lasting 54 periods with the 
Reds defeating the Whites 273 to 263. They beat the old record 
by 28 minutes. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The St. Louis arena is a busy place. The artificial ice is ready 
each year by October 1. There’s a hockey school held in 
October and as well, there are six minor hockey teams, one rec 
team, and a figure skating club. 
 
Congratulations to the St. Louis Rebels and to all the skaters 
and volunteers who helped with this marathon, placing St. 
Louis in the Guinness world book of records. And they raised 
$3,200 for their arena. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Plans for Population Growth 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, there are different ways to 
measure the performance of a government but one of the best 
ways is to ask the question: are more people moving in or 
moving out? Sadly, under the NDP (New Democratic Party) a 
lot more people are moving out. 
 
New census figures released today show that over 67,000 
people moved out of Saskatchewan between 1996 and 2001, 
while only 42,000 people moved in. That is a net loss of 25,000 
people in five years. That is the second worst emigration record 
in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the NDP record and it’s a disaster. Mr. 
Speaker, why is the NDP government driving so many people 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2859 

 

out of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition leader and I 
share a common point of view here. This is not a satisfactory 
situation, that we see people leaving our province, particularly 
our young people, looking for opportunities elsewhere. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I tell you what this government is doing 
about that. We are building a new Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We have engaged the largest personal 
income tax cut in the history of this province. We have, this fall, 
this fall, renovated our mining exploration tax regime to 
encourage opportunities in this province for our young people. 
We have changed the regulations in oil and gas, our regulation 
there, to encourage young people to have opportunities in this 
province. We’re building an ethanol industry. We’ve built a 
sound stage. We’re building a synchrotron, Mr. Speaker. We 
are building a new Saskatchewan. 
 
What do they have, Mr. Speaker? They’ve got a slogan; that’s 
what they’ve got. What do we have? A plan that’s working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, all of those innovations were suggested by someone 
else, many of them from the Saskatchewan Party. They haven’t 
come up with one new idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan and it’s an exciting and positive 
plan to grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 years. Now 
that is a far cry from the last 10 years of our history under the 
NDP — a decade when Saskatchewan lost nearly 45,000 
people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these are not just numbers. These are real 
people; people with families. And the NDP is driving them out 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these are our sons and our 
daughters and they have left — 45,000 of them have left in the 
last decade under the watch of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the future of Saskatchewan is diminished because 
of the NDP government and its policies. Why, I ask again, is the 
NDP content to drive so many people out of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to tell the Leader of the 
Opposition and his party about the future of this province. The 
future of this province is wide open . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . wide open to those people who will 
dream big, who will plan well and work hard. The Leader of the 
Opposition in his place, not moments ago, suggested that things 

we’re doing are his suggestion. Then why, I ask the Leader of 
the Opposition and his party, why do you criticize everything 
that happens in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You criticize the development of 
ethanol. You criticize the sound stage. You criticize from your 
bench . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d just remind the Premier to continue 
to direct his remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
reminder. 
 
Why does the Leader of the Opposition stand in his place, and 
his critics, criticizing the investment we’re doing in education 
this budget year? If they’re interested in building a future for 
the young people of Saskatchewan, why do they criticize the 
economic development issues; why do they criticize our 
investments in education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we criticize that government 
because even when we give them a good idea they aren’t able to 
deliver on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago the NDP 
had a chance to improve their sagging image. Some young 
people raised concerns about the NDP’s high taxes and so the 
Minister of Culture and Youth told them, come back when 
you’re older and start paying taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatoon decided they 
wanted to host the World University Games, the minister said, 
oh no, we can’t do that; Saskatoon is too small. What kind of a 
wide open future is that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the NDP expect young people to believe 
in Saskatchewan when they don’t even believe in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a first-rate 
province with a third-rate government. It’s time to start losing 
people and to start growing this province. Why does the NDP 
have no plan to grow Saskatchewan? They can spend $2 million 
just blowing smoke; they’re not doing a thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition now seems to be taking the point of view of his 
member from Cannington. He says this province blows smoke. 
His member from Cannington says it’s all snake oil. He says 
we’ve got nothing to sell as a province. 
 
That kind of attitude is rejected — rejected — by this 



2860 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

government, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan in place. The plan is 
working. We have working today in Saskatchewan more people 
in the month of November than this province has ever seen, Mr. 
Speaker. Today we meet in the city with the lowest 
unemployment rate in Canada. 
 
Young people are finding opportunities in this province and, 
Mr. Speaker, we are reaching out to our young people, to young 
people across the country, telling them that the future of this 
province is wide open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan and the plan is 
working. That opposition has a slogan that’s full of hot air. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proclamation of Farm Security Legislation 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Last week when he 
was announcing his response to the ACRE (Action Committee 
on the Rural Economy) Committee’s final report, the minister 
said that the issue of the farm land security was one of the 
ACRE recommendation that’s been dealt with by this 
government. 
 
He said, and I quote: 
 

We can check that one off. 
 
Well not so fast, Mr. Speaker. It’s been five months since the 
farm land security legislation was passed in this very House, yet 
the Act is still not proclaimed. What is the holdup? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to Saskatchewan farm 
land owners and interested buyers why this legislation is taking 
so long? Why has it not been made into law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to advise the member and all members that the 
preparation of the regulations for this legislation are complete. 
Forms have been revised in order to accommodate those 
changes to our regulations. And this legislation which attempts 
and which will grow the Saskatchewan economy in a 
responsible, careful manner, responsive to the wishes of those 
across the province, will be introduced in the very near future, 
certainly no later than the beginning of the year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is typical of the NDP government and how they handle issues 
that are so critical to our province. The former, former 
Agriculture minister said he’d look into this issue — Mr. Eric 
Upshall. And the former Agriculture minister, he promised to 
address the issue. He even hired people to study the issue. 
 
And now this minister assured me that he was finally serious 
about making the changes that people have been asking for in 
order to grow this province. And the committee met and we did 
all that for the minister and we finalized the legislation by this 

spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say the future is wide open, except the 
Saskatchewan borders are still slammed shut. Will the minister 
explain exactly when this legislation is going to be proclaimed? 
When is it going to be law, and when can these business owners 
start to look at Saskatchewan indeed being open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will be 
aware that the committee, the committee raised an issue about 
whether or not the changes would be NAFTA (North American 
Free Trade Agreement) proof. We’ve had the legal opinion, Mr. 
Speaker, that confirms that it is. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the 
opinion that confirms that it is, and I can tell the member that 
this Bill will be proclaimed as soon as possible, certainly by the 
new year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kyoto Protocol 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
The federal Liberal government will vote to support ratification 
of the Kyoto Protocol. The federal Liberals plan to force Kyoto 
on Saskatchewan even though it will kill thousands of jobs and 
billions of dollars in economic activity in our province. 
 
So just where does the government stand? Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP Premier said he can’t oppose Kyoto. The NDP MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon Greystone, say Saskatchewan 
must strongly support Kyoto. And the NDP’s Industry minister 
says he’s opposed to Kyoto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Premier to make a clear statement 
today on the Kyoto Protocol. Will he stand in the legislature 
and clearly state that the NDP government is opposed to 
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol because it will devastate 
Saskatchewan’s economy while doing almost nothing to protect 
our environment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In a matter of moments, Mr. Speaker, a 
resolution will be introduced into this House which will clearly 
voice the position of this government, and I anticipate and I’m 
optimistic that members of the opposition will support a 
unanimous motion from this legislature. 
 
Let’s be real clear about this, Mr. Speaker. Point number one, 
do not take anything any member over there says about the 
position of government as the position of government. We’ll 
speak for the position of government. 
 
Point number two, from day one . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Point number two. Point number two, 
Mr. Speaker, unlike members opposite, this government 
recognizes it has a responsibility to the future generations, to 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2861 

 

the future of this nation, to the future of this world. From day 
one, Mr. Speaker, this government has made it clear we do not 
— we do not — oppose the principles and objectives of the 
Kyoto Protocol, do not object to taking on the challenge of 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Our fight is not with the principle of Kyoto. Our fight is with 
the federal Liberal government who has refused from day one to 
participate with Canadians in building a sane implementation 
plan that will protect the interests of the environment and the 
interests of the economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, our position is clear. The 
Saskatchewan Party supports the goal of reducing man-made 
emissions of greenhouse gases. But we’re strongly opposed to 
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol because it will devastate 
Saskatchewan’s economy, kill thousands of jobs in our most 
important industries while doing little to protect our 
environment. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party supports a made-in-Canada, 
made-in-Saskatchewan approach to reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions that balances the goal of protecting the environment 
with an equally critical need to get Saskatchewan’s economy 
growing again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP government’s resolution clearly 
oppose ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in favour of a 
made-in-Canada, made-in-Saskatchewan plan that protects the 
environment and grows Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member opposite stands today in 
this House and says that he and his party support the reduction 
of greenhouse gas emissions. This is an interesting revelation 
because I have not heard from he or any member over there, 
including the leader, one substantive plan, one substantive idea 
that would in fact lower the amount of greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
 
Compare that with this government, Mr. Speaker. Compare that 
with this government. Wind generation, ethanol, greenhouse 
gas research — on and on it goes. Mr. Speaker, we will have 
opportunity well throughout this debate to flesh out the position 
of the Saskatchewan Party. I’m inviting them today to join with 
this government, to join with every provincial government in 
Canada, in giving unanimous support from this legislature to 
the resolution that’s being brought in by the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, for months the NDP government 
has sent mixed messages. Will the Premier simply stand today 
and clearly state that his NDP government opposes ratification 
of the Kyoto Protocol because it will devastate Saskatchewan’s 
economy without protecting our environment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Here we go again. They’re great on 
slogans. They’re great on sloganeering, but pretty thin, absent 
on real plan. Great on slogan, pretty thin on plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat, I repeat, this government from day one 
has accepted its responsibility to share in building a sane and 
clean environment for the future. We take that responsibility 
very seriously. 
 
Our battle is not with the principle of Kyoto. Our battle is with 
a federal Liberal government who has refused from day one to 
participate with the provinces of Canada, with industry of 
Canada, with the people of Canada in building a strong 
implementation plan. 
 
We have an opportunity, we have an opportunity in this 
legislature to pass a resolution that will set before the national 
government the 12 principles agreed to by all the provinces — 
by the way, Mr. Speaker, 12 principles that were built on 
principles developed by this minister and this government. 
That’s where they came from. 
 
We’ll have an opportunity to be as one voice from 
Saskatchewan, to demand of our federal government the 
responsibility of that federal government in looking at those 12 
principles and putting them into action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Participation in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 1997, 
according to NDP cabinet documents, the NDP government 
decided to risk millions of dollars in the potato business, even 
though the briefing and the information they received from the 
minister at the time, the current Minster of Industry, was later 
proved to be incorrect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1998, the NDP knew, found out about this. 
They found out they had acted with improper information. But 
did they put a stop to the investment of dollars? No. They 
invested, they wasted 14 million more dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
even though they knew the truth. And by 1999, the NDP’s 
entire potato investment collapsed and virtually bankrupted 
Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has obtained a cabinet 
memo from the deputy minister to the premier, Greg 
Marchildon to Premier Roy Romanow, dated July 16, 1999. It 
says Sask Water had lost so much money on potatoes that it was 
virtually insolvent. The question to the Premier is this: how 
could the NDP let their runaway wreck of an adventure in 
potatoes almost bankrupt Sask Water? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well either the member opposite understands the court process, 
or he does not understand the court process. I think he probably 
does understand the court process. He knows very well, Mr. 
Speaker, that I’m very limited in what I can say here in this 
Assembly or outside of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2862 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

But I will say what I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that there was 
infrastructure in that area, Mr. Speaker, some $140 million — a 
lot of it invested when they were government, Mr. Speaker, 
back in the 1980s — 140 million by way of irrigation 
infrastructure that needed to have products that we could add 
value to, Mr. Speaker. So we worked with the growers in that 
area to build an industry, I would argue, an industry that has 
gone from 200 acres to 10,000 acres, Mr. Speaker — something 
we should all be proud of in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has been 
talking to people in the potato industry in that part of the 
province. Those people are represented by Saskatchewan Party 
members and they tell us that far from helping, this NDP 
debacle has set this industry back. This debacle has almost 
ruined the potato industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP knew its potato business was in big 
trouble, but they covered it up. They told Saskatchewan people 
it was a partnership, but it wasn’t. They told them it was 
making money, but it was losing millions of dollars. And then 
in July 1999, on the eve of an election call, the premier was 
advised that Sask Water was broke, and he covered it up, Mr. 
Speaker. The current Premier was working in the premier’s 
office; he knew that Sask Water was broke and he covered it up, 
Mr. Speaker, on the eve of an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: why — why did the 
NDP cover up the loss of millions of taxpayers’ dollars and the 
ruination of Sask Water by this government’s policies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again let 
me say, Mr. Speaker, to be clear — even if those members 
opposite don’t want to listen, I want to explain to the public of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reason I can’t respond to the questions that are in the court, 
Mr. Speaker, is because . . . And they laugh, Mr. Speaker, and 
they laugh. Mr. Speaker, the reason is, it’s not just for the 
protection of government, Mr. Speaker, it’s also for the 
claimants in the case, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s for the 
protection of the claimants, the people who are taking Sask 
Water to court. That’s a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that member would have 
me circumvent and this government circumvent the court 
process so there isn’t even a fair trial for those people who are 
claimants in this case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me say that — and it is public information about the 
facilities there, Mr. Speaker — we said that we would turn them 
back and sell them back to the growers, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
doing that in an orderly fashion, Mr. Speaker, and there is a 
viable, vital potato industry in Saskatchewan now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what the Enron and 
the WorldCom scandals were all about in the United States is 
the leadership of those corporations misleading their 
shareholders . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — What the scandals were all about, Mr. Speaker, is 
the leadership of those corporations misleading their 
shareholders. In this case, the shareholders are every single 
taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan, and all the 
documentation shows that those people were misled, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And another Enron accounting tactic is at play here — the 
draining of other bank accounts to cover up losses. Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Party has obtained a CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) information item 
that went to cabinet on November 1999. It says, and I quote: 
 

At the end of 1999, Sask Water has 3.9 (million) . . . of in 
trust liabilities, either associated with Rafferty . . . 
completion or owed to Ducks Unlimited, which cannot be 
funded as the cash associated with these has been used to 
finance SPUDCO storage capital and losses. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this, the question to 
the Premier is this: will he stand up today and apologize to the 
people involved in the Rafferty partnership and to Ducks 
Unlimited for using their money for his SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) debacle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I would . . . I still to this 
day receive phone calls and letters, Mr. Speaker, from 
individuals who would disagree with that member’s position 
that this is a debacle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are appreciative — they are appreciative — of the fact 
that in their constituencies that they represent, Mr. Speaker, 
there is now an industry that has gone from 200 acres to 10,000 
acres, Mr. Speaker, an industry that grows some of the best seed 
potatoes in all the world, Mr. Speaker, in all the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a strong and vital potato industry and 
again, Mr. Speaker, we are engaged in an orderly disposition of 
the storage facilities in that area, Mr. Speaker. And there is a 
full accounting of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, last week . . . The minister didn’t 
answer the question. I’m sure he’s still hiding behind the courts. 
But he should know that last week . . . But he should know that 
last week officials of Sask Water were more than willing to talk 
about these two trust accounts. Officials of this government 
were prepared to answer the question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I would 
ask members to allow the question to be put. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Chair of the Crown Corps 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2863 

 

Committee sits right behind the minister. He should have 
whispered to him and told him that his officials were more than 
happy to talk about the draining of these trust accounts last 
week. So we’ll give him another chance. 
 
The CIC item clearly indicates that Sask Water has a $3.9 
million in-trust liability associated with Rafferty completion or 
owed to Ducks Unlimited because these funds have been used 
to finance SPUDCO storage capital and losses. His officials 
commented on it yesterday. Will he stand in the House today 
and apologize to those people involved in those trusts for using 
their money for the SPUDCO debacle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the way 
the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, is ranting, the Chair of 
Crown Corps would have to do a lot more than whisper for me 
to even begin to hear him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me say again, Mr. Speaker, if that member is now 
suggesting that we — we this government, myself as minister 
— should now start to circumvent a court process . . . Pay 
attention, people of Saskatchewan, pay attention to what that 
group of individuals would do if they were ever government. 
They would have total disregard, Mr. Speaker, for any court 
processes that exist. I say pay attention, because that’s the way 
they would run government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to make a statement in regards to 
Human Rights Day. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Human Rights Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as all of us know, today is Human Rights Day in 
Saskatchewan. Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights which incidentally, Mr. Speaker, was written by a 
Canadian, states: 
 

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and 
rights. 

 
For 54 years these words have resonated in the hearts and minds 
of Canadians and of people around the world. They’re the 
cornerstone of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
adopted by the UN (United Nations) General Assembly on 
December 10, 1948. 
 
After World War II the world was stunned at the atrocities that 
had taken place. People struggled to understand how such 

abuses could have happened and how future generations could 
be spared the devastation they had witnessed. 
 
More than 50 years have passed since the Universal Declaration 
was adopted, and human rights principles have increased in 
importance worldwide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, Saskatchewan has a very special 
place in the history of the promotion of human rights in Canada. 
In 1947, 18 months before the passage of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, the government of Premier 
Douglas passed The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act. Premier 
Douglas said of Saskatchewan’s original Bill of Rights: 
 

Freedom, like peace, is indivisible. I must protect my 
neighbour’s rights in order to safeguard my own. 

 
Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act was 
Canada’s first comprehensive human rights legislation and its 
passage was a very important act of leadership. All of Canada 
was profoundly affected by it and, following Saskatchewan’s 
lead, other jurisdictions in Canada began passing legislation to 
address the serious issue of discrimination. 
 
Saskatchewan’s human rights legislation evolved and 
progressed steadily through the years with the consolidation of 
anti-discrimination laws under the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Code in 1979. And the most recent changes to the Code were 
made in May 2000. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that there was unanimous 
support for the Human Rights Code when it was passed into law 
in this Assembly. The Code was clearly grounded in a 
philosophy that rose above partisan politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we approach the new year, we also approach 
the 30th anniversary of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission. It opened its first office in Saskatoon in 1973 and 
in the same year held its first formal inquiry. In 1980 the 
commission gave approval to the first employment equity 
program in Saskatchewan. In 1986 the commission initiated a 
program for kindergarten to grade 12 designed to encourage 
Aboriginal children to participate fully in the school system and 
to complete grade 12. 
 
In 2001 the Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal, a 
seven-person permanent panel of adjudicators, replaced the 
former system of boards of inquiry appointed on a case-by-case 
basis. Over the years the commission has also been involved in 
cases that refined human rights law and forwarded human rights 
principles in Saskatchewan, including a 1984 decision by a 
board of inquiry that affirmed for the first time that sexual 
harassment was discrimination on the basis of sex, in 1985 a 
case at the Court of Appeal that established a duty to 
accommodate, and a 1994 case also at the Court of Appeal that 
said displaying or selling racist stickers was a violation of the 
Code. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to 
join me in congratulating the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission on 30 years of service to the citizens of this 



2864 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

province and also to join me in celebrating Human Rights Day 
in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
often said that a society is judged on how it deals with those 
people who are less fortunate in that society. And I think as the 
minister has already done this afternoon outlined some of the 
progression that has taken place, the evolution that has taken 
place within this province. 
 
The dates that he mentioned where this all began essentially in 
the late ’40s and early ’50s, and I think we can underline how 
far we have come. Have we come far enough? No. And as I 
said, this is an evolution. But in that same House at that time, 
Mr. Speaker, there were individuals who were sitting here who 
had some years earlier written documents talking about 
individuals who had some disabilities as being subnormal. 
 
So we’ve come a long way, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s 
important that on this particular day we look at the 30th 
anniversary of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 
And the minister again very ably outlined some of the historic 
events that have taken place along the way, the rulings that have 
taken place. And I think as people of this province we can take 
pride that we have taken a leadership role, Mr. Speaker, not 
only in this province but in this country and across the world as 
well in maintaining and declaring that individuals have rights 
and have abilities and have respect in this particular province. 
 
And so we join them and join the minister this afternoon in 
recognizing the 30th anniversary of the Human Rights 
Commission on this particular day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cannington on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To ask leave 
to move motions regarding membership on standing committees 
of the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member from Cannington to 
just wait for one item. Are there any further ministerial 
statements? Now I would ask whether the Assembly is prepared 
to give leave to the member for Cannington to introduce a 
motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the name of Donna Harpauer be substituted for that of 
Daryl Wiberg on the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 

Seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Jason Dearborn be substituted for that of 
Arlene Julé on the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Jason Dearborn be substituted for that of 
Rudi Peters on the Standing Committee on 
Non-controversial Bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on the Environment 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Denis Allchurch be substituted for that of 
Wayne Elhard on the Standing Committee on Environment. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on Education 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Wayne Elhard be substituted for that of 
Rudi Peters on the Standing Committee on Education. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Jason Dearborn be substituted for that of 
Brenda Bakken on the standing committee on the 
constitution. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Continuing Select Committee 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2865 

 

seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Yogi Huyghebaert be substituted for that 
of Bill Boyd on the standing . . . Continuing Select 
Committee. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Ben Heppner be substituted for that of 
Brenda Bakken on the Special Committee on Regulations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Doreen Eagles be substituted for that of 
Milt Wakefield on the Standing Committee on Privileges 
and Elections. 
 

And that’s the last one. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave 
to move a motion pursuant to rule 46. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Kyoto Protocol 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say how very pleased I am to be able to make 
a few remarks today as it relates to the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — This has been, Mr. Speaker, an 
issue of a lot of discussion, a lot of debate, not only in our 
province but around our country, around the world. And I want 
to say as well that it’s with mixed emotions that I stand here. 
 
This debate should come to no surprise as anybody . . . or as no 
surprise to anybody in the House. As I said, it’s been 
dominating the conversation across our nation — newscasts, 
university classes, coffee row. And I know my colleagues share 
with me the conviction that we need to preserve our natural 
environment for generations to come. 
 
The quality of our natural environment defines our quality of 
life in Saskatchewan; a quality of life that the Premier, myself, 
and folks across this great province are proud to celebrate. And 

our vision is of a Saskatchewan with clean air, land, and water, 
where pristine forests, rolling hills, and living skies provide 
wildlife habitat, support a growing population, and nourish the 
human spirit. 
 
But over the course of the last number of months it has become 
very clear to us that the Kyoto Protocol in its current form will 
not do that; that this protocol could have grave consequences 
for our provincial economy, for the jobs and lives of our 
citizens and their children, and that the federal Liberal 
government in Ottawa is not committed to public consultation, 
to regional fairness, or economic development outside certain 
centres — in short, that the government of Ottawa is not 
committed to Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we, on this side of the 
House, are and will be committed to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We will stand up for Saskatchewan 
so that our province can continue to enjoy the economic and job 
growth that we’ve heard so much about lately and that’s why 
it’s my pleasure to stand before you and move the following 
motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will read just part of it and describe part of it. I’ll 
read the actual motion in when I conclude my remarks. But 
basically what we’re talking about here are the 12 principles 
that were agreed to by all of the provinces and territories — 
that’s very much a part of this motion — and that we support 
the 12 principles as a basis for a negotiated climate change plan 
with the government to address the Kyoto Protocol target of 
reducing national greenhouse gases below . . . to 6 per cent 
below the 1990 levels by 2012. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to the 12 principles adopted 
by the provinces and territories. And so while I want to say that 
there are members of this House that will snipe from those 
benches, this government’s been acting. And I want to say, to 
simply oppose everything without giving any reasoned thought 
to our environment and to our economy is not what members on 
this side of the House are about. There are some members who 
are content not to put forward any real solutions, any real plan, 
or any new ideas. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s not 
the position taken by this government. 
 
This government is signing on to the principles that will address 
climate change, and we signed on to the principles that we 
believe will work for Saskatchewan. And we want a plan that 
works for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t think it’s any secret that the people of Saskatchewan 
have misgivings about the Kyoto Protocol. As recently as 
yesterday, the Leader-Post reported that 62.2 per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents believe implementation of the Kyoto 
accord will be bad for Saskatchewan and that more than 70 per 
cent would like to see a made-in-Canada alternative to Kyoto. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this motion is about. 
 
It’s made in Canada, tailored to Saskatchewan principles that 
garnered the unanimous support, I must say, of Canada’s 



2866 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

provinces — principles that the federal government chose to 
ignore in a rush to meet an artificial, an unrealistic ratification 
deadline. And now, Mr. Speaker, we have the federal plan 
before us. A plan, much like the rhetoric I’m hearing from 
across the floor, is better described as a goal, a wish, a dream, a 
hope that would be nothing but bad news for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal climate change plan is not a real plan. 
It contains no details, no specific information, and no realistic 
cost estimates. Sounds kind of familiar, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t 
think that’s what we need here in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes discussing the 
federal plan. Unlike my opposition colleagues, I can recognize 
the good work of others, Mr. Speaker, and the federal 
government’s plan does have some good ideas. Ideally these 
would be the starting point for discussions with the provinces, 
industry, and Canadians. We in Saskatchewan have strong 
interest in some aspects of the plan: ethanol, new technologies, 
and agriculture and forestry soil sinks. 
 
And our province was pleased that the federal government has 
recognized the need to establish a partnership fund to foster 
initiatives. But we simply need more detail before we can sign 
on. We can’t accept the plan that we know will be at least 30 to 
50 per cent higher than claimed by the federal government and 
that may cost twice what’s expected. 
 
(14:45) 
 
So what is the federal non-plan, Mr. Speaker? Let me address it 
for just a couple of moments. The federal government — the 
federal Liberal government — claims that its climate change 
plan will help Canada to meet its obligation to reduce projected 
2010 emissions of greenhouses by 240 megatonnes. Existing 
measures already underway are expected to provide 80 
megatonnes. This includes 20 megatonnes from forest sinks and 
10 megatonnes from ag sinks, but we will find it difficult to 
believe that these existing measures will really mean an 
80-megatonne reduction. And reliable indicators tell us that this 
is a reduction and a reduction of this size through existing 
measures will cost much more than the $1.6 billion budgeted 
over seven years. 
 
New actions included in the federal plan are expected to provide 
100 megatonnes, 55 of which are to come from large industrial 
emitters. This section of the federal document has no budget 
estimates, something that given recent news about federal 
Liberal budgeting practices should give us all some reason for 
pause. 
 
Moreover, Saskatchewan industries would be expected to spend 
between 40 and $200 million a year to meet their Kyoto targets. 
Our industries would be forced to buy large purchases of 
international emissions — or hot air — from Russia. Taking 
investment out of Saskatchewan and depositing this investment 
in what is one of our major competitors in the international 
potash markets, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Uncertainty over this plan is already affecting Western 
Canadian industry. Mr. Speaker, in November Husky 
announced a hold on a planned upgrader expansion, and IPSCO 

here in Regina says that Kyoto could be disastrous, especially 
given the fact that the US (United States) is not signing on. 
Saskatchewan can ill afford to lose this investment, especially 
for an arbitrary plan that won’t even meet our Kyoto targets and 
that will have no clear effect on climate change, a plan that 
would take our agricultural soil sinks — a potential of 300 
million annual benefits for our farmers — and credit them to the 
federal government, if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third part of the federal plan relates to current and potential 
actions by provinces and individual Canadians — actions the 
feds expect to provide the remaining 60 megatonnes. As part of 
this, the feds are encouraging individual Canadians, all 31 
million of us, to reduce our emissions by 1 tonne each. 
 
Now I think we could all do a lot to be more environmentally 
efficient. I think that’s fair and there’s evidence of that. And 
there’s no doubt in my mind that the Office of Energy 
Conservation will continue to work toward improving the 
efficiency of our province. But to expect every single Canadian 
to reduce their emissions by 20 per cent? Might happen. 
 
My colleagues across the floor might realize the importance of 
our natural environment. Every little girl in Saskatchewan 
might get a pony for Christmas. My point, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we simply don’t know. 
 
I want to move to the 12 points. This motion before us today 
calls this Assembly to support the 12 principles adopted by all 
of the provinces and territories. And these 12 principles should 
be the basis for negotiating a national climate change plan with 
the Government of Canada. 
 
While the federal government claims to have consulted with 
Canadians, these 12 points are the direct results of the meetings 
of all Canadian regions — all provinces and territories. And I 
believe they’re the basis for a truly national plan, a plan that can 
be based on federal, provincial, and territorial partnerships. 
 
In fact the first principle calls for the full and informed input of 
all Canadians to the development of the plan. 
 
The second principle is, in my opinion, key. This principle 
would ensure fairness for all Canada’s regions and industries 
and clarity on targets and costs. 
 
The Prime Minister promised fair regional . . . regional fairness 
back in 1997. But you know what they’ve put forward as a 
document shows that 3 per cent of the Canadian population and 
3 per cent of Canada’s GDP (gross domestic product) . . . 
Saskatchewan industry would be expected to make 8 per cent of 
the emission reductions from the Canadian industrial sector. 
And we say that’s not fair and that’s not what the Prime 
Minister talked about. 
 
The plan that the federal government unveiled has no 
commitment to clarity and would mean that the federal 
government doesn’t have to compensate regions that are 
disproportionately affected. And that’s not right. And that’s 
why we can’t support what they’ve put forward. 
 
The sixth principle, explicitly rejected by the federal 
government, would protect our province from unilateral federal 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2867 

 

actions which would damage our economy. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is not the partnership of which we speak. 
 
So the federal government can sign on to whatever they want 
and they can leave the provinces and territories to pay the bills. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not where this province wants this 
discussion to go and that’s not where this province wants this 
debate to go. 
 
Simple fairness, Mr. Speaker. Is that too much to ask? Federal 
government would also see the benefits from agriculture and 
forest sinks would accrue to the federal government. What right 
do they have to assume that, Mr. Speaker? What right do they 
have? 
 
Ag sinks, as I said before, could mean as much as $300 million 
to our farmers. And here you have a national government that 
won’t support in trades war . . . trade wars, and on top of that 
intend to remove possible benefits from an agreement that could 
be reached for the province of our . . . for our farmers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in 2001 if the drought wasn’t enough, now 
the federal government wants to credit itself for the assets of the 
farming community in this province. And I want to say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, we have been standing up for our farmers and the 
seven principles show that other provinces are doing the same 
— the seventh principle. These principles would ensure that 
Saskatchewan realizes the benefits for its competitive 
advantages and the successes it has already achieved. And that 
means work, sir, that we’ve already done — that we need to be 
. . . needs to be recognized. 
 
Our significant wind power potential . . . Canada third . . . we’re 
now Canada’s third larger producer and we’re growing. Our 
agricultural forest sinks, the new technologies that we have and 
are developing such as the international CO2 test centre, the 
enhanced oil recovery CO2 monitoring project in Weyburn, 
clean coal. Saskatchewan can and should benefit from the 
progress that we’ve made in this area and we need help. The 
federal government should step up and provide real, tangible 
support for greenhouse gas emission reductions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I don’t think it’s a secret to anyone 
here that we need to take action on the environment. Climate 
change is serious business and it’s our responsibility to address 
it. But the Kyoto Protocol will not stop the climate change. 
Stopping climate change will mean going beyond Kyoto, 
working together in partnership over the long haul to ensure 
that sustainable solutions are put in place. 
 
We as provinces have asked the federal government to work 
with us in developing a partnership to address the environment. 
We’ve developed these 12 principles in the hope that the federal 
government would take our offer to heart and work with us to 
address the needs of the environment that we all cherish. It’s 
our hope that motions like this — the one I spoke to today — 
will convince the federal Liberals to stop this foolishness before 
it’s too late, to work with us to develop a made-in-Canada 
solution that works for Saskatchewan. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s for these reasons and more that I ask all members 
to join with me in supporting the motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just received a note that this afternoon the 

federal government did ratify the Kyoto Protocol by a vote of 
195 for and 77 against. So I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear 
that we in this Chamber now need to join together in putting 
forth a motion that will give direction; to put together, working 
with the provinces and territories, a plan that will work for 
Saskatchewan, that will work for Saskatchewan people in terms 
of protecting their jobs, that will work for Saskatchewan people 
in terms of protecting their environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the work that’s been going on in this side of 
the House. And it’s not been slogans, and it’s not been political 
gamesmanship. We’ve been working hard at this. And the men 
and women within these government departments that had been 
part of these discussions for years are very serious about what 
they attempt to achieve and what they want to achieve. 
 
So in closing, before I read the motion, seconded by the 
member from Athabasca, into the record, I would ask all 
members of this Assembly to support the 12 principles put 
forward in this motion so that we can move forward in the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan, for the common . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — So I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded 
by the member from Athabasca: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes that climate change is a 
critical issue facing Saskatchewan, Canada, and the world; 
and 
 
That this Assembly supports the 12 principles adopted by 
the provinces and territories as a basis for negotiating a 
national climate change plan with the Government of 
Canada to address the Kyoto Protocol target of reducing 
national greenhouse gas emissions to 6 per cent below 1990 
levels by 2012, specifically: 
 
(1) All Canadians must have an opportunity for full and 
informed input into the development of the plan; 
(2) The plan must ensure that no region or jurisdiction shall 
be asked to bear an unreasonable share of the burden and 
no industry, sector, or region shall be treated unfairly. The 
costs and impacts on individuals, businesses, and industries 
must be clear, reasonable, achievable, and economically 
sustainable. The plan must incorporate appropriate 
federally funded mitigation of the adverse impacts of 
climate change initiatives; 
(3) The plan must respect provincial and territorial 
jurisdiction; 
(4) The plan must include recognition of real emission 
reductions that have been achieved since 1990 or will be 
achieved thereafter; 
(5) The plan must provide for bilateral or multilateral 
agreements between provinces and territories . . . with the 
federal government; 
(6) The plan must ensure that no province or territory bears 
the financial risk of federal climate change commitments; 
(7) The plan must recognize that benefits from assets such 
as forest and agricultural sinks must accrue to the province 
or territory which owns the assets; 
(8) The plan must support innovation and new technology; 
(9) The plan must maintain the economic competitiveness 



2868 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

of Canadian business and industry; 
(10) Canada must continue to demand recognition of clean 
energy exports; 
(11) The plan must include initiatives for all citizens, 
communities, businesses and jurisdictions to make the shift 
to an economy based on renewable and other clean energy, 
lower emissions and sustainable practices across sectors; 
 

And finally: 
 
(12) The implementation of any climate change plan must 
include an incentive and allocation system that supports 
lower carbon emission sources of energy such as 
hydroelectricity, wind power generation, ethanol, and 
renewable and other clean sources of energy. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I stand today as a seconder to the motion in recognizing some 
of the great and significant challenges we have ahead of us and 
to recognize that climate change for Saskatchewan and for the 
Government of Saskatchewan is a very serious issue. 
 
Saskatchewan will face serious environmental, economic, and 
social impacts from the effects of climate change. More severe 
drought and storms, escalating forest fires, a decline in river and 
lake levels, and a reduction in our agricultural productivity are 
predicted as a result of climate change. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan government supports the spirit of the Kyoto 
Protocol to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions that are 
contributing to climate change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is Saskatchewan doing? Saskatchewan is not 
standing still on this issue. We are moving aggressively forward 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to develop innovative 
solutions to capture and store CO2, and to develop strategies for 
adapting to climatic changes. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, after several years, is now the third 
largest developer of wind power projects in Canada. And 
planning is underway, Mr. Speaker, for a new development that 
would see us become the leader in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
has undertaken extensive energy conservation work on 70 
government buildings that will result in energy savings and 
financial savings to the taxpayers. 
 
We are participating, Mr. Speaker, in the Canadian Clean 
Power Coalition study of new, clean-coal technologies. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers have the highest adoption rate 
of conservation tillage systems in the world, transforming 
agricultural soils from an emission source for atmospheric 
carbon dioxide to a carbon sink, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An innovative agreement between SaskPower and 
Saskatchewan Environment to plant trees and to create a forest 
carbon reserve recently received national endorsement by the 

greenhouse emissions reduction trading pilot project which is a 
scientific panel established to review carbon sequestration and 
trading projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since 1996 Saskatchewan has supported the Prairie Adaptation 
Network at the Saskatchewan Research Council, to examine the 
probable effects of climate change on the Prairies and to 
develop effective adaptation strategies that allow us to take 
advantage of the expected changes. 
 
These are just a few of the innovative developments that 
Saskatchewan is participating in to deal with the issue of 
climate change now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people want and Saskatchewan people demand 
and Saskatchewan people deserve to have a Saskatchewan 
solution to this challenge. Mr. Speaker, we are willing to do our 
part and we have already taken many important actions to 
reduce the amount of emissions that our province releases into 
the atmosphere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kyoto Protocol is an international treaty 
negotiated in 1997 through the UN to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. The Protocol is the result of a consensus amongst 
members of the UN stating that climate change caused by 
human activity is a concern and concrete action must be taken. 
 
The Kyoto commitments applied to only 38 developed nations, 
and countries in transition in central and in eastern Europe. As 
an example, Mr. Speaker, Russia and the Ukraine, etc. 
 
The overall reduction in greenhouse gases from 1990 levels is 
5.2 per cent. Canada’s target will be to reduce its output of 
greenhouse gases between 2008 and 2012 to a level that is 6 per 
cent below our 1990 emissions. 
 
This fall the Prime Minister, as we all know, announced his 
intention to ratify the Kyoto Protocol before the end of this year 
and we have heard that has been done today; however, Mr. 
Speaker, without a plan in place that is acceptable to the 
provinces and territories, and that is the severe weakness, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan is concerned that ratifying the Protocol 
without a clear plan will harm our economy without having any 
real benefit to the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while Saskatchewan people are people who care 
about their environment and who are more than willing, more 
than willing to do their share in contributing to global interests 
in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, we are also an economy 
that currently relies heavily on fossil fuels. Climate change and 
greenhouse gas reduction is a global and national issue, and a 
small economy such as Saskatchewan’s should not be 
disproportionately burdened with the national family. 
 
The Saskatchewan government responded by releasing a 
discussion document in October called, Making it Work: A 
Saskatchewan Perspective on Climate Change Policy. The 
document listed 19 benchmarks that the province would use to 
evaluate Ottawa’s plan. The federal government released what 
they called the climate change plan for Canada, more accurately 
described as a framework. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provinces are concerned that the federal 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2869 

 

framework does not adequately address the 12 principles agreed 
on by the provinces and by the territories in their October 28 
statement on climate change policy. Saskatchewan stands 
alongside all provinces in calling for a climate change plan that 
is clear, that is effective, and that is economically sustainable. 
We cannot support the federal government’s plan to ratify 
Kyoto without a clear implementation plan in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that Canadians need to know the cost 
and the impact of climate change policy on business, industries, 
and the consumers. The federal climate change plan is not a real 
plan. It contains no details, no specific information, and no 
accurate cost estimates. It contains no information as to how 
provincial economies reliant on fossil fuels will be assisted to 
ensure that they do not face unreasonable burden in adjusting to 
the Kyoto targets. 
 
The federal plan claims that cost impacts are modest, but the 
financial analysis that is provided is based on different 
assumptions than are included in the plan since Canada’s 
request for clean energy exports was not approved, Mr. 
Speaker. The costs of ratification will be at least 30 to 50 per 
cent higher than claimed by the federal government, and these 
costs may double. 
 
The most recent federal government analysis predicts that 
Kyoto will cost Saskatchewan 6,000 permanent jobs by 2010. 
The cost of government programs to reduce emissions will 
reduce after-tax household income by 1,300 to 1,500 a year in 
2010. 
 
The plan glosses over a number of serious unresolved issues, 
Mr. Speaker. For example, the federal government assumes it 
can claim the emissions credit related to carbon that has 
accumulated in sinks in forests and agricultural soils. 
Saskatchewan feels very strongly that the federal government 
has no right to claim these credits, Mr. Speaker. Most of these 
things belong to farmers, to landowners, and to provincial 
governments and the federal government must either offer fair 
compensation for these sinks or allow the owners to sell their 
related emissions credits to industry. 
 
Of particular concern, Mr. Speaker, is the plan’s expectations 
that our industry will purchase greenhouse gas credits and 
simply transfer money that could be invested here to countries 
such as Russia, with no reduction in greenhouse gas emissions 
— and again I stress, Mr. Speaker, with no reduction in 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
With so little detail it is impossible for any province to assess 
the impacts this plan will have on the residents and industry of 
our current provinces. Portions of this plan such as building 
codes are beyond the federal government’s jurisdiction and 
need provincial co-operation to be implemented. 
 
Ratifying Kyoto over the objections of provinces may affect 
future federal-provincial co-operation to implement such 
measures. Saskatchewan disagrees, Mr. Speaker, with the plan’s 
claim that the federal government has held extensive 
consultation. Canadian citizens and businesses do not 
understand how they will be affected, nor do they understand 
the costs that they will incur. 
 

The plan acknowledges that Canada needs to make, quote: 
 

Large adjustment . . . (to) many small pragmatic steps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan agrees that achieving Kyoto targets 
will require a large adjustment. This is why we feel strongly 
that the federal government should take the time to undertake 
extensive consultation and prepare a well-thought-out plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The plan contains some desirable 
measures and would be a good starting point for discussions 
with the provinces, with industry, and with Canadians. 
Unfortunately the federal government has introduced a motion 
into parliament that will commit this country to a Kyoto target 
before those discussions and these discussions can occur. 
 
The federal government must permit adequate time for 
consultation on proposed initiatives, establishment of fair 
targets for industry, Mr. Speaker, and also verifications of their 
federal government’s estimates of costs and impacts. 
Saskatchewan has a strong interest in some of the measures 
outlined in the plan — ethanol and new technology, agricultural 
soil sinks. But we need to know more details, more details 
about what the federal government intends to do in each of 
those areas. Those details, Mr. Speaker, are not forthcoming. 
 
Saskatchewan is pleased that the federal government has 
recognized the need to establish a partnership fund to cost-share 
initiative. However there’s no indication on how large the fund 
will be, and no indication whether it’ll be used in a manner that 
alleviates unfair burden on particular economies such as 
Saskatchewan. The federal government needs to ensure that 
targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions are shared 
equally across Canada. 
 
We seek a long-term financial commitment to help meet those 
targets. We believe assistance is necessary for any transition 
that might affect communities, industries, workers, or 
consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask the question: where to now? The provinces 
are asking the federal government to work with them on a 
made-in-Canada solution that reduces emissions while 
minimizing the impacts on provincial economies and jobs. 
Saskatchewan continues to urge the federal government not to 
ratify Kyoto without first developing a plan that all provinces 
can agree to. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that message was not 
heard. 
 
A plan that meets the 12 principles agreed to by the provinces 
and by the territories will provide Canada with the best 
mechanism to meet the reduced targets or the reduction targets 
when it ratifies the Kyoto accord. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, call on all members of the provincial 
legislature to support a motion, and that motion clearly states: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes that climate change is a 
critical issue facing Saskatchewan, Canada, and the world; 
and 



2870 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

That this Assembly supports the 12 principles adopted by 
the provinces . . . for negotiating a national climate change 
plan with the Government of Canada to address the Kyoto 
Protocol target of reducing national greenhouse gas 
emissions to 6 per cent below 1990 levels by the year 2012, 
specifically (Mr. Speaker): 
 
(1) All Canadians must have an opportunity for full and 
informed input into the development of the plan; 
(2) The plan must ensure that no region or jurisdiction shall 
be asked to bear an unreasonable share of the burden and 
no industry, sector, or region shall be treated unfairly. The 
costs and impact on individuals, (on) businesses . . . (on) 
industries must be clear, reasonable, achievable, and 
economically sustainable. The plan must incorporate 
appropriate federally funded mitigation of the adverse 
impacts of (the) climate change initiatives; 
(3) The plan must respect provincial and territorial 
jurisdiction; 
(4) The plan must include recognition of real emission 
reductions that have been achieved since 1990 or will be 
achieved thereafter; 
(5) The plan must provide for bilateral . . . (and) 
multilateral agreements between provinces and territories, 
and with the federal government; 
(6) The plan must ensure that no province or territory bears 
the financial risk of federal climate change commitments; 
(7) The plan must recognize that benefits from assets such 
as forest and agricultural sinks must accrue to the province 
or (to the) territory which owns . . . (these) assets; 
(8) The plan must support innovation and new technology; 
(9) The plan must maintain economic competitiveness of 
Canadian businesses and industry; 
(10) Canada must continue to demand recognition of clean 
energy exports; 
(11) The plan must include incentives for all citizens, 
communities, businesses and jurisdictions to make the shift 
to an economy based on renewable and other clean energy, 
lower emissions, and sustainable practices across sectors; 

 
And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

(12) The implementation of any climate change plan must 
include an incentive and allocation system that supports 
lower carbon emission sources of energy such as 
hydroelectricity, wind power generation, ethanol, and 
renewable and other clean sources of energy (Mr. Speaker). 

 
As Saskatchewan, we demand that, Mr. Speaker. As 
Saskatchewan, we need that and I stand in full support of the 
motion tabled here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into the debate over ratification of the Kyoto accord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kyoto Protocol was negotiated in 1997. Under 
Kyoto, Canada is required to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
to 94 per cent of 1990 levels by 2012. 
 
Greenhouse gases are invisible. They are not smog or other 
types of visible air pollution caused by particulates in the 

atmosphere. The most common greenhouse gases are carbon 
dioxide and methane. Both are naturally occurring in our 
atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is necessary for plant life on earth. 
 
The issue is the concentrations of these gases beyond natural 
levels may cause global warming, not that the scientific 
community can even agree as to whether or not any global 
warming is occurring outside of normal cyclic temperature 
swings or, if so, if it is man made or caused by natural events. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what of the impact on Saskatchewan? The 
provincial Department of Industry and Resources estimates 
Kyoto could cost as much as $2.6 billion in economic output by 
the year 2020. SaskPower estimates Kyoto could cost the 
provincial power utility as much as $250 million per year. 
 
IPSCO, one of Saskatchewan’s largest industrial companies, 
has indicated that ratification of the Kyoto Protocol could force 
the company to move to the United States. The Canadian 
Taxpayers Federation estimates ratification of the Kyoto 
Protocol will cost every family in Canada approximately $2,700 
per year, and more if they live in Saskatchewan or Alberta. 
 
Saskatchewan’s most important trading partner, the United 
States, is not ratifying Kyoto and therefore will not incur the 
same new costs as Saskatchewan companies. Kyoto will cause 
significant economic damage and kill thousands of jobs in 
Saskatchewan’s most important industries — agriculture, 
mining, forestry, and oil and gas. 
 
And the impact of Kyoto on Canada, Mr. Speaker. The 
Canadian exporters and manufacturers association estimates 
Kyoto could kill 450,000 jobs in the country. The Canadian 
Chamber of Commerce estimates Kyoto could cost $30 billion 
in economic output annually. The province of Alberta and the 
Fraser Institute agree that the cost could reach $40 billion in 
economic output annually. 
 
The system of proposed carbon debits, carbon debits and credits 
will effectively cause millions of dollars to be paid by Canadian 
companies to less energy efficient countries in Europe and Asia. 
 
The devastating impact of the Kyoto Protocol on Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and the Atlantic provinces will further 
exacerbate the existing regional tensions and alienation that has 
plagued Canada for decades. 
 
Canada is the only country in the G-8 that must meet GHG 
(greenhouse gas) emission reduction targets under the Kyoto 
Protocol. The United States, Canada’s most important trading 
partner, has decided not to sign Kyoto. 
 
Why will Kyoto have such a devastating impact on the 
economies of Canada and Saskatchewan? Jobs will be lost 
because Canada would not be competitive with the United 
States, our largest trading partner and a non-participant in the 
Kyoto Protocol. Every Canadian will suffer from a weak 
economy and higher prices for energy-related products, with 
resulting increased prices on many products. Industries that 
cannot meet emission targets will have to purchase credits from 
countries who have room to spare in their greenhouse gas 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2871 

 

allotment. If 50 per cent of emissions are reduced by 
efficiencies and technological changes, then credits for the other 
50 per cent will have to be purchased. 
 
The estimates are that as much as 2 to $6 billion per year might 
have to be purchased from countries in the developing category. 
This money would leave Canada. Costs for the purchase for 
these credits will be passed on to consumers through higher 
product costs. Oil, gas, electricity, agricultural products, etc., 
would become more expensive and non-competitive in global 
markets. Canada does not set prices for oil and gas, electricity, 
and most agricultural products. 
 
Some industries, such as agriculture, will be severely affected 
because of the high consumption of energy products whose 
prices would increase under Kyoto: diesel fuel, natural gas, 
fertilizer, etc. 
 
Industry and investment would tend to locate in countries that 
do not have the extra costs, perhaps in the US or in developing 
countries that do not have a target and thus no extra costs. Why 
would an industry locate in Canada when it could be located 
across the border and not have to worry about the extra 
emission control costs? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has been misleading the 
people of Canada and snowing provincial governments like this 
one opposite by maintaining that the impact on Canadian gross 
domestic product will be less than point five per cent and will 
not be felt in the average household. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence to read from an article 
published in the National Post and The Ottawa Citizen on 
November 21, 2002. And that article reads: 
 

The federal government is underestimating the cost of 
implementing the Kyoto Protocol by as much as 30 per cent 
in some sectors an Industry Canada study says. 
 
The new study predicts Canada’s energy industry in 
particular will see tremendous losses in investment, 
employment and output by 2010, two years before the 
treaty is supposed to be fully implemented. 

 
The article goes on: 
 

The final Kyoto plan which is to be made public today but 
was obtained (this is November 21 — made public today 
but was obtained) by the Ottawa Citizen yesterday, also 
will not guarantee financial compensation to the provinces 
for possible economic losses under Kyoto. 
 
It will instead set up a fund to help provinces pay for 
projects to reduce greenhouse gases. No amount has yet 
been specified for that fund. 
 
The Industry Canada study blamed the federal 
underestimation of the costs on the type of economic 
modelling used by the planners. 
 
Although completed early in the summer, sources said the 
study has been kept under wraps because it contradicts the 
rosy economic picture painted by (the) . . . federal 

government economic forecasts of the costs of 
implementing Kyoto. 

 
The report, entitled Economic Impact of Carbon Abatement 
Policies and Market Structure, forecasts the coal industry 
will suffer with investment declining by 48% and 
employment dropping by as much as 21%. 

 
In the crude petroleum and natural gas sectors, investment 
is forecast to decline 33% and employment by 14%. 
 
In the refined petroleum sector, investment in the sector 
could decline by 55% and employment by 27%. 

 
Jean Chrétien wants to have Parliament ratify the treaty 
possibly as early as next week (this was written on 
November 21). Major energy-producing and -consuming 
provinces including Alberta and Ontario (of course 
Saskatchewan’s left out because nobody knew what our 
position was) want to delay ratification until an 
implementation plan and its costs are better understood by 
the provinces and the public. 

 
The Industry Canada study is based on simulations of the 
impact on 13 sectors and takes into account the full 
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol. The international 
treaty requires Canada to reduce its greenhouse gas 
emissions to 6% below 1990 levels. 
 
The federal Kyoto plan aims to involve every citizen in 
reducing one tonne of greenhouse gases from their cars and 
homes. It will also commit the federal government to 
negotiating greenhouse-gas reduction targets with 
individual industrial sectors . . . 

 
I hope the members opposite are listening to this. 
 

The new plan refuses to concede to three of the 12 
provincial demands: (one), that Ottawa pay for any 
economic losses attributed to climate change initiatives; 
(two), that it bear all the financial risk for its climate 
change measures; (three), and that the carbon credits from 
forest and agricultural land, which absorb carbon dioxide, 
belong to the provinces. 
 

That is the federal government refuses to concede those things. 
 

The government’s latest estimates reveal Kyoto would cost 
at least 200,000 jobs and a (gross domestic product) . . . 
reduction of 1.5% over the next decade. Estimates from 
other sources, such as the Canadian Manufacturers and 
Exporters (association) . . . peg the (full) cost of . . . 
implementation at 450,000 jobs in manufacturing alone, 
and a 3% decline in GDP. 

 
However, the government’s estimates were based on 
reducing greenhouse gases by 170 megatonnes after 
claiming credit for clean energy exports — which it has 
been denied — a figure (of) 70 megatonnes less than the 
target set out in the Kyoto treaty. 
 
The model used in the new study is thought to be a more 
sophisticated attempt to measure the costs of the treaty and 



2872 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

its impact on investment decisions . . . 
 

“To our knowledge, this is the first forward-looking, 
dynamic equilibrium model that incorporates an 
imperfectly competitive market structure in the analysis of 
the Kyoto Protocol, not only for Canada but also for any 
other country.” 

 
The price of carbon as a commodity in the study is . . . 
29.20 per tonne in 2010 . . . This is contradictory to earlier 
estimates by David Anderson, the Environment Minister, 
that carbon credits covering a tonne of emissions will cost 
$10. The government study also indicated that at the 
high-end, the carbon credits could cost as much as $50 a 
tonne . . . 

 
“Energy sectors are the most affected . . . these sectors 
undergo large contractions,” said the study, claiming the 
largest decline in output will be in the coal industry with a 
(30) . . . per cent fall, followed by decreases of 28% and 
21% in . . . natural gas and refined petroleum sectors . . . 

 
The paper cautions . . . it will be necessary to compare 
whether the economic costs of compliance with the Kyoto 
Protocol will outweigh the benefits of having a lower level 
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if we could have had some leadership from this 
government and this Premier some time ago, perhaps in 
conjunction with other provinces, this thing may have been 
stopped. Instead we in this province are victims of the inaction 
of a government paralyzed by internal conflict and dissent. 
Under the leadership of this Premier, who sold out the interests 
of Saskatchewan in this debate in order to appease the 
left-wing, lunatic fringe of the NDP party . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — . . . that will not be appeased until the 
economy of Saskatchewan is completely devastated and private 
enterprise driven from the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada produces 2 per cent of the world’s 
greenhouse gas emissions. And countries either not signing on 
or signing on without targets represent 65 per cent. 
 
Canada will be the only country in the western hemisphere to 
sign on with any targets of greenhouse gas emissions. Mr. 
Speaker, it is in the best interests of Saskatchewan and Canada 
to put our . . . Is it in the best interests of Saskatchewan and 
Canada to put our economies at risk maybe to make a slight 
reduction in 2 per cent of the world’s greenhouse gas 
emissions? I think not, and the Saskatchewan Party has a better 
solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I propose the 
following amendment to the motion, that this Assembly 
opposes ratification of the Kyoto Protocol and that this 
Assembly support the 12 principles adopted by the provinces 
and territories as the basis for negotiating a made-in-Canada, 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions that balances the important goal of protecting the 
environment with the equally critical need to get 
Saskatchewan’s economy growing again, specifically: 
 

(1) All Canadians must have an opportunity for full and 
informed input into the development of the plan; 
(2) The plan must ensure that no region or jurisdiction shall 
be asked to bear an unreasonable share of the burden, and no 
industry, sector, or region shall be treated unfairly. The costs 
and impacts on individuals, businesses and industries must be 
clear, responsible, achievable, and economically sustainable. 
The plan must incorporate appropriate federally funded 
mitigation of the adverse impacts of climate change 
initiatives; 
(3) The plan must respect provincial and territorial 
jurisdiction; 
(4) The plan must include recognition of real emission 
reductions that have been achieved since 1990 or will be 
achieved thereafter; 
(5) The plan must provide for bilateral or multilateral 
agreements between provinces and territories, and with the 
federal government; 
(6) The plan must ensure that no province or territory bears 
the financial risk of federal climate change commitments; 
(7) The plan must recognize that benefits from assets such as 
forest and agricultural sinks must accrue to the province and 
territory which owns the assets; 
(8) The plan must support innovation and new technology; 
(9) The plan must maintain the economic competitiveness of 
Canadian business and industry; 
(10) Canada must continue to demand recognition of clean 
energy exports; 
(11) The plan must include incentives for all citizens, 
communities, businesses, and jurisdictions to make the shift 
to an economy based on renewable and other clean energy, 
lower emissions, and sustainable practices across sectors; 
(and finally) 
(12) The implementation of any climate change plan must 
include an incentive and allocation system that supports 
lower carbon emission sources of energy such as 
hydroelectricity, wind power generation (and) ethanol, and 
renewable and other clean sources of energy. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the actual motion moved by myself, to be 
seconded by the member from Carrot River Valley, reads as 
follows: 
 

That all words before “specifically” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
That this Assembly opposes ratification of the Kyoto 
Protocol, and that this Assembly support the 12 principles 
adopted by the provinces and territories as a basis for 
negotiating a made-in-Canada, made-in-Saskatchewan plan 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that balances the 
important goal of protecting the environment with the 
equally critical need to get Saskatchewan’s economy 
growing again. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2873 

 

(15:30) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure for me to enter into the debate on the Kyoto 
accord and to second the motion, or the amendment to the 
motion as proposed by the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to understand the Kyoto accord I think 
it’s important that we understand a little bit of the history 
behind it. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the 
IPCC, was jointly established in 1988 by the World 
Meteorological Organization and the United Nations 
Environment Programme to assess scientific, technical, and 
socio-economic information on the climate system, climate 
change impacts, and response options. 
 
The IPCC second assessment report released in 1996 concluded 
that climate change had indeed taken place and some of this 
change might be attributed to human activity. Governments 
around the world adopted a goal of reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions and this led to more than 160 nations gathering in 
Kyoto, Japan, December 1997. 
 
The purpose was to negotiate the Kyoto Protocol to the United 
Nations framework treaty on climate change. This international 
agreement under the United Nations was created to reduce 
greenhouse gases in the developed countries around the world. 
 
As a result of the meeting in Kyoto, 38 developed nations 
agreed to reductions. The goal of the Kyoto accord is to reduce 
overall greenhouse gas emissions by 5.2 per cent below 1990 
levels in the commitment period from 2008 to 2012. The United 
States agreed to 5 per cent, and Canada decided to go one step 
further and agreed to 6 per cent. 
 
In 2001 the IPCC published its third assessment report. This 
report reiterated the need for Kyoto and for further action. It 
outlined increasing understanding of climate change risks. The 
most abundant greenhouse gases, Mr. Speaker, are carbon 
dioxide and methane. Both of these gases are naturally 
occurring components of our atmosphere. We actually require 
greenhouse gases to survive. However the concern for some is 
that these gases are being emitted in a concentration that is 
above a natural level, resulting in global warming. 
 
However many scientists feel that warming and cooling cycles 
are normal and that in the past thousand years there were much 
warmer and cooler periods than there are today. There is no 
consensus, Mr. Speaker, on the theory that humanity is causing 
significant climate change, as there is not even consensus that 
the atmosphere is warming. 
 
Kyoto primarily targets the production of carbon dioxide from 
the burning of fossil fuels. The approximate breakdown is as 
follows: 25 per cent from transportation, 18 per cent from oil 
and gas, 17 per cent from the mining and manufacturing 
industry, 16 per cent from power generation, 10 per cent from 
agriculture, 10 per cent from buildings, and 4 per cent from 
landfill gases. Kyoto does not address the problem of air 
pollution as many Canadians believe, and as the federal 
government has led Canadians to believe. 
 
Ninety per cent of all global carbon dioxide production is from 

natural sources, with only 10 per cent produced by humans. 
Kyoto targets require that Canada reduce emissions by 240 
megatonnes by 2012. This is 30 per cent below current levels. 
 
A special report on land use, land use change, and forestry, 
which was negotiated subsequent to the signing of the original 
treaty, authorized the use of sink credits. Canada, Japan, Russia, 
and other countries will be allowed to claim certain credits due 
to the fact that forest and plant growth within their countries 
draw carbon dioxide from the air. Canada’s original target was 
reduced by 10 per cent, meaning that Canada can claim 24 
megatonnes worth of sink credits as an outcome of these 
negotiations. 
 
However the federal government has penalized the provinces by 
claiming these credits. They have told the provinces that they 
will not be allowed to benefit from the credits. They are using 
the provinces’ forests to reduce Canada’s overall burden but not 
allowing the provinces themselves to use these, even, Mr. 
Speaker, when forestry and agriculture are under provincial 
jurisdiction. 
 
Canada has also sought 60 megatonnes of clean air energy 
exports. Under this proposal, if another country reduced its 
emissions by switching from coal or oil to natural gas bought 
from Canada, Canada wanted to be able to claim the reduction 
in the other country’s emissions for itself. Twice, other 
members of the Protocol have declined Canada’s request for 
these credits. 
 
However these credits are taken into account by the federal 
government when they calculate the estimated cost that Kyoto 
will have on Canadians, even though they have been told that 
Kyoto will not be amended. The November 2002 New Delhi 
convention did not even allow this issue to be put on the 
agenda, Mr. Speaker. It is becoming obvious that this will never 
occur. Canada will now have to hope to negotiate these credits 
in the next stage of the Kyoto process which begins in 2013. 
 
As a result of its inability to claim these credits, the government 
is short and have said that they may be forced to look at even 
further reductions from industry, provinces, and municipalities. 
And the natural gas companies, Mr. Speaker, who thought they 
may be in a somewhat better position than others, were dealt a 
severe blow with this news. 
 
Another issue that has become very evident from New Delhi is 
the refusal of developing countries to commit in the future to 
any greenhouse gas reductions. Kyoto requires compliance on 
average from 2008 to 2012. By 2005, members must submit 
evidence of having made substantial progress toward meeting 
their goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are the penalties for failure to reach these 
targets set out in Kyoto? For the Kyoto Protocol, according to 
the Marrakesh accord, nations that ratify Kyoto who do not 
meet their targets in round one are penalized another 30 per cent 
in emission reductions and will not be allowed to sell carbon 
credits in round two, and that any shortfall will have to be made 
up for within 100 days. 
 
The European Union has also threatened that they will 
introduce World Trade Organization penalties against nations 



2874 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

which fail to meet their targets, thus affecting trade — 
something very important to Canada and very important to this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Just 25 per cent of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions are 
produced by the 18 developed countries who have ratified the 
accord. Canada is one of 25 countries classified as a developed 
country. Only developed countries are required to reduce 
emissions. Other countries termed developing countries are not 
only exempt from the reductions, they are actually allowed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to increase emissions under the accord. 
 
Under this accord, developing countries are able to sell credits 
for the unused part of their emission reductions. These credits 
can be sold to developed countries that cannot meet their 
emission targets. In Canada the effect of purchasing these 
credits would cost approximately $6 billion annually by the 
year 2008. This is money that would leave our country and do 
absolutely nothing to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
As it stands, it appears that only Russia and the Ukraine expect 
to be in a position to have any significant credits to sell. 
Therefore these countries, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would have a 
competitive edge over Canada which will find itself in an 
extremely difficult position as Canada has a growing 
population, a resource based economy, and a cold climate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is also no mechanism in place for 
auditing the validity of these credits and, since the breakdown 
of the Soviet Union, there are no legal institutions to provide 
reimbursement if the credits turn out to be fictitious. Would it 
not make more sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to spend this $6 
billion within Canada on the research and development of 
looking at areas around alternative methods to reducing 
greenhouse gases. 
 
The costs of Kyoto implementation depends greatly on whether 
the emission credit program comes into being. And since the 
government is still very unclear on how to address the risk 
involved with this, this issue makes it only one of the serious 
potential consequences not addressed by the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Australia and the United States have 
refused to ratify the Protocol. None of the OPEC (Organization 
of Petroleum Exporting Countries) countries are considering 
reductions under the agreement. Russia has said it will, but even 
though it has the most to gain it has not been quick to act. 
Europe has agreed, but their target is only about one-third the 
size of Canada’s. 
 
Developing countries such as China, India, and Indonesia, who 
are viewed as emerging industrial leaders, produce 7 to 10 times 
as much greenhouse gas per dollar of GDP as developed 
nations, who originally signed the accord but were not restricted 
by the constraints Canada would realize under Kyoto. In New 
Delhi recently, China and India said they will not be ratifying 
Kyoto as they fear it will shut down their economies. 
 
Of the more than 160 parties to the Protocol, only 38 agreed to 
emission limits. Countries representing 5 billion of the world’s 
6 billion people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are exempt from the 
accord. 

Japan, who have the same reduction targets as Canada, have 
signalled their acceptance of Kyoto reductions. However they 
have stopped short of full ratification, meaning these targets 
will not be legally binding. Japan’s government will not impose 
emission limitations on companies or consumers. It will instead 
be promoting household conservation. 
 
Countries such as Russia, Bulgaria, Poland, and Romania, and 
most of the other original signatories to Kyoto have been 
termed by the United Nations as economies in transition, which 
permits them extraordinary flexibility in meeting their targets, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Germany and the United Kingdom have indeed reduced their 
greenhouse gas emissions over the last decade. However in both 
these countries their economic survival depended upon moving 
more towards more modern technology. It at the time had very 
little to do with environmental concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Germany’s closure of many of their financially draining, 
coal-intensive firms and the conversion from coal to natural gas 
in the UK (United Kingdom) has caused the drop in that 
country’s emissions. As the European target is continent wide, 
the emission reductions recognized in the UK and Germany will 
assist other EU (European Union) countries. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So Canada negotiates a higher reduction, therefore has to pay an 
enormous amount in credits to countries who have made no real 
effort to reduce emissions. In fact, they are saving themselves 
economically through the closure of inefficient and financially 
unviable operations. And with so few countries participating, 
the environmental benefits of the implementation are virtually 
nonexistent. 
 
If Canada proceeds with the ratification of Kyoto, it would be 
the only country in the western hemisphere to do so and at a 
great cost to Canadians. And as we heard earlier, Mr. Speaker, I 
think we were all very unhappy to hear that the federal 
government in fact pushed the vote through in favour of the 
accord this afternoon in the House of Commons without the 
country being able to be heard, without them being able to get 
the benefit of the debate from this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada will have to make significant changes in 
order to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions. Today, we are 30 
per cent over 1990 levels. In order to reduce emissions to the 
targeted amounts, it’s going to require major changes in 
Canadian households and in Canadian industries. The 
government is telling us that each Canadian emits 5.4 tonnes of 
carbon per year and that we will be required to lower this 
emission by 1 tonne, about 20 per cent, through energy 
conservation and other approaches. 
 
As Canadians we can expect the implementation of Kyoto to be 
very costly. The government says they will initiate advertising 
to focus on household energy efficiency measures and estimate 
that these efforts would result in approximately a 0.4 
megatonne reduction. This carries very little weight, as our 
target for reductions, Mr. Speaker, is 240 megatonnes. 
 
In order to reach these targets, there will be substantial changes 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2875 

 

in consumption resulting from large energy increases through 
taxes, tradable permits, or cost pass-throughs from new 
regulations on industry and households. Canadians will see a 
higher cost of living and at the same time have lower real 
income. For Canadians to reduce fuel consumption by a 
substantial amount, fuel prices will need to increase 
permanently and significantly. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how about the $1.7 billion the 
federal government has already spent on Kyoto? What do we 
have to show for this? They have been advertising and they 
have been doing polling. And, Mr. Speaker, last month alone 
the federal government spent approximately $10 million on 
attempting to promote the accord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a recent Industry Canada report saying 
that the federal government is underestimating the cost of the 
implementation of the Kyoto accord by as much as 30 per cent. 
Taking into account that there are still so many questions to be 
answered, Mr. Speaker, how at this point can we understand 
how much Canadians are really going to spend on the Kyoto 
accord. 
 
The study that I refer to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, predicts that 
Canada’s energy industry will see grave losses in investment, 
employment, and output by 2010. At the same time the federal 
government is maintaining that the average household will not 
be affected. However a study by the Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation says that natural gas prices may see up to a 90 per 
cent increase, and the price of gasoline could rise by about 50 
per cent. 
 
Price increases in combination with necessary wage reductions 
that will occur are expected to reduce the annual after-tax 
income by approximately $2,700 by 2010, or more if you are a 
resident of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There will likely 
be tax increases in order to expand public transit systems. 
Money will be required to fund incentive and recycling 
programs. Government programs and services like health and 
education will no doubt be affected by the drop in government 
revenue. 
 
And it’s difficult to understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how these 
kinds of effects were not taken into account when the federal 
government determined that they were going to proceed blindly 
with the ratification of this accord. We’ve even had the Deputy 
Prime Minister, Mr. Manley, admit that uncertainty about 
Canada’s Kyoto plans are already discouraging investment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 50 per cent of the energy produced in 
Canada comes from coal. However, coal is one of the largest 
producers of carbon dioxide. We will suggest . . . Will we 
suggest that all the coal plants be shut down? Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think there are some realistic things that we need to 
address and there are some things that, with respect to this 
accord, are just completely unrealistic. 
 
Kyoto is not the answer for Canada. It’s not the answer for 
Saskatchewan. It is not going to be what is best for our children 
and grandchildren. We do need to address the environmental 
issues and the associated costs. We need a time for this, Mr. 
Speaker, time that unfortunately Mr. Chrétien was not willing to 
give us and to give Canadians. That is why I am pleased to 

second the amendment as proposed by the member from 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased this afternoon to enter into this debate on the issue of 
Kyoto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to examine for a few minutes what the 
actual motion made by the government was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand the members opposite have made an 
amendment, but I think it’s time to examine the content of the 
original motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
original motion said very clearly that this Assembly recognize 
that climate change is a critical issue facing Saskatchewan, 
Canada, and the world. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think to deny that 
is sticking your head in the sand, to not looking at what’s 
happening in the world around us, to not critically examine the 
scientific evidence being brought forward that in fact the 
climate is changing in the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to recognize in fact the climate is 
changing. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, the start of this motion 
simply says that we recognize in fact the climate in Canada, 
Saskatchewan, in fact the world, is changing. We’re seeing it 
with increased drought. We’re seeing it with greater 
fluctuations of climate in various parts of the world, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And we need to deal with that. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all it says is that we recognize that it 
is a critical issue facing both our province, our country, and in 
fact the world. Can anyone disagree with that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? I think to disagree with that is in fact ignoring what is 
going on around you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the second part of this motion simply says 
that this Assembly supports the 12 principles adopted by all of 
the provinces and territories as a basis for negotiating a national 
climate change plan with the Government of Canada. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, who can have difficulty with that? 
 
We’ve heard the members opposite, in their own motion, recite 
the exact same 12 points that the government brought forward. 
The same 12 points were brought forward by the opposition, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the members opposite have 
difficulty in facing an issue head-on. They’re having difficulty 
realizing that in fact, that there are issues facing Canadians that 
we must deal with. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really, really difficult to 
understand that the members opposite would stand today, they 
would stand here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after the federal 
government has already ratified Kyoto and say, let’s oppose 
something that’s already happened. They want to change what’s 
already occurred, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rather than focus on the 
path this government is focusing on — the future. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very, very important that 
we examine, that we examine the 12 principles that the motion 



2876 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

speaks to, the government motion speaks to and look at what 
they mean. 
 
Let’s talk about point no. 1, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It says: 
 

All Canadians must have an opportunity for full and 
informed input into the development of the plan. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s simply democracy. 
 
We’re asking that all Canadians have input into the 
development of a plan that’s going to affect all Canadians. That 
Canadians in British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Nova Scotia, all 
have input into a plan that’s going to affect them. A very 
elementary concept, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Why would they 
want to be opposed to it? 
 
But of course they weren’t. They enjoy supporting that 
principle but they don’t want to recognize that what they’re 
supporting is actually occurring because they don’t want to 
recognize that climate change is occurring. But they will 
support that principle in discussing that issue, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s hard to follow the opposition, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I disagree with the federal 
plan as well that the federal government’s put forward to 
implement the Kyoto plan because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
didn’t put forward a plan. They simply said they wanted to 
accomplish a goal in principle and we can agree with that 
principle, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but they didn’t 
put forward a fundamental plan that I could agree with. 
 
But does that mean that I disagree with the principle of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions? No. It means that I agree that we 
need to negotiate a fundamental plan that we, as Saskatchewan 
citizens, can agree with, that puts our province in the best 
possible position. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, point no. 2 says that: 
 

The plan must ensure that no region or jurisdiction shall be 
asked to bear an unreasonable share of the burden and no 
industry, sector, or region shall be treated unfairly. The 
costs and impacts on individuals, businesses, and industries 
must be clear, reasonable, achievable, and economically 
sustainable. The plan must incorporate appropriate 
federally funded mitigation of the adverse impacts of 
climate change initiatives. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’re saying is that nobody in 
this country, whether it be in British Columbia, Nova Scotia, or 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should pay an unfair price. 
And we want to see that the industry . . . no particular industry 
pays an unfair price, no particular sector of the economy pays 
an unfair price. And we want to have those discussions in an 
open way so that all Canadians can participate, and it’ll be fair. 
 
And why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would they oppose that? In fact, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it surprises me. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, point no. 3: 
 

The plan must respect provincial and territorial jurisdiction. 
 
Well what’s surprising about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The 
Kyoto accord itself represents the . . . reflects the autonomy of 
each individual nation, and the fact that nations have the 
opportunity to either ratify or not ratify the accord. They had an 
opportunity to discuss how ratification would impact their 
individual countries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re asking for the same principle that Kyoto put in place to 
deal with nations, be put in place for the provinces to deal with 
Canada. That’s all we’re asking, Mr. Deputy Speaker — an 
open and consultative process that respects the jurisdictions of 
each province, a very admirable quality. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, point no. 4: 
 

The plan must include recognition of real emission 
reductions that have been achieved since 1990 or will be 
achieved thereafter (Mr. Deputy Speaker). 

 
We want that plan to recognize initiatives we’ve already taken 
in Saskatchewan, and there’s a number of initiatives we’ve 
already taken in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just 
talked about a few of them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have the . . . 
Saskatchewan farmers and the people of Saskatchewan have the 
highest adoption rates of conservation tillage systems in the 
world, transforming agricultural soils from an emission source 
for atmospheric carbon dioxide into carbon sinks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
SaskPower is participating in two wind turbine projects. 
Together, these two Saskatchewan wind power projects 
represent the third largest wind power development in all of 
Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want recognition for what 
we’re doing and what we’re going to continue to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan has been working with EnCana Corporation and 
various other interested parties to initiate an IEA Weyburn 
carbon dioxide monitoring project. The project uses carbon 
dioxide enhanced oil recovery techniques to permanently store 
carbon dioxide underground and simultaneously increase oil 
production. Very good for the economy, but also very good for 
the environment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation is undertaking extensive energy conservation in 
more than 70 provincial government buildings. The work is 
being financed through energy savings which ultimately 
translate into savings to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, but also 
reducing our energy consumption. 
 
Saskatchewan assisted in establishing of an international test 
centre for carbon dioxide capture at the University of Regina. 
This $8.5 million facility will develop technologies to reduce 
carbon dioxide emissions, especially those produced by the 
energy sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(16:00) 
 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2877 

 

That’s only a few of the initiatives we’ve undertaken to this 
point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we continue to undertake new 
initiatives to reduce our energy usage and to conserve energy 
and by doing so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, reducing our greenhouse 
gas emissions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — We want to see recognition for that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Point no. 5, Mr. Deputy Speaker, deals with . . . 
 

The plan must provide for bilateral or multilateral 
agreements between provinces and territories, and with the 
federal government. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it allows us to work either bilaterally or 
multilaterally to solve some of the problems that the Kyoto 
accord or Kyoto agreement will . . . are . . . bring forward for 
Canadians, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
All it says that we’re going to work together, that we form 
agreements that allow us to work together. 
 
Point no. 6: 
 

The plan must ensure that no province or territory bears the 
financial risk of federal climate change commitments. 
 

So simply that the federal government, if it makes 
commitments, will bear the financial cost of those 
commitments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s a great bargaining 
position to put forward. Why would the opposition want to 
oppose that? 
 
Point no. 7, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The plan must recognize (the) . . . benefits from assets such 
as forests and agricultural sinks must accrue to the province 
or territory which owns those assets. 
 

Right now the federal government wants to take those credits, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re saying that those credits produced 
in this province are for the benefit of this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Of course the members opposite would have to agree 
with that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, point no. 8. 
 

The plan must support innovation and new technology. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s through innovation and new 
technology that we will be able to continue to reduce the 
amount of greenhouse gas emissions that are produced by 
Canadians and in fact produced around the world, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So of course that plan must support that innovation 
and new technology. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The plan must maintain the economic competitiveness of 
Canadian business and industry. 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is as concerned about 
the economy of business as all Canadians are. It’s atrocious to 
hear the opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, say that we’re not 
concerned about the economy, about business in our province, 
because that’s our number one priority. 
 
Our province is our priority and we’re as concerned about the 
economic well-being of our province as we are about the 
environmental well-being. But what we’re saying is we can 
balance those two things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, point no. 10 says that: 
 

Canada must continue to demand recognition of clean energy 
exports. 
 

That is a key issue for Saskatchewan. We are large producers of 
natural gas. We are going to be large producers of ethanol, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We can be huge producers of wind generated 
electrical power, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we want credit for 
that energy production. We want credit for selling those 
resources and exporting those resources to other countries, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Point no. 11, Mr. Deputy Speaker, says: 
 

The plan must include incentives for all citizens, 
communities, businesses, and jurisdictions to make the shift 
to an economy based on renewable and other clean energy, 
lower emissions, and sustainable practices across sectors. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are going to be one of the largest, if 
not the largest, producers of ethanol in the country and we need 
to have that recognized in this plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
need to see the Government of Canada recognize the initiatives 
that the Government of Saskatchewan is putting forward by 
being leaders in the ethanol industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
need it recognized. 
 
And last but not least, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The implementation of any climate change plan must 
include an incentive . . . (an) allocation system that 
supports lower carbon emission sources of energy such as 
hydroelectricity, wind power generation, ethanol, and 
renewable and other clean sources of energy. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to see those clean energy sources 
recognized for the people of Saskatchewan and reducing our 
obligation in any plan that’s put forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk for a few minutes about 
what the Kyoto accord and what some of the other countries are 
saying, and how they’re going about dealing with the issue of 
greenhouse gas emissions. Australia and the United States have 
announced that they aren’t going to ratify Kyoto. But both those 
nations are doing a significant number of things to help reduce 
their own greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
The United States has large wind farms throughout the United 
States. They’re introducing . . . they refine and produce ethanol 
like we do in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are doing 
significant energy conservation issues in many states in the 



2878 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

United States. They’re moving forward with their own plan. 
 
All we’re saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our 12-point plan or 
12-point principles, is that we want to negotiate a plan that’s 
good for Saskatchewan within the Canadian framework. That’s 
all we’re talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s one other point about the Kyoto 
accord that creates a great deal of difficulty for me and I think 
for Canadians in general. That’s the idea of buying credits from 
Third World countries where there’s no guarantee that that 
money will actually be used to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
at all. It simply may be used by those countries for other 
purposes. There are no guarantees. There’s no accountability. 
There’s no check mechanism to ensure that if you bought 
credits from Third World countries that in fact it would be used 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we note today that the Government 
of Canada has ratified the Kyoto accord, that they have ratified 
moving ahead with it. Now it is upon us as legislators in 
Saskatchewan to move forward and negotiate a plan that looks 
after the interests of Saskatchewan people, business, the 
environment, that leaves our province in its best possible 
position as this issue moves forward, because we as legislators 
are both the stewards of the economy and the stewards of the 
environment. So it’s up to us to balance those interests, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we as a government have put forward a motion saying that 
we want to use the same 12 principles that all Canadian 
provinces and territories have adopted as a basis for which to 
negotiate that plan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that all 
members of the Assembly should work together to move 
forward and negotiate the plan on behalf of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in concluding I would like to say 
that I will be supporting the original motion and opposing the, 
opposing the amendment put forward by the members of the 
opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, much has 
been said about the Kyoto Protocol over the past few months 
and though it has been more than five years since Canada 
agreed with most countries, including the United States and 
Australia, to set targets to reduce greenhouse gases, very little 
has been discussed publicly, especially here in Saskatchewan 
and in particular within this Assembly. 
 
And what has been finally said by the NDP government a week 
or so ago has been bewildering and confusing. The Premier of 
Saskatchewan had given up the fight. He was no longer 
interested in stopping the ratification of the Kyoto accord. But 
his own Minister of Industry and Resources, the Hon. — I can’t 
say his name in here — disagreed with his leader and is 
staunchly opposed to Ottawa’s bullheaded, misguided, and 
mishandled position. 
 
Why everyone though, Mr. Speaker, why everyone in this 
government would not opposed a convoluted plan that could 

devastate Saskatchewan’s shaky economy is mystifying. And 
why it would wave a white flag as other provinces are stepping 
up their opposition was bewildering. 
 
Each public opinion poll showed that a majority of Canadians 
supported the Kyoto accord initially — initially. Yet those same 
polls reveal that most people did not understand what the treaty 
attempted to address, much less understand its frightening 
ramifications. And just as shockingly, those that support Kyoto 
the most are the people who understand it the least. 
 
But as of late, Mr. Speaker, a more recent poll on the subject 
indicated that 63 per cent of Saskatchewan’s residents polled 
opposed Kyoto. 
 
The past president of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, 
whose company EnCana operates one of the world’s largest 
carbon dioxide oil recovery operations at Weyburn, warns that 
the border states of Montana, North Dakota, and others must be 
rubbing their hands with glee. They soon will be luring 
businesses to move down and set up shop in the United States, a 
country that soundly rejects the Kyoto accord. 
 
The oil producing provinces, Saskatchewan, Alberta, BC, 
Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia are nervous that they will be 
hard hit while Manitoba and Quebec believe they are in an 
advantage with their hydroelectricity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is what Gwyn Morgan, president and CEO 
(chief executive officer) of EnCana Corporation, said at the 
recent annual meeting of the Canadian Chamber Commerce: 
 

If the federal government remains on course to sign this 
most damaging of international agreements, if we continue 
to adopt our good Boy Scout image, Canadians will face 
major problems, serious divisive problems. We will face 
Kyoto discord. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports the goal of 
reducing man-made emissions of greenhouse gases but it has to 
be a made-in-Canada, made-in-Saskatchewan plan. 
Saskatchewan can ill afford to play this high-stakes game in the 
false and naive hope that we need to be the good Boy Scout to 
look good. 
 
As the Minister of Finance so clearly pointed out recently, the 
province has lost a staggering $521 million so far this fiscal 
year and this number will surely rise before the year ends. What 
definitely has risen, Mr. Speaker, is the overall debt which has 
increased over $700 million in the past two years to 11.9 billion 
during the NDP’s regime. 
 
We do not have the money for health care, education, highways, 
social services, and all the other essential services. Now this 
government is thinking, under this Premier, to further erode our 
economic base by supporting this ill-thought-out Kyoto treaty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is not opposed to reducing 
pollution and working towards a healthier environment. But in 
our little corner of the world with its big skies and wide open 
spaces, the least populated province, incidentally, west of the 
Maritimes, what we contribute to pollution on a global scale is 
negligible. What it will cost us will be huge. 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2879 

 

And now that Kyoto has lost so many key players such as the 
United States and Australia and with India, China, and Russia 
refusing to sign on, over one-half of the top greenhouse gas 
emitters, the accord will not only be unsuccessful in reducing 
the earth’s emissions but could serve to increase them. 
 
And at the same time it would do grievous economic harm to all 
regions of Canada by slowing down our economy at a time 
when more money is needed to fund health care and the 
military, just to name but a few. 
 
Saskatchewan’s cost to join the federal Liberal government’s 
ill-thought-out scheme — a federal government, incidentally, 
that has done little for our province — would be devastating. 
Saskatchewan’s financial affairs have gotten worse; in fact 
they’re disastrous. 
 
In a province where we have more natural resources than our 
booming neighbour Alberta, we have fewer taxpayers than the 
city of Calgary. To help improve our faltering economy the 
Premier flies off to Calgary begging transplanted teachers, 
engineers, and yes, even lawyers to return home to prop up the 
NDP’s socialist fortunes in what one columnist refers to as the 
cradle of saskatchewistan. But I digress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said, Saskatchewan could be economically devastated if 
Kyoto is ratified by the federal government and now we 
recognize that that is so. There is considerable evidence that is 
not worth putting our citizens at risk. For example, the president 
of SaskPower estimates that Kyoto will cost SaskPower up to 
250 million a year and will burden customers up to 25 per cent 
more than their already large bills. 
 
In addition, our public utility may have to spend a staggering $3 
billion just to replace its coal-fired generators. IPSCO, one of 
Saskatchewan’s most important industrial companies, says that 
the ratification of Kyoto Protocol could force the company to 
move out of the province. 
 
The Minister of Industry and Resources’ department estimates 
that Kyoto could cost as much as 2.6 billion in economic output 
over the next few years. 
 
The Canadian Taxpayers Federation estimates that ratification 
of Kyoto will cost every family in Canada $2,700 a year and 
more — much more if they live in Saskatchewan because of the 
loss of precious jobs and businesses. 
 
Many farmers have second jobs in the oil patch, incomes which 
are vital to the survival of their farms. Many jobs are generated 
in the oil industry from Lloydminster to Kerrobert, Kindersley, 
Swift Current, Gull Lake, Weyburn, Milestone, Carlyle, Arcola, 
Estevan, and even here in Regina. 
 
The Kyoto accord could have the same negative effect as did 
the ruinous national energy program that we all recall with 
nightmarish agony, shutting down half of the production and 
throwing thousands of people out of work. 
 
With the loss of jobs, Mr. Speaker, there will be increases in 
taxes — taxes our dwindling number of overburdened taxpayers 
can ill afford. 
 

(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has seen for too long how 
misguided socialist doctrine benefits a few, plundering our 
province while the rest of Canada flourishes. Supporting a 
misguided treaty that will devastate Saskatchewan is sheer 
folly. It is not unlike the 1999-2000 Y2K computer scare that 
turned out to be the biggest fraud in the history of mankind. 
This misguided Kyoto accord could easily outdo that sham. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party supports the goal of reducing 
man-made emissions. We should be reducing the energy 
required to heat a house, decrease emissions to produce a barrel 
of oil, and encourage ways to reduce automobile energy costs. 
But with only 30 per cent of worldwide emissions covered by 
Kyoto, and Canada’s contribution less than 2 per cent and 
Saskatchewan’s far less, we strongly oppose the ratification of 
the Kyoto Protocol. It will devastate Saskatchewan’s economy, 
kill thousands of jobs, attack our most important industries, and 
achieve little in the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that over 95 per cent of the 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere — the target of the Kyoto 
accord — comes from nature, not from man. If the Kyoto 
Protocol were fully implemented, man-made carbon dioxide 
levels would increase by 25 per cent instead of 35 per cent if 
Kyoto were not implemented. In short, the effect of 
implementing Kyoto would be miniscule. 
 
So what are the culprits, Mr. Speaker? It is not carbon dioxide 
as we earlier feared. The same NASA (National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration) scientist who identified carbon 
dioxide as the problem now says it is methane, nitrous oxide, 
and soot, which are not even covered by Kyoto. 
 
So what then is the Kyoto Protocol? Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
about science. It is crass, old-fashioned politics — socialist 
politics — intent on redistributing income led by overzealous 
Environment department bureaucrats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the season to be jolly, but there can be no 
merriment in Saskatchewan. No responsible government in 
Saskatchewan, no political leader in this province interested in 
building Saskatchewan, could endorse the Kyoto accord. 
 
I ask all members to support the Saskatchewan Party’s 
amendment to oppose Ottawa’s ill-advised ratification plan that 
will cripple our economy without achieving any significant 
environmental benefit. I ask all members of this Assembly to 
oppose ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to enter into this debate this afternoon 
to talk about some of the objectives that we have had in this 
province as we’ve moved through the discussions with the feds 
and other provinces about implementation of Kyoto, to have an 
opportunity to speak on behalf of my constituents, and to 
correct some of the very glaring misconceptions that have been 
put out by the opposition. 
 
When I was minister of Energy and Mines, I had the 
opportunity to be the lead on . . . for Saskatchewan on the 



2880 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

climate change file. And I want to say that it was an 
eye-opening experience for me to listen to what other provinces 
had to say and to listen to the different views coming out of the 
federal government, both from the Minister of Environment, 
Mr. Anderson, and the Minister of Natural Resources, who 
initially was Mr. Goodale, and of course now is Mr. Dhaliwal. 
 
I want to say that the federal government’s approach to this is 
wrong headed. It is not an approach based on co-operation. I 
had an opportunity to listen to Mr. Anderson talk on the radio 
on As It Happens the other night, suggesting to Canadians that 
we had need not worry about the impact of climate change if we 
change our ways. Fair enough. What was his suggestion in 
terms of dealing with it? His suggestion was we should turn 
down the thermostat, put on a sweater, and stop driving the 
SUVs (sport utility vehicle). He suggested that we should move 
out of the suburbs back into the inner cities. 
 
This is a fine idea if we were building a Utopian society. But 
for those of us who are starting from a sense of reality, I think 
that we need to take into account a more realistic set of 
solutions. 
 
And that’s what the Minister of Industry in this province and 
the Minister of Environment have gone forward with other 
provinces to negotiate. That is what the 12-point plan that the 
provinces, all the provinces, agree on. 
 
What I think is unfortunate is the approach that the opposition is 
taking to say under no circumstances should we pay any 
attention whatsoever to Kyoto; under no circumstances should 
we recognize that climate change is a problem in this province; 
under no circumstances should we work to correct that. And 
that is all they’re interested in doing is contributing more hot air 
to a problem that’s already caused by that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the approach the opposition’s put forward 
in terms of their amendment to this resolution is wrong, it’s 
inaccurate, it’s inflammatory, and it must be defeated in the 
interest of a more rational approach which has been proposed 
by the Minister of Industry. 
 
Let me take for a moment just a very quick look at what the 
member for Thunder Creek and the member for Carrot River 
Valley proposed. They say that what we need to do is that we 
need to reject Kyoto and that we need to get Saskatchewan’s 
economy growing again. Well I’ve got news for the opposition. 
Saskatchewan’s economy never stopped growing. 
Saskatchewan’s economy has continued to grow in every single 
year that we’ve had an NDP government here. That’s what’s 
happened and it will continue to do so long after the next 
election, under this particular Premier. 
 
Let’s understand what this growth has been fuelled on. It has 
been fuelled on a sensible approach to making sure that we 
make good use of our resources. And you take a look at the 
approach that we’ve taken over the very last few months. I had 
the pleasure of working with my colleague from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, with my colleague from Saskatoon 
Greystone, on an ethanol plan. We’ve brought in a proposal to 
make Saskatchewan a leader in terms of ethanol production, 
over the objections, over the objections of the Saskatchewan 
Party — and you can hear them today. Over the objections of 

them we brought that in. 
 
But we said that there was more than we could do. We moved 
forward to change the regulations around the mining industry in 
order to increase more exploration. We’ve changed the 
regulations to increase oil and gas production despite the fact 
that under this term, under this government, since the Romanow 
government came in, in 1991, that we have doubled the amount 
of oil and gas production in this province — doubled it. That’s 
what we’ve done. 
 
The economy has continued to grow, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The amendment to this resolution is wrong. And I 
think that their approach is wrong. When I listen to the member 
for Thunder Creek stand up in this Assembly and suggest that 
it’s the lunatic left, he says — it’s the lunatic left that says we 
need to deal with climate change. 
 
Well let me tell you who’s the lunatic left. The member for 
Thunder Creek puts into that group by saying the only ones 
concerned about climate change, the council of Catholic 
bishops. The Catholic bishops are who these people are 
attacking because they say we have to deal with climate change. 
They’re attacking the working men and women through CEP 
(Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada) 
who support the need to move forward on climate change. They 
attack the steelworkers who support moving forward on climate 
change. That’s who these people characterize as the lunatic left. 
 
And I guess if you’re that extreme right wing, if you’re on that 
extreme, the right wing which that ideologically biased right 
wing . . . (inaudible) . . . party is, then there is clearly an 
understanding why the Catholic bishops, the unions, and the 
NDP would be considered the lunatic left. Well that’s not a 
position, that is not a position supported by the mainstream of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Saskatchewan people know that we need to move forward on 
climate change. They know that we need to do something on 
the Kyoto accord. The question here is not the ratification of 
Kyoto. The question here is how we deal with the implications 
within Canada. And this is the part that frustrates me about our 
federal government. Our federal government has set up a divide 
and conquer approach. They have divided off the provinces that 
are in a good position on climate change, namely Manitoba and 
Quebec, who have resources at their disposal to be able to move 
forward. And they have divided them off from those of us in the 
West. 
 
This is a wrong-headed approach that the federal Liberals have 
taken. I can see why people in other provinces have suggested, 
in industry have suggested that this is akin to the old national 
energy program because it has ignored the approach that we 
have suggested here in Saskatchewan — that we have banded 
together with Alberta, with British Columbia, with Ontario, 
with the Maritimes in saying it’s not the right approach to move 
forward with. That we want to see co-operation. That we want 
to see a plan. 
 
That’s what we have asked for. We have pushed for that for 
years. The federal government is now in a position that they are 
going to have to start to make some decisions. 
 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2881 

 

I want to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of Industry 
and Resources, for accomplishing something that I wasn’t able 
to do while I was the Minister of Energy. And that is to get a 
national consensus on the approach to move forward. 
 
Manitoba has the potential to be a significant winner under the 
Kyoto proposal. Quebec has a significant opportunity because 
of their hydro resources. We’re coal dependent. That makes it a 
lot tougher for us. But even Manitoba and Quebec understand 
that we need to have some kind of a sharing arrangement to 
make sure that no province is adversely affected and that no 
one’s economy suffers, that we all share in the wealth as we do 
in Canada and we all share in the potential problems that result 
from these changes. 
 
That’s been Saskatchewan’s position. That has been what we’ve 
advocated all along. And what I see now today is an opposition 
standing up, attempting to grandstand on this particular issue to 
try and drive a division which is not supported by very many 
people. I challenge them to say who in the oil industry today 
says not to proceed with a sensible plan in terms of reducing 
greenhouse gases. 
 
We have partners in the oil and gas industry. The member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy may want to go back home — not her 
home, but to her home constituency. That member may want to 
travel down the road. If she needs, I can get the Minister of 
Highways to draw her a map. And she may want to go and tour 
the carbon sequestration plant which is in her own constituency. 
That’s where we’ve been co-operating with industry because 
industry, oil industry, understands that they need to be part of 
the solution. 
 
If the member can’t make it that far, she may just want to go 
down the street and take a look at what’s happening at the 
University of Regina in terms of the International Test Centre 
for greenhouse gases. She may want to take a look at what 
we’re doing with the PTRC (Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre). She may want to sit and talk to the scientists that are 
working at the Prairie Adaptive Research Collaborative. All of 
these things that we’ve funded jointly with industry, with 
academics, and with our partners in the federal government 
because we’re interested in making real and substantive change 
and progress on this file. 
 
It’s got to be about more than rhetoric. It’s got to be about more 
than trying to cozy up to the big companies that they want 
donations from. It’s got to be about more than just more hot air. 
 
These members have it wrong on that side. It’s not about 
opposing Kyoto. It’s not about taking an economic side versus 
an environmental side. This is about us moving forward in a 
way that we can find balance. And that’s what we have 
advocated on this side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There are different views, there are different views on this side 
in terms of how we strike that balance. But let me say this, this 
party has always accepted a many, many different views and we 
have always found a balanced approach. We don’t need to 
worry about just slavishly adhering to our right-wing ideology 
like the members over there do, who will characterize anybody 
in opposition to them as being part of a lunatic left including the 
Catholic bishops. That’s what those members say — that’s what 

those members say. 
 
And that is, I think, a shameful approach and part of the 
problem that we have as I’ve listened to the debate over the last 
several days in the House of Commons, as I’ve watched the 
approach being taken by other provinces, as we’ve gone 
through this debate, and it is part of the problem that we have 
today, and I suspect we’ll hear into the night and tomorrow as 
the members of the opposition stand up. 
 
I say what we need to do is go back to finding the middle 
ground, finding the common ground that allows us to deal with 
climate change. Let’s identify those issues and how we move 
forward. Let’s present a common front to the federal 
government. Let us present an approach which benefits all of 
Saskatchewan, that recognizes that not only are we potentially 
one of the most adversely affected in terms of the economic 
input . . . impact, but we are potentially one of the most affected 
in terms of the environmental impact. 
 
We need to do something on climate change. This government 
has done a great deal to date: we’ve done ethanol; we’ve moved 
forward in terms of wind power generation; we’ve moved 
forward on the research; we’ve talked about carbon 
sequestering both in terms of the bio fields and in terms of the 
gas fields; we have moved forward in a number of different 
areas. But what we need is we need the federal government and, 
I dare say, we need the members of the opposition to come on 
side in terms of moving this forward. 
 
If you take a look at the opportunities that we have, I will tell 
you I am no friend of the federal government on this file 
because I think they’ve handled it wrong. I for one find it to be 
a problem that they never recognized the potential benefit that 
our uranium mines have in terms of reducing global greenhouse 
gases in France. I think that’s a shame that they don’t recognize 
that. They should recognize those clean energy inputs. They 
should . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I hear a new voice, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I hear a new voice in this Assembly and I 
welcome it. 
 
The member from Kindersley pipes up and talks about how we 
need to move forward with nuclear reactors. Well he’s 
definitely cut from the same cloth as the former premier, Grant 
Devine, isn’t he? 
 
(16:30) 
 
This is not about nuclear reactors. This is about recognizing the 
benefit and the strength of the industry here, a mining industry 
here in Saskatchewan, which is helping keep clean air 
throughout the world. That’s what this is about, sir. That’s what 
this is about. And it’s time that this member sit back and take a 
few notes, and we’ll have a chance to debate this soon enough. 
 
But this government has moved forward in terms of a very 
balanced approach. We have moved forward in terms of our 
approach in terms of asking for clean energy credit recognition. 
We’ve moved forward in terms of the stuff we’ve done on 
ethanol, which his party opposed. We’ve moved forward in 
terms of the approach on oil and gas production, which the 
members opposite never recognized. By the way, oil and gas 
production which benefits the Kindersley constituency, but we 



2882 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

never hear anything out of the members to ever recognize that. 
That’s what this government’s been about. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t spend a great deal of time because 
of course by the rules, we’ve agreed to, to limit our comments. 
But let me say there are a lot of areas that we can work together 
on and that we are working with industry, oil and gas industry. 
 
I had the pleasure as minister of Energy and Mines of 
announcing that we were looking at partnering with them to use 
flare gas off the wells to generate electricity — a very positive 
step forward. But we had a number of different initiatives we 
worked with them on. I talked to you about the International 
Test Centre for Carbon Dioxide Capture. I talked to you about 
the benefits that we have with Prairie Adaptive Research. 
We’ve joined together with other partners across the country to 
work on clean coal. This is another area that we’ve been able to 
move forward on. 
 
But what we need to do today is come together as a legislature 
to find common ground around the 12 principles that all of the 
provinces have agreed to — all of them, including hydro-rich 
Quebec, including hydro-rich Manitoba, including oil-rich 
Alberta, and ourselves. All the provinces agree on this. 
 
Now I say it’s time that this opposition set aside its right wing 
rhetoric and join with us to talk about what the next steps are, 
recognizing that the federal government has the unilateral right, 
if it so chooses, to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. What we need to 
do is we need to work out within the national context, within 
the sense of co-operation, how those targets will be set — 
across industry, across the provinces — and who will share in 
terms of making sure the impact is mitigated. That’s what we 
need to now do. 
 
It is wrong to say that Saskatchewan’s target will be 1990, less 
6 per cent. We have no indication from Ottawa that that’s what 
the case will be. We have no understanding at this point from 
Ottawa how they’re going to set this, whether it’s going to be 
regionally. Is the West going to be counted as a region? Is the 
province? How are they going to work it out between the 
industries? How are they going to deal with the domestic 
emissions trading? 
 
These are issues that are yet to be resolved, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s why the approach put forward by our ministers 
of Industry and Resources, and Environment is a sensible one. 
It’s a moderate one. It’s a pragmatic one. And it’s one that I 
think all members should be able to support. 
 
I’m disappointed to read the amendment put forward by the 
member for Thunder Creek that talks about the . . . that drives a 
wedge into Saskatchewan’s position and is full of right wing 
rhetoric and Sask Party politics. 
 
The fact is, is that this amendment is not about talking to what’s 
in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. All this 
amendment speaks to is what is in the best interests of the 
Saskatchewan Party. And I think that it is time that these people 
on that side be exposed for this sham of an amendment. It’s 
very unfortunate. But there’s an opportunity for these members 
to rise above this. 
 

I suspect that we will defeat this amendment. And I would 
encourage us to defeat this amendment and return to the 12 
principles — the principles that will help the oil industry move 
forward, the principles that will help us in terms of dividing the 
targets among provinces to protect our industry, protect our 
jobs, and to protect our environment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not go on too much longer. I will 
simply conclude by saying that our initiatives over the last 
several years have moved us forward to a much better position 
in dealing with climate change. We operate from a position of 
intellectual honesty and integrity on this side, which I think 
gives us credit across this country. And I ask the members, in 
fact I would offer to the members opposite that they can share 
in that credibility by joining with us in terms of supporting the 
original amendment and defeating this partisan, right wing, 
extreme position that they have suggested in the amendment. 
 
Let’s defeat that amendment. Let’s take a pragmatic, rational 
position, and let’s support the 12 principles that have been 
negotiated and agreed to by all of the provinces across this 
country. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
enter into the debate. It’s kind of curious to note that the 
member from Regina South when he talks about the few people 
that support this motion . . . I think the poll was getting close to 
70 per cent of people that do not support Kyoto, and it’s 
growing all the time as people find out the possible implications 
of Kyoto. 
 
As I travel around my constituency it’s almost 100 per cent of 
the people that are against Kyoto, basically because they don’t 
know what’s going on. They don’t know how it’s going to 
affect them. And the federal government and the European 
countries aren’t telling them that it’s going to be there. 
 
There’s no overwhelming consensus about this international 
agreement on climate change. It would cost Saskatchewan far 
more than it would gain. And the people I talk to basically are 
in no mood to sign on to an agreement that has the potential to 
cost our province billions of dollars in an economy that was 
already battered and in trouble. 
 
The people I talk to are already saying the NDP are doing a 
very good job of losing money and jobs without taking on the 
impact of Kyoto. It’d be fairly safe to say the large majority of 
Saskatchewan residents believe that it would be better to 
commit to made-in-Saskatchewan, made-in-Canada approach to 
protect the environment. That makes the most common sense. 
 
The big problem about this document that Ottawa would like to 
sign is that the Canadian taxpayer simply does not have enough 
information to make an informed decision. Certainly both sides 
of the argument can quote endless statistics on why it should be 
signed, why it shouldn’t be signed. But I would like to take a 
moment though to talk about a few of the major arguments 
against Kyoto, which is so convincing they need little 
explanation. 
 
This document has been called an international agreement and I 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2883 

 

suppose it possibly could be called international because all the 
countries have looked at it. But many, many countries aren’t 
going to sign it and many, many countries will never sign it. 
Considering that the biggest traders are part of . . . The United 
States isn’t signing it and huge countries like China, India, 
Mexico aren’t signing it. I believe right now that we trade . . . 
about 80 per cent of our export trade is south of the border. 
 
Simply put, if Kyoto was such a good deal for all the world’s 
countries, why doesn’t the United States government sign it? 
Because they realize the disadvantage that it will put North 
America on the trading block, and that’s why they don’t sign it. 
 
Then there’s the question of whether or not all countries are 
treated equally in this document. The question is a very clear, 
no. Countries are basically divided into two categories, 
developed countries and developing countries. The remarkable 
thing here is that only developed countries are required to 
reduce emissions by 2002. 
 
This agreement kind of reminds me of the agreement that was 
supposed to end grain subsidies. Canada applied to the rules, 
did what they were supposed to do. Did the other countries do? 
No. So right now we’re at a big disadvantage. That’s another 
reason that this agreement shouldn’t be signed till all the rules 
are placed on the table or that you know that the other countries 
are going to follow the rules — where everybody is set on the 
same level playing field, which we’re not right now. 
 
Some of the main reasons that developed countries will not sign 
— basically it is not a fair document at all. And then I would 
ask the members opposite: who may support Kyoto; why would 
anyone sign an agreement so imbalanced as this one? It 
certainly can’t be seen in any light as a good business deal. Any 
Canadian businessman would not last very long by signing a 
document that would give clear favouritist competition. 
 
We already know that the province and the British provinces 
. . . and British Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario have stated 
clearly that they’re opposed to this accord. It is very important 
to note that Canadians as a whole are not opposed to having a 
solution put forth to do our part towards controlling greenhouse 
gases. I believe that Canadians more than any other people in 
the world are very concerned about the effects of global 
warming and the long-term impact. 
 
Our cropland, our forests, and our lakes, and our oceans are 
what make Canada such a great and beautiful country. Certainly 
here in Saskatchewan where agriculture base and forest 
management are most important, people will readily agree to 
the challenges ahead of us. But they are insisting that any 
agreement be viable and effective and fair to all involved. 
Anything else will endanger our economy and the security of 
our future. 
 
This agreement does not allow us to use our vast amount of 
cropland or forest as credits towards carbon sinks or absorbing 
any of the emissions that are out there. The fact is that our soil 
and our forests absorb a large amount of CO2 emissions. I 
believe that’s a proven fact. And yet Saskatchewan ironically 
will be forced to buy credits from a developing country in order 
to continue to operate our most important industries. I find it 
ironic that the year 1990 is the year that we set the benchmark 

for reducing greenhouse gases 94 per cent — to that level 2002. 
Who decided this and why? 
 
Would it be that that was when the Cold War was ending and 
European countries — their factories were being shut down so 
that they were at the very possible lowest emissions? Was that 
the reason that 1990 was picked? I don’t know. 
 
I believe that it was addressed and I’m afraid that this is just a 
plan to move some wealth from developing countries, 
developed countries to developing countries. And I don’t think 
this was the right way of doing that. 
 
But with Kyoto anything before 1990 is not considered at all. 
Only that Russia and other countries have ignored and even 
destroyed some of their environmental, environment are 
deemed to be positioned to sell credits to wealthier countries for 
cash on the barrel. 
 
Do any of us have any illusions that this money will actually go 
towards cleaning up their environmental or their environment? I 
doubt it. 
 
I think our money can be better spent on our own solutions here 
— in Saskatchewan, in Canada. With Canada only contributing 
2 per cent of the total fossil fuel based emissions into the 
atmosphere, it would be a clearly, to be more cost efficient for a 
made-in-Canada solution. It would be better for our companies, 
our corporations to use that money here in Saskatchewan rather 
than to be buying credits in other countries where that money 
. . . who knows what it will be used for in them countries. 
 
Respected institutions such as the Canadian exporters and 
manufacturers association estimate that Kyoto could kill up to 
450,000 jobs in Canada. The Canadian Chamber of Commerce 
estimates that this accord could cost 30 billion in economic 
output annually. Alberta estimates that the costs could be more 
than 10 billion, could be more than 10 billion above that 
estimate. Indeed Canada is the only G-8 country that must meet 
the emission reduction targets under Kyoto. 
 
In Saskatchewan the president of SaskPower himself has 
estimated Kyoto could cost the utility as much as $250 million 
on an annual basis. This government’s own Department of 
Industry and Resources have estimated that Kyoto has the 
potential to reduce our province economic output by as high as 
4 per cent per year. 
 
The question remains then, why does this government continue 
to lean towards supporting .ratification of Kyoto? It’s such an 
obvious bad deal for Saskatchewan and a bad deal for Canada. 
But why does this government and Ottawa refuse to give people 
more detailed information on what the potential costs be and the 
potential impact? 
 
In fact in a recent message from the Government of Alberta, 
Premier Klein clearly outlined his position on the Kyoto accord, 
and even went on record as saying, and I quote, and it’s a good 
quote: 
 

It’s like signing a mortgage for a property you’ve never 
seen and for a price you’ve never discussed. At the very 
least the federal government must first evaluate cost, create 



2884 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

a realistic implementation plan, and then consult with the 
provinces, including a meeting of the ministers . . . of first 
ministers. 

 
Certainly our Premier should be at least asking the Prime 
Minister exactly what he has in mind by signing the accord later 
this month and exactly what the cost will be in the future for 
this province and for the people here working. 
 
There’s also the question of nuclear energy, how it could be 
factored into climate control. I don’t think the Kyoto accord 
really addresses that. And I think the member from Regina 
South had made some points on that, that it is a clean burning 
fuel but yet there will be no credits, I believe, given for that at 
all. And that will hurt our province again. Everything seems to 
be stacked against the North American side, especially with 
only one signing. 
 
And our uranium industry is a very important part of our . . . of 
this province and it has a great future. The president of Cameco 
Corporation indicated that since 1990 the uranium industry has 
invested more than $3 billion in Saskatchewan to build and 
operate the most technology advanced mining and processing 
facilities in the world. In 2001 alone the economic impact to 
Saskatchewan resulted in over $100 million in direct wages, 
$168 million in purchases, and about $44 million in provincial 
tax and royalties. 
 
Mr. Grandey went on to say that in Saskatchewan 70 per cent of 
the public support . . . 70 per cent of the public support uranium 
mining industry today, which is approval rating about the same 
as the people that don’t support signing the Kyoto accord. Even 
the United States with uranium is up to 65 per cent approval 
rating this year. 
 
(16:45) 
 
It is also sobering to consider that more than 2 billion people 
around the world, about 35 per cent of the world’s population, 
have no access to electricity at all. Further development in these 
places would almost certainly have to be done in a more 
environmentally friendly way than burning fossil fuels, and one 
of them is looking at nuclear energy. Nuclear energy basically 
could be the key in that. 
 
In Canada alone nuclear energy accounts for one-sixth of our 
total energy generation. It also provides 16 per cent of the 
world’s electricity, and without it two and a half billion tonnes 
of greenhouse gas would be flushed into the atmosphere each 
year, if it wasn’t for nuclear energy. So there is a strong case for 
the uranium industry to be recognized in the Kyoto accord. 
 
I believe that as part of a made-in-Canada solution to climate 
control, Saskatchewan can be a leader in development of wood 
power generators and high powered . . . high tech solar power. 
We would all agree that here in Saskatchewan we get plenty of 
wind and plenty of sun — unfortunately maybe just a little bit 
too much out our way this year. 
 
The other factor that Kyoto does not recognize here in Canada 
and Saskatchewan is that we have a large source of clean 
burning natural gas. In fact our usage and export is on the rise, 
and yet the Kyoto accord will not give Saskatchewan any 

carbon credits for this obviously more environmentally friendly 
source of energy. 
Another irony which affects this agreement is the fact that the 
accord strictly deals, strictly deals with global warming. We all 
have visions of big cities like Vancouver and Toronto, Los 
Angeles, New York, Mexico City — all cities which have a 
serious smog problem which is obvious to anyone who lives 
there. But Kyoto does not deal with this obvious chronic air 
pollution problem that affects the health of its residents. 
 
And when it comes to the scientific community about it, the 
global warming itself, basically the scientific community is split 
50-50 on whether there is . . . if this will even address the 
problem with that. They’re split right down the centre on that. 
And you know that it won’t affect smog into the cities, and 
that’s about the only place . . . and maybe Montreal and Toronto 
is why there’s a little bit of support in it, because they feel that 
it will affect their smog problem. But the Kyoto accord is not 
made to address that problem. 
 
And as more information comes out about greenhouse effect, 
even more of the scientific community is learning that, that it 
isn’t caused . . . it’s caused by many other things. So this Kyoto 
accord isn’t going to address it at all. What it’s going to do is 
put our province and Canada at a major disadvantage as being a 
trading partner in the world. 
 
Basically the bottom line is that we need more time and more 
commitment towards coming up with a solution that will appeal 
to all the world’s countries. That puts everybody at a level 
playing field. For in the end, we cannot effect real climate 
change without the total help of all these countries. Piecemeal 
efforts like the Kyoto accord will do little to solve the 
greenhouse gas issue. 
 
As far as the costs for Kyoto, the sky’s the limit. With a track 
record on outrageous federal spending such as the gun registry, 
you can understand that . . . the concern that’s out here 
especially in rural Saskatchewan of the costs, potential costs, 
that could come from here when the federal government says, 
basically, trust us. And you’ve looked at their past record on 
anything else they’ve ever said on cost estimates. So it can be 
very scary when . . . I get very nervous when the federal 
government says, trust me. I get very nervous when this 
provincial government says, trust me. 
 
And like one of our members said, like most of the people in 
this province also get very nervous about this government. 
 
What remains of this debate falls down to the question, 
remember. . . What remains of this debate falls down to the 
question whether the members opposite have the courage to 
stand up against Ottawa on the Kyoto issue and whether or not 
they really do have the faith in their citizens to see major bold 
incentives come to reality. 
 
It’s time for this government to stand up for its people and their 
future and not — and not — support Kyoto in any way. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2885 

 

I’m very happy to enter into this debate to have an opportunity 
to talk about the plans that this government has been engaged 
in, and the kind of commitments that we have made. 
 
This whole issue of climate change and global warming is not 
new to our understandings or our way of approaching the world 
around us. What is having an impact and what we’ve been 
working with is a federal government that has determined to 
pass the Kyoto accord without having negotiated very clearly 
what that will mean for the provinces. And we have lobbied and 
we have pushed hard to have an opportunity to say what that 
will mean. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government has been working for years 
with a vision for where we need to go in the future. And the 
reason why our economy has been growing so consistently over 
this past decade is because we do have a vision for the future. 
We’re not just tied into today and we’re certainly not locked 
into yesterday like some of the members opposite seem to be. 
 
We’ve got a vision for how this province can develop and use 
the best of its resources in order to have a future where we are 
being responsible for the environment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think of some of the work that we have done in these past few 
years. I think of the farmers that I know out around the Indian 
Head area who have worked very hard on soil conservation 
issues and they have been developing, working with others to 
develop both equipment and methods for zero till farming. 
Some of those developments have led to real gains in terms of 
the province’s manufacturing and it’s that kind of vision that is 
so far out in the future that has been enabling our economy to 
keep growing as it has. 
 
So we’ve developed new technologies. Those technologies are 
in the forefront of agricultural developments in the world. Our 
industry has been growing and our exports have been growing 
as people throughout the world are realizing the value of some 
of these technologies which have been developed here. 
 
It seems to me that it is forward thinking that we need. It is the 
kind of visioning of where this province and this nation can be 
down the future that is what we need. It’s not being tied into the 
ways of the past. 
 
Now we have been given this Kyoto decision by the federal 
government. That’s a done deal. The next question is, what are 
we going to do with it? And the 12 principles that were agreed 
to by all the provincial ministers and the territorial ministers, 
Mr. Speaker, really help us get a sense of where we need to go 
in dealing with the federal government. We need to make sure 
that we get credit for the developments that we have in this 
province. There is no way that the federal government should 
be able to claim the kind of carbon sequestering technologies 
and developments that have been put together here for their 
own. These are a part of who Saskatchewan is and the 
developments that we have made. 
 
I want to take a look as well at some of the other technologies 
not only that we have developed, but that we are developing, 
that are going to make a significant difference in terms of global 
warming. One of those which has been referred to several times 
is the whole development of renewable fuels. In this case we 

have been working diligently for years now on the development 
of an ethanol industry. Using ethanol even at a 10 per cent 
blend with gasoline reduces greenhouse emissions by about 30 
per cent. 
 
And some of the work that’s being done around the country also 
will help us to address, as some of the members opposite don’t 
seem to understand, address the issues of smog and air pollution 
as well. The work that’s being done in Manitoba and Winnipeg 
where Husky Oil is partnering with the city and the provincial 
government on ethanol experiments with bio-diesel, they’re 
blending 7.5 per cent ethanol with the diesel and using it in the 
buses in the cities. It’s not only reducing the greenhouse gases 
but it’s reducing the particulates significantly. And we see the 
great potential for that in terms of not only reducing greenhouse 
emissions but pollution and smog in some of our larger cities. 
 
Along with that, we have seen some good inroads in the whole 
area of bio-diesels. We have been major producers of oilseeds 
for years. We plan to continue in producing those and we will 
be able to use those oilseeds for bio-fuels. Those bio-fuels will 
also reduce greenhouse emissions and the particulate emissions 
and smog. So we’re taking steps that need to be taken to address 
these issues. And we are accelerating the pace of these. 
 
I think that there are also a number of things that we have done 
in this province that will really help us to be leaders in the 
development of technology. And I think of the work that we’ve 
done with SaskPower in terms of the wind turbines. It’s been 
tremendous development. We already are third in the country in 
terms of energy by wind turbines and we will be leading in 
short order as far as I see our planning into the future. 
 
I think that there are other elements that we have taken on that 
have been very, very progressive. We have got programs — 
loan programs, low-interest loan programs — so that 
homeowners can retrofit their homes. Very important in this 
whole process, because even in our individual homes we can 
help to clean up the greenhouse gas emissions and we can help 
reduce those and make for a much cleaner environment. 
 
I think of the work that’s been done on carbon sequestration — 
the carbon dioxide monitoring project that’s been done with 
EnCana down in Weyburn, looking at ways to permanently 
store carbon dioxide underground and to simultaneously 
increase oil production. 
 
I think of SaskPower and its project to plant trees because trees 
help take the carbon out of the air — $6 million to plant 
approximately 5 million trees and to establish a forest carbon 
reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are steps that we need to take as a province, 
and we are taking those steps. And it’s these steps that have 
made our economy grow so rapidly over the years in this last 
decade, even leading the nation at times. 
 
We look at the work that’s been done by our Property 
Management Corporation, retrofitting 70 of our provincial 
buildings so that they will be more energy efficient. And when 
we do this, we produce jobs, Mr. Speaker. And when we 
produce jobs, we need people to fill those jobs. And that’s why 
our unemployment rate is low, because we have people working 



2886 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

in this province. 
 
We have had successful programs that really provide a model 
for the rest of the world that enable people to move off welfare 
without penalizing them to take these jobs. And I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s this kind of progressive future thinking that is 
making a difference for this province, that is enabling our 
economy to grow and that is enabling us to deal with these 
issues of greenhouse gases and emissions. 
 
I think of the work that’s being done with SaskEnergy and some 
of the oil companies to look at ways of using flare gas for 
energy, capturing those. 
 
And I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, we’re ready to ask for a 
recess. It’s just about 5 o’clock and so we’ll ask to recess until 7 
o’clock where I will continue debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being very near the hour of 5 o’clock, 
this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Kwiatkowski ............................................................................................................................................................................2853 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2853 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................2854 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2855 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................2855 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2855 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2855 
  Kwiatkowski ............................................................................................................................................................................2855 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2855 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2855 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2855 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Mr. Axworthy..........................................................................................................................................................................2856 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
  Ms. Julé....................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Melfort’s Coming Home Campaign 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
 Record Set For Natural Gas Wells Drilled 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2857 
 Developments in Gaming Industry 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2857 
 Tourism in Cumberland Constituency 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................2857 
 Gordon McRae Awarded Air Cadet League Certificate of Honour 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2857 
 Cornwall Alternative School Wins Donner Foundation Award 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................2858 
 St. Louis Rebels Hockey Marathon 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2858 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Plans for Population Growth 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2858 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2859 
 Proclamation of Farm Security Legislation 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2860 
  Axworthy .................................................................................................................................................................................2860 
 Kyoto Protocol 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................2860 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2860 
 Government Participation in Potato Industry 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2861 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2861 
 



 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Human Rights Day 
  Axworthy .................................................................................................................................................................................2863 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2864 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Members on Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2864 
 Substitution of Member on Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2864 
 Substitution of Member on Standing Committee on the Environment 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2864 
 Substitution of Member on Standing Committee on Education 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2864 
 Substitution of Member on Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2864 
 Substitution of Member on Continuing Select Committee 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2864 
 Substitution of Member on Special Committee on Regulations 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2865 
 Substitution of Member on Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2865 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Kyoto Protocol 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2865 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2868 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................2870 
  Kwiatkowski ............................................................................................................................................................................2873 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2875 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2878 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2879 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2882 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2884 
 


	Tourism in Cumberland Constituency
	Gordon McRae Awarded Air Cadet
	League Certificate of Honour
	Tourism in Cumberland Constituency
	Gordon McRae Awarded Air Cadet League Certificate of Honour

