















































Hansard: December 11, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2905 
 December 11, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have been asked by a number of Saskatchewan citizens to 
present a petition on their behalf. These are citizens who are 
concerned about the state of health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan and are wishing to suggest alternate solutions to 
the government, primarily in the funding area. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to induce the provincial 
government to instruct Saskatchewan lotteries and the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority to begin to 
appropriate 25 per cent of all profits towards provincial 
health care needs. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
There are 1,075 signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker. And it 
is signed by citizens of Birch Hills, Nipawin, Codette, and 
numerous other communities including Rocanville, Moosomin, 
Weyburn, and other communities around the province. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I again 
present a petition on people who are opposed to the Kyoto 
accord. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to immediately take all necessary action to 
protect our province’s economy and work to halt the 
federal government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord 
in its current form. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Naicam, 
Lake Lenore, and Spalding. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present today to ensure the responsible use of natural 
resources by all citizens. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge, Russell, Esterhazy, Bredenbury, and 
Langenburg. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the negative effect 
signing the Kyoto accord may have on the Saskatchewan 
economy. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to immediately take all necessary action to 
protect our province’s economy and work to halt the 
federal government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord 
in its current form. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals all from the community of 
Naicam. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again today I 
have a petition asking the provincial government to resist 
signing on to the Kyoto accord. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Maple 
Creek, Swift Current, and Fox Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition signed by concerned citizens in my constituency 
regarding the Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
present form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by my constituents from Bienfait, Macoun, 
and Estevan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the Kyoto Protocol. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to immediately take all necessary actions to 
protect our province’s economy and work to halt the 



2906 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

federal government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord 
in its current form. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these people that have signed this petition are 
from Quill Lake, Naicam, and Spalding. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are especially concerned about the devastating 
effects Kyoto will have on our constituency. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And I have several petitions, Mr. Speaker, and they are signed 
by residents of Saskatoon, Weyburn, Regina; Calgary, High 
River, Alberta; Kirkella; Vancouver; Brooks, Alberta; Roblin, 
Manitoba; Spruce Grove, Alberta; Bienfait, Radville, 
Bengough, Big Beaver, and more from Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
concerned residents of southwest Saskatchewan on the issue of 
Kyoto. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current, and the communities in the Southwest of 
Pambrun and Wymark. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise with a petition from citizens in my constituency that 
are very concerned about the economic impact that Kyoto may 
have on the province of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
McCord and Mankota. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
signed by many citizens worried about the Kyoto accord. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by many citizens from the town of Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the Kyoto accord. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect the 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of North Battleford, Shellbrook, 
and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition of citizens concerned about the Kyoto accord. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 

And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Davidson, the city of Regina, and from Vancouver, British 
Columbia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents who are very 
concerned about this government’s inability to develop a 
mechanism to change the boundaries of the regional health 
authorities. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2907 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in Regina 
Regional Health Authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the signing on to the 
Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to immediately take all necessary action to 
protect the province’s economy and to work to halt the 
federal government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord 
in its current form. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from the 
centre of Rose Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby received as addendums to 
previously tabled petitions being sessional papers nos. 11 and 
437. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before moving 
concurrence in the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills, I would draw the Assembly’s attention 
to the items that were discussed and recommended. 
 
Your committee met to examine the petition of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool for a private member’s Bill to amend 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995. The committee finds 
that rules 65 and 68, that deal with public advertising 
requirements and fees, have been fully complied with. 
 
However rule 64 that requires the petitioner to file their request 
by the 20th sitting day of the session could not be complied 
with at this time as this fall session began on day 79 as a 
continuation of the spring session. 
 
In order to consider the Bill at the fall session rather than 
delaying the Bill until spring of 2003, your committee 

recommends that provisions of rule 64 be waived in this case. 
 
Pursuant to rule 84, your committee further recommends that 
the timelines laid down in rules 81 . . . 71 to 83 be modified to 
enable consideration and passage of the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool amending Bill by December 18, 2002. 
 
With those recommendations, Mr. Speaker, I now move: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Arm 
River. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Clerk: — As the assembled members have just heard, 
petition 304 of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has been 
favourably reported on and pursuant to rule 71, private Bill No. 
304, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 
1995, is deemed to have been introduced and read the first time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before 
asking leave of the Assembly to move second reading, I’d like 
to make a few brief remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Assembly has petitioned, and I have agreed as 
a private member to sponsor Bill 304 and to pilot it through the 
House. As explained to the committee in this morning’s 
meeting, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is asking for 
consideration at this time because the normal process would 
delay consideration for at least another six months and perhaps 
even longer. 
 
Bill 304 would give delegates the authority to make changes to 
their company’s governance and structure, changes that they 
would deem to be in the best interests of their members, 
shareholders, and co-operative and in a time frame that more 
accurately reflects the speed of change within the business 
community. 
 
In passing Bill 304, this Assembly would enable the movement 
of specific provisions and associated authorities from the Wheat 
Pool Act to the Pool’s bylaws, giving them greater control to 
make future changes without having to seek legislative 
approval. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, 
pursuant to the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills: 
 

That private Bill No. 304, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995, be now read a second 
time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 

 
Leave granted. 



2908 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 
(13:45) 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day. no. 86 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: is it the 2002 
policy of the provincial government to advise or require the 
FMA partners to take only hardwood forest products from 
the provincial forest; if this policy is in place, is it designed 
to increase stumpage income for the province; if not, what 
would be the reason? 

 
And I have also a question for the Minister of Environment. 

 
I also have another question. I give notice that I shall on day 86 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: what is the status of the 
proposed TLE land negotiation between Pelican Lake First 
Nations and the Crown regarding the area west of Big 
River in the Otter Lake area; have third party interests been 
represented in these negotiations and what have been the 
results of those third party representations, if any; what is 
the provincial government’s position regarding the Carlton 
Trail which passes through the proposed TLE land? 
 
And I have also questions for the Minister of Highways and 
the Minister of Government Relations. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 86 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many employers in the 
province who have 10 employees or more currently do not 
have health and safety committees set up? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 86 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Agriculture minister: has the Government of 
Saskatchewan made its full financial commitment 2001 
CFIB and NISA program? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, I will submit a question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: what is the 
current status of Sask Water lawsuits involving IPSCO; if 
the matter has been resolved, what were the terms of the 
settlement? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 86 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Labour minister: for the year 2001, how many 
people applied for workmen’s compensation for stress 
leave due to mental illness; further to that, how many 
people were granted stress leave upon application; and 
finally, how many files upon initial date of application 
exceeded the two-year window? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have further questions along the same line 
that date back to 1996 through 2001 inclusive. 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 86 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many winter 
bull-feeding stations are there in the province of 
Saskatchewan; and of those, how many cut their own feed? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You and all 
members will have noticed that a large number of guests are 
gathered in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. They will be more 
formally acknowledged later in proceedings today during 
ministerial statements, but I do want to welcome today the 
entire Queen’s Golden Jubilee Committee and representatives 
of other royal organizations in our province who have worked 
very hard this year to celebrate the Queen’s Golden Jubilee in 
our province. 
 
And I want to equally welcome the president of the Indian 
Federated College and mayors from the cities of Prince Albert, 
Lloydminster, Regina, and Moose Jaw. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we will be more formally introducing our 
guests later today but I would invite all members now to give a 
warm welcome to our guests in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition I would like to join 
the Premier in welcoming the guests from the Queen’s Golden 
Jubilee Committee and all the other royal organizations that are 
here, as well as the other guests that he had previously 
mentioned. I hope your stay is enjoyable and safe and we look 
forward to meeting with you perhaps later. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
well I welcome our guests and I’ll be visiting with you after 
we’re done in the legislature. 
 
But I want to introduce to the House a group of people who are 
joining us from northern Saskatchewan, and I’m going to 
explain a little bit about them before I mention their names and 
I’ll get them to stand. 
 
Both COGEMA and Cameco as active corporate citizens in the 
North brought together what’s called the community vitality 
project. And the community vitality project was about northern 
youth taking leadership in helping to identify opportunities for 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2909 

 

their community, taking positive action in their communities. 
 
Now I don’t know if you know, Mr. Speaker, but 60 per cent of 
the population of the North are youth. So even whether they 
chose to be proactive or not, they will be the people who are 
making these decisions. And it is . . . I like their definition of 
leadership. It’s about identifying positive action for their 
community. And I certainly want to commend COGEMA and 
Cameco for the resources that they’ve devoted towards this 
project. 
 
The youth visiting with us today who met with several of the 
ministers — and I must say provided very practical information 
that will be helpful in decision making — if I could get you to 
stand: Brennan Merasty, Chris Hansen, Tiffany McKay, 
Bernadette Knox; Walter Smith from Cameco, Alan Richards 
from Cameco, and Don Hovdebo has been a facilitator 
throughout this whole process and did a terrific job on that. 
 
So please join me in welcoming these representatives from their 
communities. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add my 
voice as well to welcome the students from northern 
Saskatchewan, and Mr. Richards and Mr. Smith from Cameco. 
It’s very appropriate that they are accompanying the northern 
students here. Cameco and COGEMA are huge employers in 
northern Saskatchewan and we commend them on this 
initiative. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
rise today to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of this House, a very special guest who’s seated in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce my constituent, Mr. John — 
or J.D. — Mollard, a very well-known Saskatchewanian and an 
internationally respected geotechnical researcher and 
consultant. Mr. Mollard is accompanied by his wife, Mary Jean. 
I’m also introducing him on behalf of the Minister of Highways 
and Transportation. 
 
Mr. Mollard just recently received his investiture into the Order 
of Canada. He was recognized for his work as a pioneer in 
remote sensing and terrain analysis. As president of J.D. 
Mollard and Associates, he’s made major contributions to the 
interpretation and mapping of the earth’s physical geography, 
its natural resources, and its geo-environment. 
 
His innovative work both in airborne and satellite remote 
sensing technology has had far-reaching implications in many 
disciplines, including transportation and engineering, as well as 
in agriculture and geological applications. 
 
Mr. Mollard is highly regarded by academia, industry, and 
government, and he’s an outstanding international lecturer who 
is generous with his time and knowledge. 
 
The Order of Canada is awarded to Canadians who have made a 
recognizable difference to the country, and Mr. Mollard joins an 

elite group of 4,000 Canadians who’ve been awarded this 
honour, including six others who’ve just received this honour 
recently — Sharon Butala from Eastend, John Boucher from St. 
Louis, David Kaplan from the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon, Harold MacKay from Regina, Ian Wilson, our 
former provincial archivist, and Roy Atkinson. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, on November 21 of this year, Mr. 
Mollard was also awarded the prestigious Lieutenant Governor 
of Saskatchewan Meritorious Achievement Award, presented 
by the Lieutenant Governor on behalf of the Consulting 
Engineers of Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all members of the House to please recognize and 
welcome John — J.D. — Mollard and his wife, Mary Jean 
Mollard. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to 
welcome in the west gallery, 26 students from St. Pius School 
in my constituency. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 
Elizabeth Stephenson, as well as parents Wendy Englot, Pam 
Kujawa, and Rosemary Williams. And this is part of their 
neighbourhood and part of learning what it’s like to be part of 
the Regina Lakeview constituency. 
 
And I’d ask all members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition I’d like to join with the member from 
Regina in congratulating Mr. Mollard on receiving his award. I 
had the pleasure of being in attendance at the Consulting 
Engineers annual banquet in Saskatoon earlier last month and 
Mr. Mollard also received an award from that association. And 
so I say, congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduced to you, seated in your gallery, Janet Ledingham, and 
I’d ask her to stand. Janet is a successful business person, 
farmer, and municipal leader. She’s also the nominated Liberal 
candidate in Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Now of course because on Monday we introduced the new 
constituency boundaries and that constituency no longer exists, 
she will now have to choose a new constituency in the 
Southeast in which to run. And I know this will have several 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in the Southeast 
extremely nervous and I can understand if the MLAs from the 
Southeast are reluctant to welcome her to the legislature. 
 
But I’d ask that at least all other MLAs join me in welcoming 
Janet to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
my colleague, the minister of culture and sport and recreation, 
in welcoming the northern leaders, and to also publicly thank 



2910 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

Cameco and COGEMA for their fine work in working with the 
northern leaders, and to point out that these are the young 
individuals that travelled many, many miles to be here today 
and they are the people that are going to be leading the 
renaissance of northern Saskatchewan as a community overall. 
 
And I would point out that many of them are actively involved 
in sport. One of them of course has been involved with planning 
the cleanup of some northern mines — Ms. Knox has been 
actively involved with that. 
 
We talked about some of Tiffany’s background as a basketball 
coach, and we often talk about Chris being heavily involved in 
sport. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you know, the last individual, he is from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. His name is Brennan. And Brennan’s a hockey 
player by trade and he’s a goalie. And last time I took a shot at 
him, Mr. Speaker, Brennan of course went like this and the 
puck hit him here. So there’s quite a bit of junk on my shot, Mr. 
Speaker, and he did manage to save that, so he’s a pretty good 
goalie. 
 
I want to point out that I was pretty happy that they’re here 
today and I’d like to welcome them here as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to the Legislative Assembly, Angie Roe who is 
with us today, who . . . Angie lives in the city of Regina and is 
seeking the nomination in Regina Elphinstone-Centre on behalf 
of the Saskatchewan Party. Angie is out working very hard in 
her constituency, meeting people and groups, and she is looking 
forward to winning the nomination and also taking her place in 
the Legislative Assembly following the next provincial election. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, if I might I would also like to 
welcome Janet Ledingham from the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Well, members, I’d just like to add my 
welcome to all of our visitors and guests in the Assembly today, 
particularly the students, the young people from the North; the 
mayors, including my own mayor, Mayor Cody, who is here 
today. 
 
And I want to extend a special welcome to the committee for 
the Queen’s Golden Jubilee who have been working hard all 
year. And I understand that they’ve brought with them the 
congratulatory register which will be mailed to Her Majesty. 
And if there’s anybody in this building or any guest to this 
building who wishes to sign, they may do so in the rotunda 
today. 
 
(14:00) 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure to 
add my words along with my fellow colleagues to, of course, 
the students from northern Saskatchewan and also to President 
Eber Hampton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they did the presentation this morning I was 
very impressed in regards to the need for science development, 
the respect for culture, but also that they did it in both English 
and Cree. So with that respect, I would like to say: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I would like to say in Cree the final word — 
Ta wow — to them; a special welcome to Eber Hampton and 
the students from the North. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Globe and Mail Job Creation Article 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Who 
knows that Saskatchewan is wide open to the future for those 
who dream big, plan well, and work hard? Well I know it; the 
Premier knows it; everyone on this side of the House knows it. 
 
Who else knows it? Well for openers, how about the record 
number of 489,000 people working hard, dreaming big, and 
planning well. And as we knew it would, the word is getting 
out. 
 
I refer you to Monday’s Globe and Mail, Canada’s national 
paper. Specifically I refer you to a business column by Bruce 
Little called “Amazing facts.” The column is about the national 
job search in the first 11 months of this year, a national 3.3 per 
cent increase since last December. That’s good news for 
Canada. 
 
Now let me quote Mr. Little. He says: 
 

Where can we find the jobs that have been popping up like 
spring crocuses . . . (this) year? 
 
Begin with the provinces. Five have exceeded the national 
gain of 3.3 per cent . . . 
 
Despite their economic woes this year with agriculture and 
forestry . . . Saskatchewan leads the way with 5.5 per cent 
job gain . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Alberta could do no better than to match the 
national average of 3.3 per cent. Saskatchewan will be satisfied 
once again with leading the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has a slogan. This government has 
a plan and it’s working. Our future is wide open. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2911 

 

Nipawin’s Order of the Royal Purple 
Celebrates 60th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
early November Nipawin’s Order of the Royal Purple 
celebrated their 60th anniversary at the Nipawin Elks Hall. The 
Nipawin chapter of the Royal Purple was established on 
November 15, 1942. 
 
The Royal Purple has a long history of helping Nipawin and 
area residents. Over the years they have assisted in war efforts, 
delivered meals, hosted teas and entertainment at the seniors’ 
hall, and have donated their time and resources to many 
charitable events. 
 
They meet needs locally by donating to the nursing home and 
hospitals, sporting events, parks, scholarships, and academic 
awards. The Nipawin Royal Purple are also large contributors 
to the national charity, the Elks and Royal Purple Fund for 
Children. 
 
During the evening, Mr. Speaker, Kay Fitton of Nipawin was 
presented with a 60-year pin. Mrs. Fitton has been a member 
since the formation of the Nipawin chapter. The Nipawin and 
area community benefit greatly from the hard work and 
dedication of people such as Mrs. Fitton. 
 
This year the Nipawin Royal Purple welcomed five new 
members who will no doubt continue to contribute greatly to 
the betterment of their community. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Mrs. 
Fitton and the Nipawin Order of the Royal Purple on their 60th 
anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Growth in Southeast Regina 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
future is wide open in southeast Regina. I draw members’ 
attention to this area of the city because it’s almost every week 
a ribbon is being cut, a new foundation is being poured, and 
new jobs become available. 
 
What is being built, Mr. Speaker? The answer is opportunities. 
Mr. Speaker, there is a flurry of activity and investment all 
through the city. Freshly completed roads pave the way to 
businesses new to our city and our province. What kind of 
businesses are these, Mr. Speaker? They are new food, service, 
and retail stores ready to provide for the expanding lifestyle and 
growing economy Regina has been experiencing. There’s a 
brand new Co-op grocery store, Reitmans, Hallmark, Home 
Outfitters, Pier 1, and Michaels — just to name a few. This 
economic enthusiasm is not restricted and contained to just my 
area of Regina. It’s the case throughout the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these new businesses demonstrate that people 
have decided to put their roots down rather than to put down 
our great province. Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, consumers 
are showing what they think of the economy — not with their 
feet as the opposition would hope, but with their wallets. With 
steady growth being projected by all major banks, Regina and 

Saskatchewan’s economy remains buoyant and robust. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Naicam Citizen Receives 2002 Agribusiness 
Leadership Award 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Germain Dauk, a distinguished farmer from Naicam, was 
recently honoured as the 2002 recipient of the Saskatoon and 
District Chamber of Commerce Agribusiness Leadership 
Award sponsored by Bayer CropScience. This annual award 
recognizes an individual who has demonstrated leadership, 
vision, and action which has shaped the development and 
expansion of agri-value and agribusiness across Saskatchewan. 
 
Germain grew up on a family farm in Annaheim, received his 
Bachelor of Science in chemistry, his B.Ed. (Bachelor of 
Education) from the University of Saskatchewan. He played 
football with the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) Huskies 
and the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 
 
For the next 20 years he took on the challenge of teaching 
Naicam’s youth. After 20 years of teaching, Germain began 
farming with his father-in-law and is currently farming with his 
two sons, Richard and Ryan. 
 
His interest in agriculture and innovative ideas led him to join 
many farm organizations, where his natural leadership abilities 
quickly placed him in executive positions. Anyone who 
personally knows Germain is aware of his commitment to his 
community and even though his farm and his involvement in 
farm-related organizations at the local, provincial, and national 
levels keep him extremely busy, he still finds time to support 
his community. Most of us who know him, know that his 
involvement in recreation, sport, and service clubs in the 
community have benefited everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to ask this Assembly to 
join with me in congratulating Germain for winning the 
Agribusiness Leadership Award and thank him for his 
involvement in the community, province, and nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welfare Caseloads Decline 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld noted, 
employment in Saskatchewan is up 5.5 per cent this year. I’m 
pleased that many of these new workers are people who were 
formerly social assistance clients. It’s very good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that welfare caseloads for the month 
of November were at their lowest level in the last eight years. 
Eight consecutive years of decline, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In just one year welfare caseloads dropped by nearly 2,000, or 6.4 
per cent. That could be an accident, Mr. Speaker, but the evidence 
suggests a successful government plan. At the heart of our plan is 
our building independence initiative which has helped 6,000 
families leave welfare by removing barriers to work. 



2912 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

The supplementary income benefits paid under building 
independence have helped 13,500 children in Saskatchewan. Our 
partnership for prosperity economic development strategy created 
a record number of jobs for November and our income tax reform 
has removed 55,000 people from provincial tax rolls. 
 
A three-part plan, Mr. Speaker, that create jobs, that ensures that 
all can share in the opportunities that exist in our province, and 
that reduces the tax burden on working families. This is a plan, 
Mr. Speaker. Not a slogan, but a plan with real results. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liza Percy Named Saskatchewan 
Junior Citizen of the Year 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the house today to talk 
about a remarkable young lady, Liza Percy from Davidson, who 
on September 21 won the Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the 
Year award. 
 
Liza, daughter of Jim and Ruth Percy of Davidson, graduated 
last June from Davidson High School with full honours. She 
was nominated in early September after receiving several 
endorsements from her high school principal, Tony Baldwin, 
several teachers, and the mayor, Jim Cross. 
 
The award is sponsored by the Saskatchewan Weekly 
Newspapers Association and includes a 3,000 student bursary 
award sponsored by SaskPower. 
 
Liza is a very deserving recipient of this year’s award, having 
excelled at helping others both at home and in her school and 
the surrounding community. Liza has a great attitude towards 
life and volunteerism, constant energy, and providing a 
prominent role model for fellow students and a high ability to 
communicate with people of all ages. 
 
Some of the other activities Liza has taken part in include 
volleyball, basketball, curling, badminton, drama, SRC (student 
representative council), track and field. She has had extra 
community involvement as a 2002 Lifestyles Fair school 
representative, a Meals on Wheels delivery volunteer founder, 
also founder of the local Students Against Drunk Driving 
chapter, a volleyball and basketball official, and hosting an 
exchange student. 
 
Liza is currently attending the University of Lethbridge for a 
degree in Health Sciences. I would ask all members to join me 
in congratulating Liza Percy on her high level of achievement. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Builder Awards 
to Citizens of Ukrainian Heritage 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Very good, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
speakers, current and former, are by their nature a modest 
bunch, not given to tooting their own horns. And fortunately 
though, that natural three-cornered reticence need not apply 

when one applauds another, which I’m happy to do today. 
 
I’m pleased to advise my colleagues in the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, that recently you and 10 other outstanding 
Saskatchewan citizens of Ukrainian heritage were given 
National Builder Awards by the Saskatchewan Provincial 
Council of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress. 
 
The awards have been given now for eight years to those 
playing a significant role in keeping Ukrainian culture and 
language strong in our multicultural society. One of the other 
recipients, Marie Kishchuk of Wilkie, said that championing 
one’s own culture gives one a sense of identity and community 
and a sense of place. She pointed out that six of the eleven, 
including yourself, Mr. Speaker, were teachers who were very 
prominent in the promotion of ongoing education and cultural 
awareness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to name the other award 
recipients who were: Dr. Michael Krochak, musician Basil 
Baleshta, cultural promoter Michael Baran, teacher Stan 
Chepyha, teacher Mary Cherneskey, violinist Taras Gabora, 
teacher Katherine Labiuk, teacher Jayne Paluck, and the 
publisher John Zenchyshyn 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to join in recognizing these 
distinguished recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, in November 2000 the Provincial 
Auditor released the results of an investigation into the financial 
scandal at Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority. The 
investigation concluded that senior officials and board members 
of SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) had 
misspent over $2 million, including $811,000 in improper 
spending by former CEO (chief executive officer), Dutch Lerat. 
The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) also began an 
investigation in that same year. That investigation was 
concluded in January of last year and turned over to the 
Department of Justice. That was over 10 months ago. 
 
Will the Justice minister advise the House as to what actions 
have been taken in regard to the RCMP investigations, and will 
the minister commit to make public any decision by the 
department, whether that decision is to lay charges or not lay 
charges? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member will know that it’s not 
very easy to talk about things that are under investigation, and 
I’m sure she doesn’t want me to talk about those things, Mr. 
Speaker. When I say not very easy, Mr. Speaker, I mean it 
would break my constitutional responsibility. 
 
But I would say to the member that these matters, as she knows, 
have been presented to the prosecutions department who will 
consider these in accordance with their own standards and 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2913 

 

requirements and will report to me in due course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I don’t have anything else to add at this stage and I’m sure 
the member would not want to prejudice any of the inquiries 
into these matters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
next question is for the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. SLGA is responsible for 
regulating all gaming in Saskatchewan, and SLGA also 
launched an investigation into misspending of taxpayers’ 
dollars by SIGA officials. The SLGA investigation concluded 
that $2.3 million had been improperly spent by SIGA officials, 
including CEO Dutch Lerat. 
 
In the SLGA’s 2001 annual report, the government committed 
to collect $1.36 million of the misspent money by withholding 
government payments to the First Nations Fund. And the 
government also committed last year to collect $811,000 of 
taxpayers’ money that was misspent by CEO Dutch Lerat. 
 
Will the minister update the legislature on how much money 
has been withheld from the First Nations Fund and how much 
money has been recovered from Dutch Lerat? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
glad to answer these questions and inform the House, and once 
again to underline the fact that the agreement that this coalition 
government has with First Nations is a good agreement for First 
Nations people and the people of this province. 
 
As a matter of fact, I want to underline other comments made 
by people that do investigations and look into the whole scene 
about gambling and First Nations operations in this country, 
and they say Saskatchewan is on the leading edge and other 
provinces should follow our example of how good an 
arrangement we have looking after our First Nations people and 
our partners. 
 
Money has been recovered from SIGA for . . . that was 
inappropriately expended, and the monies that have been 
inappropriately expended have been reported and will be 
subject of auditors’ reports and financial statements that are 
presented. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we seem to have not 
received a concise answer from the minister. 
 
I would like to ask another question of the minister. Mr. 
Speaker, both the Provincial Auditor and Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority have concluded that there was a serious 
misuse and abuse of millions of taxpayers’ dollars at SIGA 
between 1997 and 2001. The RCMP has concluded a criminal 
investigation into this misuse of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 

Will the minister confirm to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
this Assembly that the government has taken steps to ensure 
that SIGA has stopped improperly spending taxpayers’ money 
and that SIGA is operating within the rules established after the 
financial scandal that was revealed in the year 2000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And one single 
response with one word — absolutely. 
 
The SLGA and SIGA have been following the auditors’ 
directions and the benchmarks that have been set, and we 
continue to work in a co-operative fashion to benefit First 
Nations people and all the people of this great province of ours 
and afford people the opportunities for a good future that we 
have in this province — a wide open future, I might add — that 
is available for anybody and everybody that wants to contribute 
to the economy of this great province of ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Participation in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 1997 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) took millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars and they risked them in the potato business. They told 
Saskatchewan taxpayers that they were going to be doing it 
under the auspices of a partnership. But that wasn’t the case. 
 
By 1998 they knew their investment was in huge trouble and 
they ordered an internal audit, Mr. Speaker. What did this 
internal audit say about the NDP potato deal? 
 
Question to the minister is this. What were the reasons that the 
NDP decided to mislead the people of Saskatchewan about this 
deal? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 
would ask the member to rephrase his question in a way that it 
would not indicate any wrong intentions on the part of any hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What were the reasons 
behind the NDP portraying this deal to Saskatchewan people in 
a way that wasn’t correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Well of course, the member knows that the rule 
pertaining to discussing issues before the courts is one that we 
respect on this . . . at least on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. We respect it at least on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rule exists to protect both parties, not just the 
government but the plaintiffs as well, Mr. Speaker. And the 
member should acknowledge and respect, I ask as well, Mr. 
Speaker, that it applies . . . the rule applies not just to the 
government but it applies to members opposite as well. They 
should consider that carefully before they engage too much 
discussion, Mr. Speaker, about what’s going on to the courts, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, throughout this process the official 



2914 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

opposition has asked general questions about how it was 
taxpayers wound up losing $28 million because of NDP 
decisions. We will continue to ask those questions until we get 
some answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday we asked the NDP to 
start telling the truth and release the internal audit. That, they 
refused. They refused so far to release that internal audit. 
 
This morning . . . Mr. Speaker, this morning, a copy of that 
Ernst & Young audit arrived at my office in a brown envelope. 
And I note, as far as we could tell, Mr. Speaker, this document 
is not part of the court filings that have been referred to so far. 
So the minister should be able to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this audit the officials at Ernst & Young 
confirm that there never was a partnership with a private 
company. It was always 100 per cent owned by the government. 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP tell the people of Saskatchewan 
that this deal was a partnership when that clearly wasn’t the 
truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member asks 
why I don’t answer the question. And yet on a daily basis, and 
in that very question, he references a document, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a part of the examination for discovery, Mr. Speaker. He 
references documents, Mr. Speaker. On a daily basis, he 
references documents that are part of the examination for 
discovery, Mr. Speaker, and then he asks me to respond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members on both sides of the Assembly 
to respect the due process that the courts are engaged in on this 
very day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Ernst & Young makes it very clear 
this deal was never a partnership. The audit says, and I quote: 
 

The Storco’s are owned (those are the storage companies 
are owned) 51% by CFI and 49% by SPUDCO. However 
the total amount of investment by CFI in each Storco is 
only $51 ($51, Mr. Speaker) and there is no (this is the 
report now, Mr. Speaker; there is no) economic evidence to 
suggest that CFI is a partner . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Ernst & Young report confirmed on June 25, 
1998 that this deal wasn’t really a partnership. So did that cause 
the NDP to then tell the truth about the deal? The answer is no, 
Mr. Speaker. No, they did not come out and tell people the facts 
as had been presented to them in the Ernst & Young report. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this question is for the Premier: why did the 
NDP continue to cover up the true risk to taxpayers, even after 
it received the Ernst & Young report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, the member 

continues to reference documents that are part of examinations 
for discovery. And just because he says it’s not part of a 
document that is in the process of examination for discovery, 
Mr. Speaker, he says many things in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, that we find out later may not be altogether true, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that member to respect the process of the 
courts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — He is still hiding behind the courts. These are 
general questions about decisions they made on behalf of 
taxpayers that risked and lost $28 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they won’t answer the questions. But fortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, the Ernst & Young audit answers a lot of the 
questions. Ernst & Young says, and I quote, Mr. Speaker. 
Here’s the quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . (Sask Water Corporation) Management has indicated 
that the current ownership structure (this answers the 
question, why would they do this; why would they cover it 
up; that the current ownership structure) provides a number 
of potential benefits, including avoidance of international 
trade investigations, use of non-unionized labor for 
construction, and (Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker) the optics 
(the optics) of significant private sector investment. 
 

That’s what that report says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In other words, they set up this phony-baloney deal to fool our 
trading partners, Mr. Speaker, to get around their own 
construction tendering policy, and to deceive the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the Premier please stand in his place today, Mr. Speaker, 
and tell this House if he thinks that’s acceptable on the part of 
his government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if that member’s of the 
notion that I’m not desirous of asking the questions that he’s 
asked, he’s sadly mistaken, Mr. Speaker. But I am going to 
quote directly from the . . . what is referred to as the sub judice 
convention. It says that in section 505, Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

Members are expected to refrain from discussing matters 
that are before the courts or tribunals which are courts of 
record (Mr. Speaker).The purpose of this sub judice 
convention is to protect the parties in a case awaiting or 
undergoing trial and persons who stand to be affected by 
the outcome of a judicial inquiry. It is a voluntary restraint 
imposed by the House upon itself in the interest of justice 
and fair play (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that minister just stood in his place 
and said there should be no doubt that he is willing to ask these 
questions. Where was he in 1998 when CIC (Crown 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2915 

 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) officials exposed 
this ruse for what it was? Where were his questions then when 
he could have saved taxpayers $14 million, Mr. Speaker? It 
wasn’t before the courts then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s try this again. In 1997, the current Minister of Industry 
proposes to the cabinet a partnership to build potato storages, 
only there was no partnership. We know that now. The 
government put up millions; the private company had no risk. 
And what was the reason? 
 
What would be the reason for that, for that deception, and then 
subsequent to that what would be the reason to put more money 
into the project even when they know the truth? To get around 
international trade laws, Mr. Speaker. To avoid their own 
construction tendering policy, Mr. Speaker. And to give the 
optics to the taxpayers if there was a partner. 
 
I’ll ask the Premier again: does he believe that is acceptable and 
appropriate behaviour for his NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Where was I, Mr. Speaker? Where was 
he, Mr. Speaker, in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, when they put in a 
pile of money in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker? Where was he? 
 
I’ll tell you where he was, Mr. Speaker. He was working for a 
minister, Mr. Speaker. He was running around privatizing 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s where he was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They put in excess of hundreds of . . . with the federal 
government some $140 million, Mr. Speaker, in infrastructure 
in irrigation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, some $140 million-plus in 
irrigation infrastructure that was lying in the ground not being 
able to add value to any crops, Mr. Speaker, or very few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did we do? We worked with the growers to 
add value. And, Mr. Speaker, I provide an update for the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I said yesterday there were 10,000 
acres, Mr. Speaker. There are in excess of 13,000 acres, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on June 25, 1998 or shortly 
thereafter, that minister that just stood on his feet would have 
had access to this Ernest & Young report that clearly outlined 
this as the ruse that it is, that we know it is today; that clearly 
highlighted that the government tried to get around its own 
tendering policy when it set this up; that they were trying to 
deceive our largest trading partner, Mr. Speaker; and more 
importantly, that they were . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Once again . . . Order. 
Once again, I would ask the member to be very careful about 
the way he phrases his statements implying . . . Order. 
 
I would ask the member to be very careful in any statements he 

makes in the legislature that should not imply motives of 
wrongdoing on the part of any member. Any member is capable 
of making a mistake, but no hon. member in this House should 
be accused of attempting deliberately to falsify or deceive. 
 
So I would ask all members, in their remarks, to be very careful 
when they’re making that type of statement. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the point is, he sat at that table; he 
knew all of the information. He did nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the point. And that’s what he and the rest of his 
colleagues ought to remember as they ask the questions that . . . 
and answer the questions that we’re asking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this whole thing started because the current 
Minister of Industry came to cabinet in 1997 with, at best, 
incomplete information, and for the most part, incorrect 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what has happened to that individual? Has he been relieved 
of his duties? No, Mr. Speaker, he still sits at the cabinet table. 
He still negotiates multi-million dollar deals with the private 
sector. Mr. Speaker, the executives who covered up the Enron 
scandal aren’t negotiating deals any more; they’re going to jail. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Why is this minister still negotiating deals on behalf of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers? And will the Premier do the right 
thing today, Mr. Speaker? Will he do the right thing today and 
ask for the resignation of his Minister of Industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will do no such thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, what else 
neither this Premier nor any member of this government will do 
under my watch, is what I heard from this opposition today. 
 
In its first set of questioning, what were they telling us to do? 
Interfere with the prosecutions branch of the Department of 
Justice. That’s what they were telling us to do. Now they’ll 
deny it, but that’s what they were telling us to do. 
 
What have we heard this week? No respect — no respect — for 
the due process of law, which is happening in a courtroom 
today. No respect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not ask today for the resignation — or any 
day for the resignation — of this minister. And I will have no 
member of this government trying to influence the prosecutions 
branch or interfering in the due process of law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, any fair-minded individual who has 
followed the proceedings over the last number of days will 
know that we have asked general questions on a public policy 
matter that end up costing taxpayers $28 million. They have 
been general, general questions and that Premier and that 



2916 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

government has hid behind the courts. 
 
That Premier just stood up and said for all of these . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Allow the question to be 
put. 
 
Mr. Wall: — That Premier has just stood up and said for all of 
these transgressions, for this, Mr. Speaker, for deceiving 
Saskatchewan people, this minister — this minister — will not 
be fired. That’s what he . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — For all of the transgressions that Ernst & Young 
laid out, this minister who started the whole debacle will not be 
fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Premier that the Saskatchewan 
people will not hesitate what he lacks the courage to do. They 
will fire that minister and they’ll fire the rest of them . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, very quickly, the Ernst & Young 
audit has much to say, including that there was insufficient 
explanation of the level at risk and commitment made by Sask 
Water to the cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is responsible for that? Who is responsible 
for the lack of information coming to the cabinet of the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the member can ask the 
question in as many different ways as he wants, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve answered here many times what the situation is. 
 
The issue is right now in the process of examination for 
discovery, Mr. Speaker. It’s impossible for us to answer the 
question. I said as many times as I would like to defend the 
government’s position, it is absolutely inappropriate for me to 
do so. It not only jeopardizes the government’s position, Mr. 
Speaker, it also jeopardizes the plaintiff’s position, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He references documents I believe, Mr. Speaker, on a daily 
basis that are part of the examination for discovery, documents 
that the plaintiff has requested as part of the court process, Mr. 
Speaker. Absolutely inappropriate for any of us to be 
commenting or to be responding to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We’ve asked the government why. Why did they 
do this, starting back in 1997? Why did that original cabinet 
item not provide the correct information? And when they had 
the correct information a year later, why did they decide to put 
more millions into this thing instead of stopping it? 
 
And the answer is in this report, this Ernst & Young report. 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, Sask Water Corporation management 
has indicated that the current ownership structure provides a 

number of potential benefits including avoidance of 
international trade investigations; the use of non-unionized 
labour for construction, which would violate their own 
tendering policy; and the optics, the optics of significant private 
sector investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are facts. Those are the facts today. So we’re 
asking the Premier to do the right thing. The Premier should 
hold accountable his member of the cabinet that began this 
whole affair, who now sits as the Minister of Industry and is 
still negotiating deals, deals that he characterizes in the same 
way as he did this one. Will he do that today? Will he ask for 
the resignation of the Minister of Industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to . . . I want to point members 
opposite to what we heard during members’ statements today. 
During the tenure of this Minister of Industry and Resources 
and during the tenure of this Premier, we’ve seen a major, 
major turnaround in the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to quote again, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to quote again the report from The Globe and Mail of 
December 9, 2002. This columnist reports, this business 
columnist reports: 
 

There are many ways to look at the job market (in Canada) 
. . . we’ll examine a few. 
 
(Let’s) begin with the provinces. Five provinces have 
exceeded the national gain of 3.3 per cent since December 
. . . 

 
Now listen to this, Mr. Speaker, and the member from Rosthern 
should be quiet in his bench and listen: 
 

Despite their economic woes this year with farming and 
forestry respectively, Saskatchewan leads the way with a 
5.5 per cent job gain . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This province is leading Canada, leading 
Canada in spite of the doom and the gloom that proceeds from 
that party, in spite of a party that only comes to the people of 
Saskatchewan with a slogan. This government, this minister 
comes with a plan, puts the plan in place, and the plan is 
working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier had a chance to show 
some leadership here today on this very serious matter and he 
didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. There was no leadership in that 
answer he just gave. 
 
He is right about one thing. It isn’t only the current Minister of 
Industry that should be held to account, Mr. Speaker. Every 
single cabinet minister that sits over there, that sat around that 
table in 1998 and made the decision to ignore the truth and risk 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2917 

 

millions more in this and lose it eventually, to destroy an 
industry eventually, Mr. Speaker, and to lose $28 million — 
they should all be fired, Mr. Speaker. Every last one of them. 
And that’ll be happening in the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he won’t do anything about the current Minister of 
Industry. In fact what he allows the minister to do, he gives him 
a $100 million credit card and tells him to negotiate yet another 
deal. And what have we heard about the Broe deal so far? That 
there’s a significant private sector partner, that they’re taking 
the majority of the risk. The information’s all the same. 
 
Can the Premier stand in his place today and tell us why, in 
light of the events of this week and the revelations, why we 
should trust this government on any future deal they make, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I ask them just to look at the statistics, Mr. Speaker. 
Look at the job growth; the numbers in November of this year 
alone, Mr. Speaker. It’s incredible, Mr. Speaker. You don’t 
listen to me, Mr. Speaker; just look at the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say, why did we invest in the potato industry? It’s simple. I’ve 
said it before and I’ll say it again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
worked with the growers to assist them in diversifying an area 
of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, that had tremendous potential. 
 
And if you look at the latest StatsCan numbers, Mr. Speaker, 
we have over 13,000 acres, Mr. Speaker, and they say . . . they 
also say in those numbers that they’re looking at a 12 per cent 
growth for next year, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we work with 
the growers out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Committee for the Queen’s Golden Jubilee 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this afternoon I would want to welcome again in the 
gallery, your gallery, the members of the Queen’s Golden 
Jubilee Committee and a number of other representatives of 
royal organizations in our province who have worked with the 
committee all this year. I would say, Mr. Speaker, thanks to 
their combined efforts, the Golden Jubilee celebrations in our 
province have been a great success. 
 
And I would invite all members — all members — to show our 
warm appreciation to the members of the Queen’s Golden 
Jubilee Committee and the other royal representatives who are 
here today for the work that they have done throughout the 
course of this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the Golden Jubilee year 
draws to a close, it is now timely, I think, that we look to the 
future. And of course, the province’s centennial year is 
foremost in our minds. And, Mr. Speaker, it is our hope and our 

expectation that Her Majesty, the Queen, will be able to visit 
Saskatchewan in 2005 for this landmark anniversary. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, next year, 2003, also marks some very 
significant milestones in Saskatchewan communities. In the 
year 2003, in the cities of Regina, Moose Jaw, and 
Lloydminster will all celebrate their centennials. And in the 
year 2003, the new Saskatchewan Indian Federated College at 
the University of Regina and the cultural centre in Prince Albert 
will open. And all of we in Saskatchewan will celebrate these 
tremendous occasions in the life of our province. 
 
It is therefore, Mr. Speaker, with great pleasure that today I 
announce that their Royal Highnesses, The Earl and Countess 
of Wessex have accepted Saskatchewan’s invitation to visit our 
province from June 18 to June 23, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Prince Edward and his wife Sophie have 
kindly agreed to celebrate the city centennials with us; to 
officially open the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 
building and the Prince Albert cultural centre. As many of us 
will know, Mr. Speaker, Prince Edward is also a patron of the 
Globe Theatre in Regina and international president of The 
Duke of Edinburgh’s awards. And both of those organizations 
will also be involved in the royal visit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province will coordinate the visit in 
partnership with the host municipalities and organizations. 
 
And so today, Mr. Speaker, I would very much like to 
acknowledge the presence, again the presence in your gallery 
this afternoon, of four of our mayors and a leading educator in 
our province. And perhaps as I indicate their name, they may 
just want to stand and just give us a little wave — His Worship 
Pat Fiacco, mayor of Regina; His Worship Al Schwinghamer, 
mayor of Moose Jaw; His Worship Ken Baker, mayor of 
Lloydminster; His Worship Mayor Don Cody of Prince Albert; 
and President of the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, 
Dr. Eber Hampton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of 
this House will join with me in expressing our appreciation to 
The Earl and Countess of Wessex for accepting our invitation to 
share this important year with us in the life of our province next 
year. And I’m equally confident that all the people of our 
province will extend to the royal couple a very, very warm 
Saskatchewan welcome next June. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of 
the official opposition in Saskatchewan, I too would like to 
welcome our distinguished guests in the gallery, the 
representatives of the Queen’s Golden Jubilee Committee who 
are present. Also I see Dr. Michael Jackson in the gallery who 
coordinated a lot of the celebration around the awarding of the 
Queen’s Golden Jubilee medals. 
 
We certainly appreciate the efforts that you have put forward to 



2918 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

make this celebration one in which Saskatchewan participated; I 
understand from Dr. Jackson, showed some leadership 
nationally and of course was well received in the province. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I would join with the Premier in welcoming the visit of the Earl 
and Countess of Wessex to Saskatchewan next year. That is, of 
course, a very exciting event and it’s to commemorate a number 
of celebrations here in the province of Saskatchewan. As the 
Premier has mentioned, three of our cities are celebrating their 
centennials. And I too would welcome Mayor Fiacco from 
Regina, Mayor Schwinghamer from Moose Jaw, and Mayor 
Baker from Lloydminster. It’s good to have them in the gallery. 
 
Also seeing Mayor Cody from Prince Albert who’s involved in 
the celebration in a slightly different way with the opening of 
the cultural centre, and Dr. Hampton from the Indian Federated 
College. We welcome you here as well and we’re glad that 
you’re present in the gallery to take part in this very happy 
announcement. 
 
A few years ago when I was the Member of Parliament for 
Kindersley-Lloydminster, we did have the privilege in 
Saskatchewan of hosting the Prince, Prince Edward, when he in 
fact was made the patron of the Globe Theatre. It was a pleasure 
to meet him at that time. We now look forward to not only 
meeting the Prince but to also meet the Countess. 
 
And I’m sure that it’s a great celebration that we’ll all enjoy in 
Saskatchewan in the lead up to a number of other great 
celebrations — the centennial of the province of Saskatchewan 
and an election, hopefully some time next year. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 
the day I rise on a point of order. 
 
Last evening during the debate on the motion regarding the 
Kyoto Protocol, on page 2,897, remarks given by the Leader of 
the Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar referred to the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone as including a fanatical presentation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to rule on this because I 
understand that all remarks given in the legislature are remarks 
given in good faith, that we need to be respectful of each others’ 
remarks, and that we are not to impugn the members who are 
speaking in the legislature. And it’s my opinion, Mr. Speaker, 
that these remarks were unparliamentary, and that these remarks 
should be withdrawn and the member should be asked to 
apologize. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
haven’t had a chance to review the exact wording, but if the 
word is indeed, fanatical, that would mean, Mr. Speaker, 
someone who is very enthusiastic about the . . . passionate 
about what they were describing, Mr. Speaker. And in no way 

was it used in a derogatory term, Mr. Speaker, so I would ask 
that you rule that there is no valid point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for Saskatoon Nutana for 
raising the point of order and for the response from the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Members of the Assembly, when it comes to language in the 
legislature, there is a list that is published that . . . even that list 
is occasionally breached. A lot of it depends on the content, on 
the context of the debate. Quite often it depends on just whether 
or not the members themselves are offended or not. 
 
So I would . . . As I recall a debate at that time, there were a 
couple of members who objected to the wording, but probably 
not any more than they object to many other things that have 
been said in this House. So I would just ask members to be 
respectful of each other, try not to exceed the tolerable limits 
within this House. 
 
And so with that, I would just leave it under that advice and 
respond to the member that her point is well regarded but 
cannot be . . . I’m not asking for any other action on that basis 
except for members to be mindful of what they say. 
 
Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Kyoto Protocol 
 
Mr. Goulet: —Mr. Speaker, of course I rise to support the 
motion by the government and to go against the amendment by 
the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the way that I look at the debate, on one side we 
have the government members who are dealing with the issue 
on a balanced, sustainable, and practical level. We are talking 
here about a balance between economic development and the 
environment. All of our members who have made speeches 
talked about that very, very important balance. 
 
When we look at the Saskatchewan Party amendment and many 
of their commentary, while they do from time to time make a 
small, little comment on the environment, basically their 
position is on the economic front only. While it is very 
important to look at the dollar side of the equation, you have to 
be able to combine it with the environmental side. 
 
And I know that there are many, many things that have been 
said in the debate that were problematic. As I watched and 
listened to the debate, I listened to the Leader of the Opposition 
and I’ll go back to that quotation and reflect upon, you know, 
the other member’s comment because I think it’s very, very 
important to be able to put that on the record, you know, for the 
members. Because our argument is to combine both the 
economic and the environmental agenda and to deal with a few 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2919 

 

of the questions in that front with 12 important principles that 
were indeed supported by all provinces and the territories. 
 
I will therefore take a quote from the side of the Leader of the 
Opposition. I’ve noted over the past while in context, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Sask Party is trying to sell themselves as a 
moderate party. They try and sell themselves as, you know, 
somebody who can possibly govern. And we see some of the 
statements they make in Saskatoon. They never actually make 
the same statements here and there but they do very, very 
selective statements. They try and present themselves as a 
moderate party. We see them in different debates, but 
sometimes, of course, the real world comes out. Although they 
try and hide behind sheep’s clothing, the wolf comes out. 
 
And it is in this case a very, very important one because when I 
hear the Leader of the Opposition having to use the language 
that he did — you know, more extreme type language — that 
proved the point. And I would put it on the record as to what he 
actually said. It’s . . . quote: 
 

It’s very clear (he said) — Kyoto cannot work. But yet 
members on the other side, including the fanatical 
presentation by the member who preceded me, are heard 
from that side of the House. 

 
He also said: 
 

. . . the member . . . (from) Saskatoon Greystone had an 
opinion and spoke out loud — as misguided and ridiculous 
as it was. 

 
But what was the statement that the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone concluded with? The member from Saskatoon 
Greystone said this in conclusion: 
 

We are standing, Mr. Speaker . . . and I know, Mr. Speaker, 
that we . . . (all) stand firm in terms of negotiating a fair 
position that protects the interests of the Saskatchewan 
economy and all Saskatchewan residents. 

 
But I’ll give you the actual quote right from the beginning. And 
this is what the member from Greystone actually said: 
 

We are standing, Mr. Speaker, in support of the principles 
and objectives of the Protocol, and I know, Mr. Speaker, 
that we . . . also stand firm in terms of negotiating a fair 
position that protects the interests of the Saskatchewan 
economy and all Saskatchewan residents. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t see anything fanatical about that statement. 
I don’t see anything ridiculous about that statement. I thought 
that the member, the Leader of the Opposition, stooped really 
low to come out and actually make that comment. It was not 
becoming, you know, the parliamentary debate that we have 
over here. I thought that he should have outlined his points, you 
know, from time to time, even in regards to the statements from 
their other members. 
 
The only quotes that I could see from their statements were 
from the Canadian Taxpayers Federation and also from a few of 
the selected scientists. But everybody knows the history in 
regards to the issue relating to the environment. 

Back in the early ’80s we had the Brundtland Commission. And 
the scientists of the world came together and presented a plan in 
regards to the environment and coined a term that had been 
used prior to that time on sustainable development. And they 
produced a document. Gro Brundtland, who was the prime 
minister of Norway at that time, presented that document. And 
it was . . . a book came out published by Oxford called Our 
Common Future. 
 
Later on as we dealt with the environmental issue, they also 
went on to do the 1988 development. There was an international 
panel on climate change, and many other people started 
recognizing the need for environmental regulations, protections, 
and controls if we were to deal with the overall issue of 
sustainable development. 
 
We also saw the debates in Rio and then we went to Kyoto. In 
every single one of those cases since the early ’80s, people have 
recognized the need to do something vis-à-vis the environment. 
And when we were looking at that, Mr. Speaker, many of the 
statements made by the members opposite were basically 
platitudinous. It was very soft statements, never really 
convincing in regards to the importance of the question of the 
environment. 
 
When I was growing up in Cumberland in northern 
Saskatchewan, we used to see the smokestack in Flin Flon, and 
we saw the sulphur dioxide emissions that were there. As I was 
growing up, later on we knew and the elders talked about the 
problem of that. 
 
We had a concept in the Cree language which we called 
kuochinan, and I’ll leave that on the record and I’ll send it to 
Hansard later on, on that particular word because it’s a very 
appropriate word. 
 
The word kuochinan in Cree really means that if you do 
something to destroy the environment, to wreck the 
environment, or to create harm to animals, whatever it is that 
befalls them in terms of sickness, the belief was that it would 
come back to haunt you, and that indeed you would get the 
sickness and the illness yourself. 
 
And when we were doing hunting when I was growing up, we 
had to make sure that you did it in the most humane manner and 
also to make sure that when I was hunting grouse or ducks that 
we did a quick kill, because if an animal ever escaped and you 
didn’t do the proper hunting, people would say kuochinan. 
 
So that particular concept, you know, is used in a modern 
ecosystems debates on the environment. And I think there are 
many, many other scientists throughout the world, you know, 
agree to that. 
 
The members now opposite of course quote scientists who 
disagree with that. And obviously they seem to assume . . . 
seem to say that that’s a new position. It really isn’t. Thirty 
years ago the majority of the scientists were on the other side — 
40 years ago — and that very few people thought that there was 
a problem with global warming, greenhouse gases, etc. It’s been 
a major shift over the past 30 years. And we see the shift now; 
where there was a smaller number of scientists who were 
talking about that, the majority of the scientists are now talking 



2920 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

about that. 
 
(15:00) 
 
People from the Sask Party and their debates are going back, 
you know, 40 years ago in that regard. And there is no question 
about that, that there is a few scientists that are indeed the 
position of the Sask Party. 
 
But the majority of the scientists have shifted their position and 
agree with the fact that you have to do something about global 
warming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, so the point of the matter is that 
the Sask Party in this case is the one that’s taking the extreme 
position. They are taking the backward position. And they’re 
the ones . . . I wouldn’t go as far as to say they are fanatical. I 
would say indeed that a greater care must be taken on their part 
in regards to dealing with this issue in a more up-to-date 
fashion. 
 
I looked at the issue as well from the economic development 
side. Mr. Speaker, they have quoted about the few countries that 
are indeed not agreeing with Kyoto. But let’s remember that 
there are 38 countries, developing countries, that agree with 
Kyoto — 38 countries. And when you look at that development, 
there is a lot of new aspects of that development that take place 
even in countries who disagree . . . You know, from the United 
States . . . they’re already planning and preparing to deal with 
this issue. 
 
And a lot of the top businesses that are dealing with this issue 
— while some will complain about it — recognize that they 
have to do something into the future. They know that. 
 
We have seen the evolution and the development of solar 
power, wind power, and other alternate cogeneration 
developments; you know, shifting from coal-fired to a natural 
gas, for example. So we’ve seen that planning and the 
development taking place over time vis-á-vis Saskatchewan. 
We are taking a leadership role on that with Saskatchewan . . . I 
mean, the Power Corporation. 
 
In forestry, we have put aside, in 1999, 6 million over a 
five-year period. And in that plan, we are trying to put aside 
500,000 acres . . . hectares, I mean, of land on the forestry side. 
And we’re also looking at putting in 5 million seedlings, of 
which 3 have already been planted. 
 
And when I look at that development, I’d like to do a bit of a 
quote on it from November 16 on the Leader-Post, 2002. This 
is what one of the . . . our own persons from the department 
says — his name is Al Willcocks and this is his explanation: 
 

Trees are carbon eaters . . . They absorb carbon dioxide — 
which contributes to global warming — retain the carbon, 
and emit oxygen. 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

One acre of mature trees produces enough oxygen for five 

people to live on for a year . . . 
 

One acre of mature trees produces enough oxygen for five 
people to live on for a year. So although the Saskatchewan 
Party doesn’t really care about those types of developments, 
these are very, very positive in regards to leadership, you know, 
throughout the world. 
 
And we also have done a lot of the stuff in regards to the wind 
power. As of now we’ve gone into to do 17 megawatts of power 
on wind generation. We have 11.2 megawatts vis-à-vis 
SunBridge, you know, a combination of the Enbridge company 
and Suncor, and . . . near Gull Lake, and they are moving to do 
development on that. We also have 5.9 megawatts on Cypress, 
and we are now talking also about going to 150 megawatts in 
the future. 
 
So we’re looking at making sure we have a balanced approach, 
Mr. Speaker, and that indeed we take into consideration both 
the economic development side and also on the environmental 
side. When I look at the Sask Party they’re going back to more 
of their extreme ways, their one-sided ways, and only looking at 
the economic development side, and completely disregarding 
the solid research in regards to the environmental side. 
 
Some of them will express a few platitudes on the environment 
but the result is that the majority of them have been more 
strongly opposed to Kyoto than in regards to the possibilities of 
joining forces with all the provinces plus the territories. Even 
Ralph Klein and the province of Alberta, you know, are part of 
the people in regards to the 12 points. So with that I will close 
by looking at this reasonable approach. No. 2: 
 

The plan must ensure that no region or jurisdiction shall be 
asked to bear an unreasonable share of the burden and no 
industry, sector, or region shall be treated unfairly. The 
costs and impacts on individuals, businesses, and industries 
must be clear, reasonable, achievable, and economically 
sustainable. 
 

It also says on point no. 11: 
 
The plan must include incentives for all citizens, 
communities, businesses, and jurisdictions to make the shift 
to an economy based on renewable and other clean energy, 
lower emissions, and sustainable practices across sectors. 
 

Point 12: 
 

The implementation of any climate change . . . must 
include an incentive and allocation system that supports 
lower carbon emission sources of energy such as 
hydroelectricity, wind power generation, ethanol, and 
renewable and other clean sources of energy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that to me is the reasonable, practical, and 
achievable way of dealing with this issue. The Sask Party is still 
back in the Dark Ages. They may try and use statements like 
fanatical, they may try and use statements like ridiculous, but it 
is really unbecoming of the debate and I really feel that it shows 
that they’re on very shaky ground when they are dealing with 
this issue. 
 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2921 

 

And I really feel that as we move forward into the future, we 
have to remember what I learned when I was growing up. You 
have to respect the environment and if you don’t, it’ll come 
back to haunt you. And in many cases, that indeed the 
combination of jobs and environment is the way of the future. 
We are joining forces with all the other provinces and territories 
to make a strong stand so that indeed something is achievable 
into the future. 
 
So with that I’d like to support our resolution and also to 
oppose the amendment by the Sask Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to speak 
on this very important issue, the Kyoto accord. And by many, 
it’s a flawed agreement . . . agreement that is going to hurt 
Canada and hurt Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’d just like to take some time and talk about how the 
Kyoto Protocol was developed and where it came from. Mr. 
Speaker, the Kyoto Protocol’s part of an international treaty 
called the Kyoto accord. The Kyoto Protocol mandates a set of 
country-specific standards for the emission of greenhouse 
gases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kyoto accord evolved from studies by the 
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change or 
IPCC. The IPCC was formed in 1988 and IPCC reports in 1996 
concluded climate change was occurring partly as a result of the 
man-made emissions of greenhouse gases. 
 
However, the scientific community is split on the overall 
environment benefit of the emission reduction targets in the 
Kyoto Protocol. There’s also significant debate within the 
scientific community about the validity of the conclusion that 
made greenhouse gas emissions, that man-made greenhouse gas 
emissions are causing climate change to global warming. 
 
Nevertheless the 1996 IPCC report led many governments 
around the world, including Canada, to adopt greenhouse gas 
reductions as a national policy. The Kyoto Protocol was 
negotiated in 1997. Under Kyoto, Canada is required to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions to 94 per cent of the 1990 levels by 
the year 2012. 
 
Now Canada, under Kyoto, has agreed to reduce greenhouse 
emissions to 6 per cent below 1990 levels by 2012. This would 
represent a 26 per cent reduction from projected 2012 levels. 
Two years ago Canada had surpassed its 1990 levels by close to 
20 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so far 86 countries have ratified the Kyoto 
Protocol, roughly half the number that attended the Kyoto 
conference, and the United States has not ratified Kyoto. I’d 
like to discuss that issue a little later. 
 
Now some sticking points for Canada, and in particular 
Saskatchewan. Canada has argued it should receive greater 
credit for carbon sinks. This is the term used for forest and other 
vegetation that absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, 
store it, and produce oxygen. Canada also asked for more clean 
energy export credits for the natural gas and electricity it sells to 

the United States. 
 
The Canadian oil and gas industry has also argued that the 
economic impact of sweeping emissions reductions would harm 
the Canadian economy while a flight from Canada’s oil and gas 
would not necessarily mean a global reduction in the burning of 
these fossil fuels. 
 
And in the future, Mr. Speaker, the Protocol will only become 
legally binding when it is ratified by at least 55 countries, 
covering at least 55 per cent of the emissions addressed by the 
Protocol. The 55-country benchmark has been passed but the 23 
industrialized countries that have ratified it present only 36.6 
per cent of 1990 emission levels. Canada represents only 2 per 
cent of these emissions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is, why is Kyoto important to 
Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the second 
largest producer of greenhouse gases per capita in Canada. 
Saskatchewan greenhouse gas emissions have grown by 31 per 
cent since 1990, compared to the national average of 14 per 
cent. The Kyoto Protocol would require Saskatchewan to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 6 per cent below the 1990 
levels by 2002. 
 
Now there’s been a lot said about the impact of Kyoto on 
Saskatchewan and on Canada. It is said by many scientists and 
experts in Saskatchewan and in Canada that Kyoto will kill 
thousands of jobs in Saskatchewan’s most important industries 
— namely agriculture, mining, forestry, and gas. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at agriculture. The 
Saskatchewan and Canadian farmer is the most efficient farmers 
in the world, and we have done that by using technologies. And 
part of that impact has been going to use greater, larger 
equipment and of course equipment that uses gasoline and 
diesel fuel which give off emissions. 
 
This Protocol would certainly increase the costs to our 
Saskatchewan farmers, increase costs to our agriculture. And 
hand in hand with that, as to date, Saskatchewan farmers are not 
able to use the carbon sinks that are being discussed but not part 
of the Kyoto Protocol as of this year. So, Mr. Speaker, 
agriculture is going to be hurt by this Protocol. We’re not going 
to be able to use the benefits of carbon sinks in our negotiations 
in our agreements that Kyoto has outlined to date. 
 
And of course when we look at Saskatchewan, we talk about 
developing Saskatchewan, rural revitalization, growing 
Saskatchewan. And of course at every turn we look, agriculture 
and mining and forestry, and oil and gas, these are considered 
negative in the eyes of the Kyoto agreement. And this is going 
to put a dampening effect on our growth in this province if the 
federal government does not, with the help of Saskatchewan 
and the other provinces, do not take these industries into 
account and protect these industries from the very negative 
effects of the Kyoto agreement. 
 
Other problems around the Kyoto agreement that affect 
Saskatchewan/Canada is of course the United States, our largest 
trading partner. The United States has not ratified Kyoto and we 
don’t know if they ever will. So we’re set up in a situation 
where Canada and Saskatchewan has ratified Kyoto and so the 



2922 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

increased cost to our industries, to our agriculture, and to our 
country and our economy, and we have to compete with the 
United States which have not signed on to Kyoto. So this puts 
Saskatchewan and Canada at an economic disadvantage right 
off the top. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Groups like the Canadian Taxpayers Federation estimate 
ratification of the Protocol will cost every family in Canada 
approximately $2,700 per year. 
 
Other examples. IPSCO. IPSCO is now threatening to leave 
Saskatchewan if there aren’t amendments to the Protocol which 
they say will force this company out of Saskatchewan back into 
the United States where they have other plants. And we will 
lose hundreds of jobs if this happens. 
 
Our own SaskPower estimates Kyoto would cost the provincial 
power utility as much as $250 million per year, and this would 
increase utility bills. You could see the bills going up by as 
much as 25 per cent. Even the province’s own Department of 
Industry and Resources estimates Kyoto could cost as much as 
$2.6 billion in economic output by the year 2020. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is a very serious situation. This is a very 
serious Protocol and accord that Canada has signed on to, and 
without any plan. We’re really signing on to a Protocol without 
. . . that we have to negotiate into the future. He doesn’t have a 
plan in place. Industries and the provinces don’t know where to 
go from here on and we’ve really signed on to something that 
may hurt us dramatically in the future. 
 
Other examples of where the Protocol will hurt Canada is the 
Canadian exporters and manufacturers association estimates a 
loss of 450,000 jobs in Canada. These are dramatic losses. 
There’s a number of estimates of job losses and economic 
downturn caused by the . . . possibly caused by the Kyoto 
agreement. 
 
One only has to look at other types of policies the federal 
government has placed in the past, and you look, only need to 
look at the national energy program. It was devastating to the 
West, to the energy producing provinces of Canada at the time. 
 
And we have to . . .And the provincial government and the NDP 
government should take this possibility very seriously and to 
protect the economy of Saskatchewan and Western Canada 
from a Liberal federal government that really does not look out 
for the Western Canadian interests in any way. And we only 
need to look at the national energy program as an example of 
that. 
 
Other problems with Kyoto is the concern of the rest of the 
world. Western Europe has signed on to this accord. Just 
because of their proximity and their history, they do not have to 
make the dramatic changes in order to meet the reductions. 
 
We have seen the United States have not ratified the agreement. 
Developing countries like China and Italy and many other 
developing countries are not obligated under the accord, so they 
can pollute as much as they want and not be affected in any 
way. 

One example is Russia. After the fall of the Soviet Union, the 
Russian economy has collapsed and so they now are in a 
position of being able to sell carbon credits to other countries. 
So we could see a situation where North American companies 
could buy credits from Russia, Russia could keep polluting as 
they try to build their economy back up, and the western 
companies could continue to pollute. All that we see is a huge 
transfer, a potentially huge transfer of capital from the western 
economies to Russia and countries like that without making any 
change in the environmental impact of greenhouse gases. 
 
So there are many things that have to be sorted out to take into 
account those types of situations where we make dramatic, have 
a dramatic effect on our economy in North America and in 
Canada without actually making any changes to the greenhouse 
gas emissions in the world as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the Saskatchewan Party have been very, 
very clear in this. It seems that this accord is more about politics 
than it is about science, like so many agreements, many 
international agreements. As I mentioned, it possibly could 
mean a transfer of millions and billions of dollars of capital to 
the underdeveloped world while not changing anything in the 
environmental file at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen the present Prime Minister of 
Canada push this accord on to the Canadian people. And what 
is the agenda of the present Liberal Prime Minister? Well he 
claims to . . . he has said he’s going to be retiring in I believe a 
year from this February and he has made no secret that he wants 
to leave a legacy that he’s going to leave with the Canadian 
people. And this is one of the areas where he’s pushing hard 
where he thinks this is going to leave a positive legacy in the 
minds of historians into the future. 
 
And unfortunately as we’ve seen in the past and the policy is 
made this way, that it hurts many people. It will have a negative 
effect on much of Canada — all in the name of a prime 
minister, a lame-duck prime minister, quite frankly, who may 
not last the full year into the future in politics. And we’re going 
to be left with this very serious accord and Protocol which is 
going to hurt Canada, and Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
So we also hear what the provincial Liberal Party has said. Well 
the provincial Liberal leader is supporting what the federal 
Liberals are doing, with no thought of their own and without 
any interest in protecting the Saskatchewan economy. He has 
just . . . he has done what he’s been told by the federal 
counterparts and gone along. 
 
Now yesterday we listened to the Liberal member in the 
legislature and he stood up and spoke for 20 minutes. But 
unfortunately after the end of his speech, no one is wiser to 
what his position is on Kyoto. It was left very hazy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s position on Kyoto has been very 
muddy at best. It’s obvious that the NDP caucus is split over 
this. And we have seen the Premier . . . I’d like to quote from a 
CJME radio, October 7: 
 

Premier Lorne Calvert says he can’t oppose the Kyoto 
accord. 

 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2923 

 

Well we have seen a couple of his members stand up and speak 
in favour of Kyoto. And so that’s another sign of division in the 
NDP caucus and the NDP cabinet. 
 
And we have noticed that the Premier of Saskatchewan has not 
spoke on the Kyoto accord and has not spoke in this debate. 
And one has to wonder why he has not come into the House. He 
still has some time before the vote this afternoon to speak on 
this accord, but I suspect he is too afraid to come in the House 
and speak his mind. His caucus is divided and I suspect he does 
not want to actually say anything about it and hope this 
situation goes away, but unfortunately will not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our leader, the Leader of the Official Opposition, 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar spoke yesterday, spoke 
very clearly about the Saskatchewan Party’s policy on Kyoto, 
and I’d just like to read again the amendment to the motion: 
 

. . . (The Saskatchewan Party supports) the 12 principles 
adopted by the provinces and territories as the basis for 
negotiating a made-in-Canada, made-in-Saskatchewan plan 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions that balances the 
important goal of protecting the environment with the 
equally critical need to get Saskatchewan’s economy 
growing again. 

 
Very clear. That is leadership, Mr. Speaker — something we do 
not see from the NDP Premier. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I 
enter the debate on Kyoto, I want to first of all congratulate the 
new member who was recently elected in the by-election in 
Kindersley. And I want to congratulate him on becoming a 
member of the Legislative Assembly. And I wish him much 
success as a member of the legislature, advocating on behalf of 
his constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past several months I’ve listened intently 
to the discussion around the Kyoto Protocol. And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve been interested in this topic since about 1995. I 
must say I’ve heard alarming comments, both pro and con. I’ve 
seen ads in our daily newspapers, both pro and cons. And I’ve 
seen carefully crafted phrases to convince us one way or the 
other that either Kyoto is public enemy number one or it’s a 
small step forward as the world attempts to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve read everything that I can, from the work 
done by the Fraser Institute to the work of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. I’ve read various 
publications and scientific journals. And I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are many, many publications, including 
information coming from the Prairie Adaptation Research 
Collaborative or PARC. 
 
I’ve also had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to meet with 
citizens who represent industry. And I’ve also met with a 
scientist in Saskatchewan who was the editor on the North 
American chapter of the Working Group number II of the 

Intergovernmental chapter . . . or Panel on Climate Change; and 
this is chapter 15. 
 
And this Working Group II assessed climate change, its 
impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Every sentence that was 
edited by this scientist was edited for scientific accuracy, and 
each sentence on the North American chapter and in the work 
contained was approved by international scientists. It was a 
highly rigorous exercise. 
 
For my colleagues across the floor, all scientists that I’ve had an 
opportunity to meet with indicate that when they observe on 
these kinds of matters, they observe it in a rigorous way and 
they, as I understand it, tend to have quite a conservative 
culture. 
 
In my review of the literature I concluded that it was most 
likely that the internationally recognized scientists have the 
greatest understanding of the issue of climate change. And in all 
of my research I also concluded that we all need to be worried 
about our ability and our capacity to understand the impacts on 
our citizens, our industry, and our globe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve clearly heard from our opposition colleagues that they’re 
opposed to signing the Kyoto Protocol. Clearly they do not 
understand the rate of change in our climate, which will be 
faster unless we act now. 
 
So what does science know about climate change? For the 20th 
century, the global mean surface temperature has increased by 
about point six degrees Celsius. The northern hemispheric 
surface temperature has increased and it’s increased greater than 
in any other century in the last 1,000 years. 
 
The 1990s is the warmest decade of the last 1,000 years for the 
northern hemisphere. And for the western Prairies the snow 
cover season has been shrinking, especially in the last 30 years. 
There has been a widespread retreat of glaciers and it’s 
occurring in the northern hemisphere. And glaciers are an 
important source of river flow for the Prairies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spring blooming dates for ash and poplar have 
shifted 26 days earlier in the past several decades in the 
Prairies. Global and regional climate changes are happening and 
they’re happening now. Our ecosystems are changing as they 
are affected by climate change, and these changes are consistent 
with climate change projections. 
 
Scientific analysis demonstrates that greenhouse gases are the 
dominant driver of climate changes in the past century. And a 
balance of evidence suggests that human activity does influence 
global climate. There is evidence that most of the global 
warming observed is due to human activity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the International Panel on Climate Change 
2001 has clearly observed that for the mid-latitude of the 
northern hemisphere, that our winter temperatures increase 
faster than our summer temperatures; night temperatures rise 
faster than daytime temperatures; soil moisture decreases in 
summer and increases in winter; snow cover area and duration 
decrease; and precipitation increases in winter with some 
decreases in the summer. 
 



2924 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

(15:30) 
 
It is expected that there will be extreme weather. Whether that’s 
hail, heat waves, cold spells, they’ll decrease tornadoes and dust 
storms. Droughts and floods are going to increase and they’re 
going to intensify. 
 
Now what does that mean for the Prairies where we live? For 
the Prairies we can expect longer growing seasons. We can 
expect more extremes. We can expect decreased snow cover 
and spring recharge. We can expect water problems such as 
floods, drought, and conflicts over water. We can see the 
northern expansion of insects and disease, and we’ll see more 
fires. And we’ll see decreases in air, soil, and water quality. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see these decreases sooner rather than 
later. 
 
In Saskatchewan over 46 per cent of our land is under 
agricultural production and it’s worth more than $4 billion in 
exports. The prairie climate has had a history of being much 
more arid than the present-day climate. And given climate 
change, the arid nature of the Prairies and the environment on 
social and economic impacts produced by historic droughts, any 
change to the prairie climate that might increase its aridity 
could have serious ecological and financial consequences for 
our province. And any increase in temperature could have 
disastrous impacts on agriculture. 
 
And we’re seeing this already, Mr. Speaker, in the west-central 
part of our province and the northwest part of our province 
where many farmers have experienced drought five out of the 
last six years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the public and the Assembly that 
all of the information that I’ve given you has scientific sources. 
Scientific sources for all of my observations, Mr. Speaker, are 
available if the opposition is interested. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that projected climate 
change will have both beneficial and adverse effects on our 
social economic system. But let there be no doubt, the larger the 
change and the rate of change in climate, the adverse effects 
will be the most dominate. 
 
So what do we do? We can pay lip service and carry on. But 
then we’re going to need to adapt in response. We’ll need to 
moderate the harm and it will be very costly. And I can say of 
all of my review of the literature, I have not seen any work done 
on the do-nothing option. This option, Mr. Speaker, will be 
highly disruptive and costly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m of the view that we need to do our part. 
Our government has done much work already which has been 
articulated by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone, who I believe — contrary to what the Leader of the 
Opposition has to say — that he knows more about Kyoto and 
its impacts than any other member of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know from all of the work that’s been done . . . 
And it’s obvious to me from the members’ opposite speeches, 
who I’ve read very carefully, that they have not done any work 
in terms of research. What they have simply done is parrot what 
is being said out of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

We know that in southern Canada the largest increases in 
temperature due to greenhouse gas emissions are expected to 
occur in our province, on the Prairies. And we know that 
temperatures have increased significantly in the past several 
decades. We know that the Prairie provinces have a variable 
climate and we know that our economy and ecosystems are 
extremely sensitive to variation in climate. 
 
We know that most of our population of Alberta and 
Saskatchewan derive their waters from glaciers and snowfields 
in the Rocky Mountains and we know that this source of water 
is declining. And many glaciers, Mr. Speaker, are expected to 
disappear in this century. 
 
We know that more precipitation will fall as rain as opposed to 
snow, and we know that the timing of storage runoff will 
change requiring adaptation of water management practices. 
 
We know that drier conditions on the Western Canadian boreal 
forest will increase fire frequency and intensity, and we’ve 
already witnessed that in the last couple of years. 
 
And Prairie people, especially farmers who have had a large, a 
relatively large capacity to adapt to change because of a history 
of adaptation, will have to adapt to these periodic droughts and 
floods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and what does this mean? Well for those people in 
our province who are dependent upon agriculture — and we 
have over $4 billion in exports — they are going to have to 
adapt even if we do something, and they will have to adapt even 
further if we do nothing. 
 
We know that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
will emphasize the assessment of the interactions between 
climate change and water, and this work is going to be due in 
2007. And we know already, given the work that was done 
around the Meridian dam, that there will be increased 
competition for water as many jurisdictions and sectors will 
compete and fight for water. And this will become a significant 
public issue. 
 
And obviously economic growth will be affected by the 
availability of quality surface water. And for even those in the 
oil and gas industry, in order for that oil to be extracted, they 
need access to water. And as our climate changes, Mr. Speaker, 
that access is going to become more and more limited as we try 
and extract those fossil fuels. 
 
So what are we to do? Well, Mr. Speaker, we can do nothing as 
I’ve said, or we can try and do something. And if you listen to 
the opposition, their view is: don’t sign Kyoto, do nothing, and 
life will carry on. In fact, as I’ve listened to the opposition, it 
appears as though they don’t even believe that the world is 
warming due to human consumption and human activity when 
it comes to CO2 and nitrous oxide emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a host of information that has been made 
available to Canadians. We have a host of information that 
indicates very clearly that we need to move forward and we 
need to support the Kyoto Protocol. But we need to move 
forward in a way where Canadians and Saskatchewan people 
clearly understand what this means for them. 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2925 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recently had the opportunity to have a group 
called the Sun Ridge development come to my home and do a 
greenhouse gas emissions test on my home. And while much 
has been spoken about in terms of industry’s responsibilities 
and duty to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, not much has 
been said about we, as individual consumers, can do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my home was built in 1911; it’s an old home in 
the city of Saskatoon. I have a relatively new furnace. I have a 
relatively new water heater. I have done some work in terms of 
insulating my attic and my basement. So I have been doing 
some things to try and deal with the whole issue of cost 
effectiveness when it comes to energy consumption, but also 
when it comes to making my home more comfortable. 
 
Sun Ridge developments was able to show me, through the tests 
that they did on my home, that I can reduce my own greenhouse 
gas emissions in my house by 3 tonnes per annum. And I can do 
that — and also save myself $640 based on today’s present gas 
prices — I can do that by spending about $4,000. 
 
I can do further insulation work in my walls. I can do more 
work in terms of caulking my windows and my baseboards and 
making sure that my electrical outlets are properly insulated; by 
doing further insulation in my basement; by changing my water 
heater to a water heater that heats water as I use it; and also by 
changing some of my appliances, like my fridge. My fridge is 
20 years old and it’s not that energy efficient, Mr. Speaker. And 
there are now fridges available that can lower your electrical 
consumption, save you money, and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s so amazing is that hundreds of people 
are getting this kind of work done so that they can take some 
personal responsibility as we make our way towards those 
Kyoto Protocol targets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I like about the government’s 
resolution is that clearly we are committed to ensuring that 
Saskatchewan businesses, Saskatchewan citizens, the 
Saskatchewan economy is treated fairly and that we’re not 
going to be penalized because we are blessed with some of 
Canada’s resources — primary resources such as oil and gas, 
forestry, and elsewhere. And the resolution makes it very clear 
that we all need to be treated fairly as Canada moves towards 
the Kyoto Protocol targets come 2012, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other points that I would like to 
make but I would make these points to the people of this 
province. The Saskatchewan Party does not want to sign the 
Kyoto Protocol. They are against it. The Government of 
Saskatchewan supports the principles of the Kyoto Protocol and 
moving towards those 2012 targets. And we want to do it in a 
way where our citizens, our province, our socio-economic 
economy is treated fairly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For that reason, I will be opposing the amendment introduced 
by the members of the opposition where they stand opposed to 
Kyoto. And I will be supporting the motion put forward by my 
colleagues from P.A. (Prince Albert) and Athabasca where we 
support the 12-point plan and we support the principles of 
Kyoto in reaching those greenhouse gas emission reductions by 
the year 2012. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to be able to participate in this debate on this very 
important resolution and the amendment put forward by the 
official opposition by the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin my remarks though, I do want to 
welcome and congratulate the new member for Kindersley — 
welcome him to our caucus and to this legislature. He has 
already acquitted himself very, very well in terms of the work 
that we do as a caucus, and including our committee work and 
indeed was able to participate in his first standing committee 
meeting of the Crown Corporations Committee two weeks ago 
where we were asking some important questions — some on 
Kyoto in fact that week when SaskPower officials were there. 
And it’s certainly a pleasure for us to welcome him to the 
legislature in the first session of what will no doubt be a very 
long and rewarding career. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was contemplating what it was that I 
wanted to add to this debate — and there’s been much said; I’ve 
tried to listen closely to the comments from my own colleagues 
and from those of the government — but when contemplating 
what I would say today in regards to this resolution I did want 
to focus, Mr. Speaker, if I could, on the impact of this particular 
Protocol and the impact of this debate on my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re very fortunate in the constituency of Swift 
Current to have a very strong and vibrant oil and gas 
community. That particular sector of our economy in Swift 
Current contributes mightily to the success that we have. And 
even when times are a little thin — and for the most part those 
have been NDP times over the last 10 years — when times are a 
little thin in terms of the economy of Swift Current and area, we 
have at the least been able to rely on a strong and robust oil and 
gas sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of entrepreneurs, oil and gas 
entrepreneurs who have chosen to make Swift Current a home 
and I should pay tribute to them at the outset of these remarks, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve had some changes in our oil and gas 
industry of late. 
 
For the most part by the way, Mr. Speaker, it’s service 
companies, oil and gas service companies that we lay claim to 
in Swift Current and area. We’d like there to be more 
production companies in Swift Current and we’re hopeful that 
with the changes that we’ll be able to make, and because of the 
work of our energy critic, the member for Thunder Creek, that 
due to the changes we’ll be able to make in government we may 
be able to attract some producers as well to join the many 
service companies that are in Swift Current. 
 
I want to congratulate one company in particular that’s the 
product of an acquisition or a merger. There were two very 
dynamic service companies in Swift Current. One was Diamond 
oil well servicing, headed up by some young and aggressive and 
very solid entrepreneurs — one of whom I went to school with 
in Swift Current, and moved away for a time to Alberta and has 
come back to operate an oil service company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should point out that for Diamond, their head 



2926 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

office is in Swift Current and they have a shop in Medicine Hat 
as well. So there’s a company doing work in Alberta. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The other . . . there’s many, but probably the other major 
service company is a company called Sage Oil Well Services — 
and they’ve been in Swift Current for years and years — started 
by a number of individuals and not the least were Ted Hanlon 
and Len Stein, who was also the mayor of Swift Current for 
some considerable period of time. 
 
Anyway, those two companies have come together to form a 
very strong and dynamic oil servicing company. And that 
particular new company and many, and I would say almost all 
of the other oil and gas service companies in Swift Current, are 
very, very, very concerned about the Kyoto Protocol. They are 
paying attention to the debate here. And of course they were 
paying disappointed but close attention to the vote yesterday in 
the House of Commons to ratify the accord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are the employer of so many young people, 
the employers of so many young people in our community. I 
take a look at the parents of many of the friends of my children 
in elementary school, and so many of them are working either 
indirectly or directly as a result of the presence of a strong oil 
and gas sector in our community. 
 
So when the Kyoto accord debate ramped up in the country and 
when it became clear that this government was going to be 
sending mixed messages on the issue, I made a point of 
contacting them, as many of those oil and gas service 
companies I could by way of a letter. And I just highlighted 
what it was we knew about the Kyoto Protocol and about its 
failings, and also about this government’s position on the 
accord. 
 
And I enclosed with that letter a petition and encouraged them 
to have that petition signed by employees or friends or 
themselves, if they had a concern. And I want to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, the response has been overwhelming — the number of 
petitions we have received in our office and have had the 
chance to present them in this legislature, at least a few them. 
 
And their concerns are the concerns that you’ve heard from this 
side of the House. Their concerns though also, Mr. Speaker, are 
the concerns that you heard raised even by our Minister of 
Industry in the province — concerns I would say not shared 
frankly by many of his caucus colleagues, but concerns that he 
has made a valiant effort to try to put forward in this debate and 
in handling this particular file as a minister. 
 
In the letter that I sent out to our oil and gas people in Swift 
Current, Mr. Speaker, we began the letter by highlighting . . . or 
rather we ended the letter I think is how it turned out in the end, 
by highlighting a quote from a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) Saskatchewan Web site dated October 28, 2002. 
And CBC was trying to characterize where the Premier stands 
on the issue of Kyoto. And I’m quoting their Web site, Mr. 
Speaker. Their Web site says: 
 

Calvert says he supports Kyoto in principle. Calvert says he 
does not support Alberta’s court challenge to Ottawa’s 

proposed ratification of the deal. 
 
Combine that statement with the fact that the previous speaker, 
the member for Nutana, came out in the Leader-Post and The 
StarPhoenix, I believe on October 18, strongly supporting and 
calling on her government to ratify Kyoto, and she was joined 
in that position by the member for Greystone. 
 
How in the world can the oil and gas community of this 
province, those that create so many jobs, those that attract so 
much investment, those that pay so many taxes — corporate 
income taxes and capital taxes and are the reason why 
employees can pay income tax and sales tax — how in the 
world can those oil and gas companies have any comfort at all 
with this government that they are united with respect to the 
need to send out a strong signal of support for their industry 
when senior members of their caucus, members who have been 
in the NDP cabinet, come out and say that Kyoto is fine; ratify 
it — take the blind leap of faith, notwithstanding that we don’t 
know how this will be implemented — notwithstanding any of 
that, ratify it. That’s what those members said. 
 
Combine that with what the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan said, which is that he likes Kyoto in principle and 
that he wouldn’t join any sort of a court challenge put forward 
by the province of Alberta and then ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
why those business men and women in this province, in my 
hometown, with all of their employees, would have any faith at 
all that an NDP government was interested in their issue, was 
interested in defending them, that an NDP government was 
prepared to fight for them. Mr. Speaker, they don’t believe it. 
That’s why they signed the petition. 
 
Our petition basically calls on this government to stiffen its 
resolve. But as you’ve heard from the previous speaker, far 
from that this NDP government is very wishy-washy on this 
issue. 
 
And it isn’t the only oil and gas issue they’ve been 
wishy-washy on. You know, Mr. Speaker, earlier this fall the 
Minister of Industry made an announcement about oil royalties. 
And the original announcement I think portrayed something 
much greater than what we actually got, but nonetheless you 
could argue that in some respects it was a step in the right 
direction and to that extent the opposition said . . . gave the 
minister credit. 
 
But do you know what happened shortly after that, Mr. 
Speaker? The same member that just spoke, the member from 
Nutana, again commented in the media that . . . or at least 
questioned the wisdom of cutting royalties in the oil and gas 
sector, once again sending the mixed message to the oil and gas 
industry in Swift Current and in southwest Saskatchewan and 
across the province. And the mixed message is, is that there’s 
one minister — apparently one minister — that’s prepared to 
recognize the importance of this industry and maybe fight for it, 
although now he’s going to be supporting a very much watered 
down NDP resolution. But at least they would have had some 
hope before. 
 
And then all of the other comments, including the Premier’s 
comments and comments from senior members of the 
legislature from that side of the House, that would give the 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2927 

 

industry in Swift Current every reason to believe that this 
government doesn’t feel comfortable in its support of the oil 
and gas industry. And we see it time and time again. 
 
We also see it on the issue of uranium, frankly. On one hand 
you have some members paying lip service to companies like 
COGEMA and Cameco. But we know, Mr. Speaker, that 
members across the way, senior members across the way would 
rather that the province had nothing to do with the development 
of uranium. They would rather that the province had nothing to 
do with the jobs and the economic impact that can come from 
that industry. 
 
We’ve had mixed messages from this government. They pay lip 
service on one hand to the industry. But we know that the left 
wing of their party that frankly seems to be running the show 
these days, including on the issue of Kyoto, that send the mixed 
messages to the people of the province. 
 
And that’s also why, Mr. Speaker, even though they’ve heard 
from the Minister of Industry and others, that’s why the oil and 
gas industry in this province doesn’t trust them. They don’t trust 
them, Mr. Speaker. That’s why areas that have the oil and gas 
industry in their constituencies vote for the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker; that’s why they’re going to continue to vote for 
the Saskatchewan Party — because they don’t trust them. 
 
This government appears very willing to cash the cheques that 
the oil and gas industry sends in. You know, Mr. Speaker, in . . . 
since 1998, Swift Current area, the southwest area as defined by 
Energy and Mines or what used to be Energy and Mines, sent in 
$80 million in land sales revenue to this government . . . 80 . . . 
it was about $88 million. 
 
You know what they’re starting to ask now, Mr. Speaker, after 
sending all of these cheques in to this NDP government, helping 
them to balance . . . or at least at one point balance their budget, 
but helping to keep their deficit to about a half a billion dollars? 
After all of that, Mr. Speaker, they’re wondering why in the 
world is this government sending mixed messages on Kyoto 
when the government understands what it could do to that 
industry, Mr. Speaker. They understand what this accord will 
do to the industry. 
 
Well the Minister of the Environment says there are no mixed 
messages. Then why won’t he and his colleagues stand up and 
send a united message that they oppose the ratification of 
Kyoto, Mr. Speaker? Why don’t they support our amendment? 
All he’s got to do is stand up and vote for our amendment then 
and that would be a clear message to the oil and gas industry 
that we oppose . . . they oppose the ratification of the Kyoto 
Protocol. 
 
He can’t have it both ways. He can’t snipe from the sidelines, 
Mr. Speaker, and say there is no mixed message while his 
Premier, the member from Nutana, and the member for 
Greystone send out mixed messages to the industry. He can’t 
have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you want to get an idea, Mr. Speaker, there was a letter 
to the editor in The Southwest Booster called “Kyoto and 
needed action ”. That’s our local paper and it’s about Kyoto. 
And the author of this letter, Mr. Speaker, by all accounts, 

apparently is considering or is already a candidate for the NDP 
nomination, the provincial nomination. 
 
And here’s what he says, Mr. Speaker. He frankly thinks that 
Kyoto should be ratified. He agrees with the member for 
Greystone and the member for Nutana and other members of 
the NDP that think it should simply be ratified. In his letter, Mr. 
Speaker, here’s how he characterizes those who are very wary 
of Kyoto, who don’t agree that we should ratify the accord. And 
I quote. He says: 
 

The short-sighted, myopic view of conservative fossil fuel 
dinosaurs like Wall are little more than the traditional 
opposition to change that will benefit humanity. 

 
Fossil fuel dinosaurs, Mr. Speaker. So I guess this young NDP 
individual isn’t just referring to myself. I guess he’s referring to 
the very same oil and gas companies, the same entrepreneurs 
that every day risk dollars and risk investment to create jobs and 
to bring taxes to the government’s treasury. They’re all fossil 
fuel dinosaurs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you want to get to the truth of what this government thinks of 
the oil and gas sector, it’s right here in this letter. They think 
that they’re fossil fuel dinosaurs. They’re happy to cash the 
cheques and keep their deficit to about a half a billion dollars by 
cashing their cheques. They’re happy to take $88 million out of 
Swift Current in land sales alone, Mr. Speaker; and by the way, 
not return even a single dime towards a new hospital — not a 
single dime. They’re happy to do that. But here’s what they 
think of them. They think that they’re fossil fuel dinosaurs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you this side of the House 
understands that those men and women that are creating those 
jobs and paying those taxes are the only reason in this . . . one 
of the only reasons that we still have a chance in this province 
to recover from six decades of socialism. That’s what we 
understand on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think other colleagues have 
highlighted as well the impact of Kyoto in terms of our 
electricity bill, that bills will increase by 25 per cent or more. 
Mr. Speaker, they understand that IPSCO’s talking about 
leaving the province of Saskatchewan and moving to the 
province of Alberta. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think they also understand that 
Kyoto could cost, according to studies, every family $2,700 per 
year. And I also think people do understand that we need, we do 
need to take a look at the issue of greenhouse gases. We do 
need a made-in-Canada and a made-in-Saskatchewan solution. 
We do need to be serious about the issue. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what they also need to hear from their 
government is that the government understands that killing the 
goose that’s laying the only golden egg they’ve got going for 
them right now is no way to afford, for government to afford 
the kinds of environmental measures that can in fact 
meaningfully clean up the environment here in Saskatchewan 
and across Canada. 
 



2928 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, because it would . . . because the Kyoto 
Protocol holds so much potential harm and danger for my 
constituents, the people who gave me their trust to represent 
their views, I will be supporting the amendment that was put 
forward by the member for Thunder Creek and seconded by the 
member of Carrot River Valley. And, Mr. Speaker, because it’s 
a wishy-washy, indefinite statement from the government, I will 
be opposing the NDP’s resolution on this issue. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise in support of the motion and will be opposing the 
amendment. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, I was approached by an individual 
at an institution here in Regina and he said, you know, I just 
don’t know what to make of this Kyoto matter, this Kyoto 
business; I don’t understand it. 
 
And I might say that’s not a unique sentiment in Regina or for 
that matter in Saskatchewan. I think one of the other members 
of the House, the member from Arm River, said as much last 
night when he said: 
 

As I travel around my constituency it’s almost 100 per cent 
of the people that are against Kyoto, basically because they 
don’t know what’s going on. 

 
(16:00) 
 
And this gentleman too, he wasn’t expressing opposition. He 
was just expressing the sentiment that he was not familiar with 
the issue and did not know what was going on. 
 
I didn’t get much time to reply. He was busy; I was busy. But I 
would like to make some comments now and if you like, Mr. 
Speaker, if I might be taken . . . take that liberty of addressing 
my comments as much to him as I might be addressing them to 
the Chair. 
 
To me Kyoto is about science and it’s about climate. And that’s 
not to say that I know much about science, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t 
take physics in high school and I’m no scientist. There’s times I 
wish I had taken physics in high school, but I’m no scientist. 
But then we’re not elected to be experts in subjects in this 
Legislative Assembly. That’s not the nature of elected 
representation. There are very few experts inside this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
We do tend, however, to rely on the words of and the evidence 
of authorities that’s presented to us, whether it’s people in the 
provincial government administration or whether it’s other 
authorities. We need to take their words, we need to take their 
evidence and then make what we’d like to call informed 
decisions that are in the best interests of the public. 
 
And what we bring to this is, hopefully, some sense of maturity 
or wisdom so that we, at the end of the day, make the right 
decision. That’s not to say we always make the right decision. 
That’s not to say that the so-called informed matters that are 

brought for us by experts are always the right matters or the 
right information, but it’s up to us to try and make the right 
decisions. 
 
I think Tommy Douglas probably said that best some years 
back when there was some exchange in this very Chamber, and 
he said something to the effect that, you know, I don’t have to 
be a chicken to know how to make an omelette, Mr. Speaker. 
And I guess in this Kyoto matter it’s something like . . . it’s 
similar. I’m not a scientist but I have to nevertheless make 
decisions about something that is, at the end of the day, a 
scientific matter and a scientific matter about the climate. 
 
What do I know, Mr. Speaker? I know that the overwhelming 
majority of scientists agree, the overwhelming majority — and 
the words that are used sometimes is the preponderance of 
evidence — they agree that in part the earth’s temperature is 
increasing, the climate is warming because of man-made 
greenhouse gas emissions, largely carbon dioxide and methane, 
Mr. Speaker. And these scientists say we have to reduce these 
emissions if we want to slow down or hopefully reverse global 
warming, Mr. Speaker. And again, it’s the overwhelming 
majority of scientists that are saying that. 
 
That’s not to say that there aren’t scientists who take a different 
point of view. I think that just about in every endeavour in the 
world that you can think of where scientists become involved, 
there will be various points of view expressed by scientists. But 
in this case, the overwhelming majority agree. 
 
And again, that’s not to say that there aren’t scientists who take 
a different point of view. I think even if you were to say that, 
for example, that everyone would agree, or most doctors would 
agree, that babies come to us because they’re delivered by a 
nurse and a doctor and a mother’s involved, there will still be 
somebody in this world, Mr. Speaker, who’ll take the point of 
view that no, babies are delivered by a stork. Well those would 
be the funny science people, Mr. Speaker, but there would be 
somebody. 
 
I think even some years after Columbus and then others who 
sailed around the world, there were still people who believed, 
no, the earth was flat. And in fact there may well be people 
today who believe that the earth is flat. So I say that by way of 
saying that no matter what the overwhelming evidence is on 
something, there will always be somebody who disagrees, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But in this particular case, it is very, very clear that there is a 
consensus in the world scientific community that the great 
majority of scientists agree that global warming is an issue and 
that we should do something about that. 
 
Why is it a problem? You know it’s hard today, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’ve got to admit that I’m feeling a little ambivalent about 
global warming when you have a beautiful day like we have 
today where it’s, I think in Regina plus 5 degrees. And it’s at 
least I looked . . . the last time I looked it was a beautiful, sunny 
day. So I’ve got to confess, there are days that I’m a little 
ambivalent about global warming. And who wouldn’t be 
ambivalent when you get falls that are much nicer, you get 
shorter winters, the winter is a much nicer winter. 
 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2929 

 

But at the end of the day the problem is that we know from the 
scientists that if this trend continues that the earth’s oceans will 
rise, that there will be flooding in global cities around the 
world, as one example. We know, for example, from their 
scientific evidence that areas such as Saskatchewan would turn 
into desert. And I don’t know whether the droughts of the last 
two years are part of a trend that’s moving us in that direction, 
that might be something else. But again that’s the scientific 
evidence. 
 
So even though all of us might wish for nicer winters, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact remains that the global warming will result in 
horrendous, horrendous problems for all of us. And that I think 
we would agree that if we knew or that we know that because of 
global warming Saskatchewan will become a desert over years 
and if there’s a way that we can act to prevent that, that we 
would do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I accept the conclusions and the call to action by the world 
scientific community who say there is a problem, you need to 
do something, you need to act responsibly. Again, I wish it 
weren’t so but the fact remains that this is an issue and we need 
to act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know at the end of the day I’m elected here to 
make responsible decisions. And in making those responsible 
decisions I have to rely on the evidence that’s presented to me 
and I have to rely on the information that’s presented to me so I 
can make informed decisions in a responsible manner, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s what I plan to do. 
 
I accept the science. My colleagues on this side of the House, I 
think those that have spoken to it also accept the science that 
says that we do have a problem with greenhouse gas emission. 
So I think it’s a legitimate question for people at home to say 
well what is this all about? It is a legitimate question for them to 
ask decision makers and their elected representatives, do you 
accept the scientific consensus that there is a problem that needs 
to be fixed? Yes or no? No maybes, yes or no? Do you agree 
that there is a problem that needs to be fixed? 
 
I am particularly interested, given this question, as to what it is 
that people on the other side of the House are saying because 
they’ve also been involved in this debate. And there, I’m not so 
sure that they agree that there is even a problem. Because 
almost all of their speakers who have spoken to this issue try to 
somehow minimize that there is a problem. Their very first 
speaker, the member for Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker, in his 
remarks he doesn’t say . . . what he says is that the scientific 
community cannot even agree as to whether or not any global 
warming is occurring outside of normal cyclic temperature 
swings or if so, if it is man made or caused by natural events. 
 
Well that’s not what the scientific community as a whole is 
saying. Some scientists may be saying that, but the great 
majority of scientists are not saying that, Mr. Speaker. So now 
he’s saying that that’s what’s guiding his intervention in this 
debate, that there is really no problem that needs to be fixed. 
 
Their next speaker on this, the member for Carrot River Valley, 
he doesn’t agree that there’s a problem. He says there is no 
consensus, Mr. Speaker, on the theory that humanity is causing 
significant climate change. So he doesn’t agree that there’s any 

problem that’s being caused by us. So if he doesn’t agree that 
there’s any problem, I’m not sure why it is that he would even 
want to speak to the solution that’s put before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of their other speakers, the member for Humboldt, she 
doesn’t even say . . . she doesn’t even say or even address the 
question of any, any problem whatsoever. She just launches into 
a diatribe or an attack on the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the member for Arm River, the member for Arm River, he 
says that global warming itself, basically the scientific 
community is split 50/50 on whether there is . . . if this will 
even address the problem with that. They’re split right down the 
centre on that. 
 
Well that’s not my understanding and that’s not the 
understanding of anybody, Mr. Speaker, that seriously 
examines this issue. Again, the scientific community is very, 
very clear on this. There is a problem. It needs to be fixed. It’s 
man made and the solutions have to be man made as well, Mr. 
Speaker. This is not, this is not a question of the scientific 
community being split. Again there are some specific scientists 
who always take a contrarian position and that’s the science that 
I guess members of the opposition subscribe to — the so-called 
funny science people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it goes on. The member for Kindersley who in his maiden 
speech . . . and I want to congratulate the member for 
Kindersley both on his election and also on what I thought was 
a well organized and well delivered presentation, although I 
disagree with some of his points. He too says he questions the 
validity of the science. He said the third point focuses on the 
validity of the scientists and in this, in this the scientific 
community is split on. Well I don’t think they’re split on this, 
Mr. Speaker. I think again the great majority of opinion in the 
scientific community is we have a problem and the problem is 
man made. And there has to man-made solutions to this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then we get to the member for Estevan. She says scientists 
don’t agree. They can’t assure us that there is a trend to global 
warming. So she too denies that there is a problem. In fact she 
goes so far as to say Kyoto does not deal with pollution, it deals 
with greenhouse gas emissions. Now I’m not sure how to make 
that distinction myself, Mr. Speaker, but I guess she does that. 
 
And then we go on further, Mr. Speaker, as we listened last 
night to the Leader of the Opposition. And the Leader of the 
Opposition did not mention the science whatsoever, not once, 
not at all did he say there is a problem, or there isn’t a problem, 
here’s where I come down on the problem. He didn’t mention 
it. He just launched into a diatribe, an attack on anyone who is 
opposed to his point of view. And he said, in fact, this is not a 
debate about being environmentally responsible and then 
launched into an attack heaping scorn on others who might have 
something to say, using words such as fanatical, misguided, 
ridiculous, ridiculous again, radical, not being honest. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been here a few years now 
and you might say I’ve been around the block a few times and I 
have seen a fair number of party leaders in my day, Mr. 
Speaker, make interventions in this House. But I daresay I have 
never seen such an intervention by a party leader that was so 



2930 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

shallow, Mr. Speaker, and that was so negative, as I witnessed 
last night by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
And I’d say it’s not a very helpful intervention. It’s not 
something that helps us deal with what is, we believe, 
scientifically proven a major issue for us, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I agree that there is a problem. And I guess the 
question I would have and the people of Saskatchewan would 
have, how can you talk about what solution you will or will not 
agree to, whether it’s Kyoto or made in Saskatchewan, if you 
don’t think that there is a problem. 
 
If they don’t believe there is a problem, then why would they 
address themselves as to what the solution should be, Mr. 
Speaker. And it seems to me, in this particular case, they’re 
trying to have it both ways, if you like, resolutely riding off in 
both directions. 
 
They say on the one hand well, you know, we don’t like the 
solution that’s put forward, we need to have a different kind of 
solution; but oh, if we’re really pressed, we don’t even agree 
that there is a problem. And I want to make that clear because 
there are many, many people both in Saskatchewan, throughout 
Canada, and in the world that will be interested to know that 
notwithstanding what it is that the majority of scientific 
evidence suggests, they do not believe it one bit whatsoever. 
They don’t believe there is a problem. We can simply continue 
on the way we are; that whatever is happening — climate 
change that man made — is not sort of part of their lexicon, is 
not part of their vocabulary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:15) 
 
But this is what the opposition typically does. They try to sit on 
both sides of the fence or as I said they resolutely ride off in 
both directions at the same time. Here they say, well we — you 
know, in all their speeches — we don’t agree with the signs, we 
don’t think there is a problem. But yet here their resources 
critic, the member for Thunder Creek, writes to the Prime 
Minister and he says the official opposition Saskatchewan Party 
supports the goal of the Kyoto accord to reduce atmospheric 
greenhouse gas concentrations but then goes on to say, of 
course we want you to reconsider the government’s position on 
the Kyoto accord and we oppose what you’re trying to do. 
 
So here again they’re trying to have it one way, trying to have it 
another way, trying to have it every which way. But again I 
guess I just don’t understand. If you don’t agree that there is a 
problem, if you don’t agree that there is a problem then how can 
you get fixed on what the solution should be, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this particular issue I dare say that there is 
much to be done. Much has been done. The provincial 
government has been taking action over the course of the last 
years and months. We have moved with greater urgency in the 
area of energy conservation to see what we can do to help 
institutions to conserve energy because if you conserve energy 
that’s something that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
We have moved in the area of ethanol, Mr. Speaker, to develop 
an ethanol industry and at the end of the day to have a situation 
in Saskatchewan where ethanol will be an additive in all of our 
gasoline because we know if we do that we can also 

significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
We have moved, and people will know, in the area of wind 
power. And I hope that we see more of that in that particular 
area. And there are other areas that we have moved in, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Individually there are things that we can do in our own homes, 
whether it’s turning off some lights, whether it’s getting a 
thermostat that turns down the heat automatically at night and 
during the day when we’re not at home. There are many, many 
things that we can do and people can get information from 
many sources that we can do on an individual basis. 
 
There is much debate about the impact of this accord and what 
it might potentially have on the Saskatchewan and Canadian 
economies. And we’ve heard a great deal of that, I think, from 
both sides of the House. 
 
I might add though that it’s not always negative to say that 
trying to conserve energy means that there will be job losses 
because I just mentioned ethanol and we know that jobs will be 
created in the area of ethanol. But ethanol will also help us to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. So there is an example of 
where you reduce greenhouse gas emissions, you help the 
environment, but at the same time you’re creating more jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are taking the position that we are . . . we think 
we need to work with Ottawa and the provinces. We put 
forward a number of principles to do that. Those principles 
were in fact put forward by Saskatchewan. But again, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to do what’s best for Saskatchewan, but again 
we also accept that there is a problem. 
 
And I guess this debate is essentially about, yes we agree there 
is a problem. And if we agree there is a problem, how is it that 
we should move forward to work with Ottawa and the other 
provinces to see what would be the best solution, not only for 
Canada but also for Saskatchewan and in a way that minimizes 
the impact on the Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say that if you agree if that there is a problem 
with global warming, that we need to . . . that if you accept the 
fact of Kyoto and the Kyoto accord, that somehow you’re a 
socialist, Mr. Speaker. Well all I can say if acting responsibly 
means you’re a socialist, Mr. Speaker, then I guess I would 
have to say that I too am a socialist, Mr. Speaker. And I will be 
voting in favour of the motion and opposed to the amendment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
have looked forward to entering the debate on this important 
issue. Mr. Speaker, as many members of this Assembly have 
said during the last two days, this is a very complex but a very 
important issue. 
 
It deals with having countries of the world, citizens of our 
country and of our province having to make decisions on . . . 
based on imperfect science — science that is . . . suggests that 
something is happening in the climate and also there is some 
evidence that it just may be a natural occurrence. And so as I 
said, it is certainly difficult to make some decisions that will 
have long-lasting and significant effects on our country and on 



December 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2931 

 

our province. 
 
The other complexity to this issue, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
benefits of the decisions we make around the world, we really 
won’t see those benefits for another 50 to 100 years. And to 
further complicate things, it’s fairly difficult to determine the 
impact of doing nothing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, from a personal standpoint, I’ve grappled with 
these issues and I have read as much as I possibly could on the 
issue. I’ve done research. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I hired some 
additional staff to do some research for me so that I could be 
informed on the issue. 
 
And I guess when it comes down to whether you believe the 
science and that sort of thing and where you come down on this 
whole issue, you have to look at it in as unbiased a manner as 
you possibly can and then you also have to look at some of the 
personal decisions or from a personal side. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last night I had the occasion to introduce 
three of our grandchildren and some of my remarks will be in 
that context. I really don’t think, in my lifetime, if I should live 
to be the average life of a Saskatchewan citizen, that I will see a 
lot of damaging effects from climate change. But the question is 
what kind of a world will I leave for my grandchildren, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is something that has perplexed me. 
 
I realize our time is short and I have a lot of information. So I 
think I will just basically cut through it and get to the points that 
I feel is important, because many of the things that I had 
intended to say, Mr. Speaker, have already been said by other 
members. 
 
The way I view this whole debate on Kyoto, there’s really three 
parts to it, in my opinion. The one portion that has been debated 
and continues to be debated in the country and within the 
province is: should Canada ratify the Kyoto Protocol? That’s 
one debate. And really I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s really kind of a 
moot debate because our federal government, our cabinet has 
decided that Canada will ratify and we will be part of the 
international treaty. 
 
The second part of this whole issue is the federal 
implementation plan and that certainly is not a moot point. It is 
a very important point because that is . . . now that our federal 
government has decided to implement, to ratify the treaty, there 
is a whole lot of questions. There’s many issues surrounding the 
federal government’s implementation plan. 
 
And the third point, the third issue in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, 
is that at some point we in this province have to face reality. 
And we have a couple of choices. We can say, well we’re going 
to continue to fight the federal government’s decision and 
devote all our energies in that arena; or we can face reality and 
say, okay, now that they’ve decided to ratify, maybe we should 
devote some of our energies to get the best deal possible for 
Saskatchewan. And I think that is very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Basically I think to understand this whole area we have to talk a 
little bit about what Kyoto is, and we’ve heard many 
explanations from members on both sides of the House. I think 
probably the only thing that I could contribute at this point in 

time is the common belief and the common statements that have 
been made is that Canada . . . that the Kyoto agreement has 
called on countries to reduce their greenhouse gases by 5 per 
cent below their 1990 levels. And in fact countries actually 
negotiated different targets — Canada being 6 per cent, the US 
(United States) actually negotiated a 7 per cent, and the EU 
(European Union) an 8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to say a few words around this whole issue of 
climate change and is it for real. And I think in order to do that I 
would like to look at some recent events and then look at some 
of the statistical evidence that’s out there in the world of 
science. I have made a point, Mr. Speaker, of asking groups that 
I encounter whether they feel the sun has more intensity now 
than it had, say, some 10 or 15 years ago. And it was 
interesting. I just completed a series of meetings with municipal 
councils and I asked that question and invariably people agreed, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a fair bit of science out there that says this climate 
change is for real. And, Mr. Speaker, I think if you look at it in 
an unbiased fashion I think the scientific evidence, at least from 
my opinion, I believe that there is something to global warming; 
and something that I think the international panel on climate 
change, I think they got it right. I believe President Bush asked 
the US National Academy of Sciences to review that panel’s 
work and they came back and reported to the president that by 
and large they had it right, that human activity is having an 
effect on our climate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize my time is somewhat short so I think I 
will forego some of the points I was going to make, except to 
say that in my opinion the recently unveiled federal 
implementation plan, I don’t believe is cast in stone. I believe 
that there is some room for negotiation. And I would . . . And 
that would bring me to what my concerns are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This implementation plan will . . . if we look at it from the 
Saskatchewan viewpoint, there will be some additional costs. 
There could . . . there will be some lost opportunities, perhaps 
some job losses, and definitely extra costs to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. But I think, Mr. Speaker, that there also is the 
flip side to that coin or at least there could be a flip side to that 
coin, and I think there could be some benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of those areas where I think there could be some very 
significant benefits is in that whole area of agricultural carbon 
sinks. But, Mr. Speaker, that is a very complex issue. And my 
real fear is that no one on that side of the House really 
understands the issue, nobody’s on top of that issue, and 
nobody is in Ottawa negotiating with the federal government to 
make sure that the farmers of this province, in fact the farmers 
of Western Canada, gain the benefits of that particular issue. 
And I’m sure there are other issues. I just point that one out. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my real fear is that this NDP government is 
going to drop the ball on that issue. And as I said, that is only 
one issue in this whole debate and I’m sure there are others. My 
fear is that, that if we look at where this government has been 
and this whole issue, they haven’t participated in any of the 
conference of the parties. Other provinces like Quebec and 
Alberta had representatives there, making sure that their 
provincial viewpoint was part of the Canadian position. Even 



2932 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 2002 

 

Manitoba sent delegates to the conference of the parties. As far 
as I know, Saskatchewan hasn’t done anything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think what we’re really looking for . . . My biggest fear, 
and I hope it doesn’t come to pass, is that we’re going to end up 
with another situation like we did with the farm program AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), where this 
government said it’s a federal issue; it’s a federal responsibility; 
we don’t want anything to do with it. And we as Saskatchewan 
citizens had to deal with the effect of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would urge this government to get 
on . . . to get up to speed, to make sure that Saskatchewan’s 
interests are represented and that we get the best possible deal 
we possibly can. If we’re forced to live with this agreement, 
Mr. Speaker, we better make sure we get the most out of it, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The division bells rang from 16:34 until 16:40. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 
Kwiatkowski Heppner Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 
Eagles   
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
McMorris D’Autremont Bakken 
Wall Huyghebaert Dearborn 
Brkich Wiberg Weekes 
Harpauer Hart Allchurch 
 

Nays — 31 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
Hillson   
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 16:43 until 16:44. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 

Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
Hillson   
 

Nays — 22 
 

Kwiatkowski Heppner Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Huyghebaert 
Dearborn Brkich Wiberg 
Weekes Harpauer Hart 
Allchurch   
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:47. 
 
 


	Liza Percy Named Saskatchewan
	Junior Citizen of the Year
	National Builder Awards
	to Citizens of Ukrainian Heritage
	Liza Percy Named Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the Year
	National Builder Awards to Citizens of Ukrainian Heritage

