















































Hansard: May 07, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1221 
 May 7, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan disappointed by 
this government’s treatment of the snowmobile industry in this 
province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails and obtain funding 
for this through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, and mandatory trail permits on Crown land and 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registrations. 
 
And as is duty bound, you petitioners will ever pray. 

 
There are five petitions here, Mr. Speaker, and they are signed 
by citizens of Regina, Mistatim, Wadena, Yorkton, Melfort, 
Little Bear Lake, Lower Fishing Lake, Codette, Gronlid, 
Saskatoon, Choiceland. 
 
And I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about 
the sexual abuse and exploitation of children in our province. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of Saskatchewan that regards the long-term 
care fee increases in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on this petition 
and they are from the two communities of Elrose and 

Rosetown. And I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
from people in the province who are concerned about the 
Snowmobile Association: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails and obtain funding 
for this through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown lands and 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registration. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions are from Yorkton, 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Muenster, Humboldt, Lipton, Rouleau, 
Mistatim, Nipawin, Meadow Lake, Regina, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens who continue to express their 
concern about long-term care fees. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 

Signatures this afternoon on this petition are all from the city of 
Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with long-term care fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Yorkton and 
the town of Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from concerned citizens of Saskatchewan, concerned on the 
long-term care fee increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, from people in Regina. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with fee 
increases for long-term care services. And the prayer reads: 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Canora, Foam Lake, and West Bend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning insurance premium hikes and coverage 
reductions instituted by the crop insurance program this year 
through the direction of the provincial government. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage, in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed almost exclusively by 
producers in the Cabri area. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens who have ongoing 
concerns regarding the long-term care fees. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from my constituency, namely, the 
city of Estevan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent loss of life 
and injury and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people in the 
Sedley and Francis area. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the citizens from the good town of Davidson. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon I’d like to present on citizens who are concerned 
about the abuse of children through the sex trade in our 
province, and the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition concerning the abuse and exploitation of 
children through the sex trade. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
probably comes as no surprise to you today that I have a 
petition with citizens concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway No. 15, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And again the signatures demonstrate how well travelled this 
highway is. They are from Imperial, Kindersley, Watrous, 
Simpson, Manitou Beach, Englefeld, Pilot Butte, Saskatoon, 
and Regina. 
 
I so present. 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed 
by citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
the . . . Duck Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by concerned residents of the province. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from North 
Battleford and Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a petition from citizens that are very, very concerned 
still with what’s going to happen to long-term care fees in this 
province. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Meyronne, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 7, 11, 17, 18, 23, 24, 31, and 59. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 42 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: what was the name of each 
published departmental policy report, study, review, or 
consultant’s report undertaken by this department or its 
predecessor, the Department of Education and the 

Department of Post-Secondary Education, in the year 
2001-2002; and what was the cost of conducting each of 
these to the government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the same question for the years right 
back to the year 1992-1993. 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 42 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Government Relations: how many 
houses were relocated in Saskatchewan in the year 2000 
under the housing authority program; and further to that, 
where were these houses relocated from and where did they 
go? 
 
Also I have another question for . . . dealing with the year 
2001. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, a group of students from Arborfield School. 
These students are here today on a job shadow program, Mr. 
Speaker. They are all keenly interested in the legislative process 
and are hoping that they can learn as much as possible this 
afternoon and possibly meet a number of the MLAs (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly) as well. 
 
You will remember, Mr. Speaker, some of these students were 
the more enthusiastic of the participants during your visit to 
Arborfield. And I think from that afternoon, we actually have 
the premier and the leader of the opposition amongst the 
students. 
 
And I would ask each of them to stand in turn as I introduce 
them. Firstly we have Nicole Kapeller, grade 9. We have 
Megan Thoreson, grade 9; Bryant Campbell, grade 9; Bonnie 
Cummings, grade 12; James Vickaryous, grade 12. And they 
are accompanied today by my constituency assistant, Shelley 
McCrea and volunteer, Bridgette Spranger. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly, members, I would 
just like to express my own appreciation through, at this time, to 
the students for accommodating the Speaker on his visit to their 
school. And I do want to advise the members here that these 
students understand quite a bit about parliamentary process. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 16 grade 
12 students from the Sedley High School in my constituency. 
Their teacher is Sandi Robertson, chaperones Gwen Nell and 
Nadine Jensen. Some of the faces I recognize because they are 
pretty close to my home area, just about half a mile down the 
road. 
 
I have the opportunity also of meeting with them after QP 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

(question period) and hope to be able to explain some of the 
things that take place in this House during question period. And 
it’s only during question period, the other five hours of the day 
is quite a bit quieter. So we’ll certainly talk about that, I guess, 
with our meeting after question period. 
 
So I’d like all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Nursing Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The week of May 6 to 
12 is National Nursing Week. The theme this year is “Nurses 
Always There For You: Caring For Families.” Mr. Speaker, the 
first thing that needs to be said about Saskatchewan’s practising 
nurses is that this theme does say it all. 
 
As we publicly thank nurses, we also recognize that although 
their role in health care delivery is expanding into areas unheard 
of a few years ago, the basic philosophy of nursing remains the 
same — providing access to quality care. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Nurses provide the day-to-day care of patients and today that 
care expands far beyond traditional support and caring into 
educating family members, promoting healthy life habits and 
focusing on preventing illness. 
 
Nurses need a depth of knowledge and involvement in the 
community that takes into account diversity among families and 
family members. 
 
Nursing has evolved with the fundamental changes in society 
and will continue to evolve as needed. The focus of health care 
is shifting from in-patient treatment to improved community 
supports that include education and prevention. 
 
Nurses are providing these services in the health care system. 
They are educated not to just provide care but to also promote 
good health, to educate, and to work with individuals and 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses have always and will continue to play a 
critical role in delivering and maintaining our health and our 
health care system. National Nursing Week is one brief period 
to recognize this year-round contribution, and we thank all of 
our nurses for all that they do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nipawin Volunteer Recognized 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Marjorie Moisan of Nipawin was honoured for her years of 
volunteer service at the Nipawin Hospital Complex with 
permanent recognition on the Pineview Wall of Fame. Marjorie 
joins a select few individuals and groups singled out for 
outstanding volunteer contributions to the lives of residents and 
staff of the Nipawin Nursing Home. 

Marjorie, affectionately referred to as the queen bee of 
Pineview’s volunteers, was recently named the 2001 Volunteer 
Wall of Fame inductee at a special ceremony which featured 
tributes to this special volunteer. Joining her there was her 
husband of 42 years, Ernie, and mother, Dinah Smith, a 
Pineview resident. 
 
Her volunteer work began at Pineview Lodge 25 years ago 
when she was asked to do residents’ hair once a week. Then 10 
years ago, when her parents became residents at Pineview, she 
became much more involved in every aspect of volunteer work. 
These duties ranged from planting flowerbeds to serving on the 
long-term care accreditation committee. 
 
Marjorie, who was honoured earlier this winter for years of 
service with the Nipawin Junior Hawks hockey team, worked in 
the medical records department at the hospital for almost 20 
years. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Marjorie 
for her recent honour of being named 2001 Wall of Fame 
inductee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce 
Installs First Nations President 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ours is truly a 
province of firsts: first with hospitalization and medicare, the 
first Arts Board, the first bill of rights, the first Native law 
centre in Canada, first synchrotron in Canada, first province to 
give 18-year-old adults the right to vote, and even the first 
human-made mountain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday, I was proud to be present at another 
first — the installation of a First Nations president of a major 
Canadian city’s chamber of commerce. I’m even prouder that 
the city is Saskatoon. 
 
In the 95 years of the Saskatoon chamber’s history, this is the 
first time that over 30 Elders from Muskeg Lake First Nations 
were invited, the first ceremony where Chief Gilbert Ledoux 
spoke, and the first that added an honour song and traditional 
gift giving to the passing of the gavel. 
 
As a former city councillor and former Minister of Aboriginal 
Affairs, I am very familiar with the accomplishments of 
Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce president, Lester Lafond so I 
know that he is an excellent choice as well as an historic one. 
 
I am particularly impressed with his belief that the best way to 
solve many of society’s problems is through economic activity. 
As a First Nations leader, and as a business leader, Lester is the 
perfect person to promote the idea that the best social program 
is a job. 
 
Lester says that generally he is an optimist. Now that Lester 
Lafond is running the show in Saskatoon, I too am more 
optimistic than ever about my city’s progress towards economic 
opportunity and social harmony. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

 

North Battleford Youth Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday evening 
I, along with my colleagues, the members from Redberry Lake 
and Shellbrook-Spiritwood, were privileged to attend the Youth 
Business Excellence Awards in North Battleford. Their purpose 
is to link education and business to help young people find 
opportunity in their own community and in themselves. 
 
Ninety-four young people entered the competition in categories 
of special achievement, business plan, and business venture. It 
was very encouraging and exciting to hear about the 
accomplishments of our young entrepreneurs. It is truly 
amazing what imagination and a bit of encouragement can 
produce. 
 
This was a great step toward success in the business world for 
our future leaders. I would like to thank and congratulate the 
leaders and organizers of this successful venture, and I would 
like to ask all members to join me in congratulating our youth 
for their achievement and encouraging them in their future 
endeavours. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 5 to 11 is North 
American Occupational Safety and Health Week as observed in 
Canada, United States, and Mexico. This year’s theme is: 
Prevention is the Cure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a former safety officer myself I’m proud to 
point out that this is the 30th anniversary of Saskatchewan 
introducing the most comprehensive occupational health and 
safety legislation in North America. 
 
That legislation has worked. In fact, from 1977 to 2000 the 
time-loss injury rate in Saskatchewan has declined by more than 
35 per cent. WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) claims have 
declined by 28 per cent since 1972 alone. 
 
Today there are more than 4,000 active occupational health and 
safety committees in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We know 
health and safety in the workplace works, because we’ve got the 
data to prove it right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’re making even more improvements. This year we’ve 
added four new safety officers and Saskatchewan Labour and 
the Workers’ Compensation Board have developed an initiative 
called Work Safe Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite our best efforts, every year too many 
people are injured or become ill from workplace accidents. Too 
many are killed, too many are injured — one is too many. In the 
spirit of this Occupational Safety and Health Week, let us all 
recommit to making every workplace and every job as safe as 
we possibly can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wakaw Lake Canal Feasibility Study Released 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the town of 
Wakaw and the Wakaw Lake Canal Committee have announced 
the completion of a feasibility study into the development of a 
canal linking the town of Wakaw to Wakaw Lake. 
 
The study was overseen by a 12-person committee chaired by 
Ed Kidd of Wakaw. Other members of the committee were 
Daryl Rudichuk, Preston Kaleynuk, Lloyd Wederwer, Rick 
Kindrachuk, Ray Shevernoha, Russ Baker, Marge Biccum, 
Steve Skoworodko, Dave Kovach, Ben Nussbaum, and Diane 
Olchowski. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the study concluded that the canal project is 
technically feasible and has little or no negative impact on the 
environment. Preliminary tests of economic and financial 
feasibility indicate that, providing market efforts are successful, 
the project would be a real economic boost for the town of 
Wakaw and area, creating tourism and economic development. 
 
The plan includes a marina where boaters from the lake could 
moor, as well as a paved covered marketplace and residential 
lots that, once sold, would pay for the development. The next 
step is for the town to establish a canal corporation to develop a 
business plan and try to attract developers. 
 
Congratulations to the people of Wakaw and area for their 
innovative ideas and for acting on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Comedy Duo on New Television Show 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
write down this Web site address, www.zed.cbc.ca. As soon as 
we are finished for today’s business, go find that address — on 
your home computer of course, Mr. Speaker — follow the 
directions and then vote for the entry by the Regina comedy duo 
of James Whittingham and Kevin Allardyce. 
 
Let me back up just a bit. CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) TV is launching a new late night series called ZeD 
TV. The producers have chosen three segments by James and 
Kevin of a pilot program called Screwheads — don’t ask me 
why. Their segments were among 12 which were chosen from 
over 1,200 applicants. The people’s network is showing these 
segments on late night TV with the idea of eventually deciding 
the nature of the programming which will run in the fall. 
 
I mention the Web site address because we can vote for our 
favourite pilot. Mr. Speaker, I believe in cheering for the 
hometown team, so I think it’s worth a moment to give 
Screwheads a boost. 
 
Viewers of Regina Cable TV will remember James and Kevin 
from their popular show, daringly called The James and Kevin 
Show which ran between 1995 and 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, we have in our small province a 
very active, very creative group of film and video makers and 
artists. Kevin and James are among them. Let’s show them our 
support and let’s vote for those Screwheads at www.zed.cbc.ca. 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Response to United States Farm Subsidies 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
extremely disappointed in the response from the federal 
Liberals. I understand that Lyle Vanclief has now said there is 
no commitment to new money from Ottawa. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers, as we all know, are under a massive 
attack from an increase in US (United States) farm subsidies 
and the federal Liberal government is now waving the white 
flag. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened this morning at the ag ministers’ 
conference? Why did it end in complete failure for 
Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I would want to say to the Leader of the Opposition 
that I would hope that we wouldn’t prejudge the results of the 
meeting that has taken place in Ottawa. I think it’s very clear 
from comments that our Agriculture minister has made that 
there hasn’t, at this time, been a commitment to the support of 
the agricultural community as it relates to the trade action that 
was taken by the American government. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that the national government has 
heard and recognized the call from this legislature, from the 
government motion that we are looking for action as it relates to 
support for the agriculture community, the agriculture 
producers here in our province. 
 
I have spoken with Minister Goodale. I can say that we are 
waiting for a report from our Minister of Agriculture. I know 
that his position was that of the Government of Saskatchewan 
and it was put very clearly and very strongly to the federal 
government and to his provincial counterparts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe the 
minister is trying to be very positive but the public news is not 
very good. We understand that there’s been no movement at all, 
up to this point, by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also heard that if any new money does 
come, the Agriculture minister, the federal minister, Mr. 
Vanclief, says it will have to be cost shared 60/40 with the 
provinces. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, North Dakota isn’t picking up 40 per cent of 
the cost of the new US farm Bill for the $73 billion of increased 
spending in the United States. And for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 
Quebec, the province of Quebec doesn’t pick up 40 per cent for 
the bailouts for Bombardier. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s only agriculture where it appears that the 
federal Liberal government is wanting to pass on responsibility 
to the provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are the federal government . . . why is the 
federal Liberals appearing to ignore and abandon Canadian 
farmers, and what are the ag ministers doing to prevent 
complete failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say 
that we have as government taken a very firm position as it 
relates to support for our farmers. We have relayed our 
concerns to the federal government; we have asked for them to 
join us here in Saskatchewan to hear people of Saskatchewan, 
to hear people from this legislature make representation with 
respect to the impact that the American actions have taken on 
our farming community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not, from our perspective, a 60/40 
cost-share initiative. This is a trade action that was taken by a 
national government, the American government, and the 
support that needs to come to the Canadian agricultural 
community, the Saskatchewan agricultural community, has to 
be a Canadian response, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is not, Mr. Speaker, a matter of us sitting back and waiting 
for a cost-shared program. This program is the responsibility of 
the national government. We have said that, our Agriculture 
minister has said that, and our Premier will say that, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is saying this in 
the House but we need to know what is going to move the issue 
forward. Mr. Speaker, we have not gained any ground up to this 
point, and in fact the information seems to indicate that we may 
be slipping in regards to getting the required and desired 
response from the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve been calling for more action to 
force Ottawa to listen. We believe that we need to develop a 
common front. Saskatchewan farmers are hearing a lot of talk 
from the federal and the provincial governments, but there’s no 
action. And again it appears, unless the minister can bring new 
information to the House, that we are being ignored by Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier going to do, what is the 
provincial Minister of Agriculture going to do, to get Ottawa’s 
attention more than just speaking here in the House today? 
What is the government across the way going to do to force the 
federal government to live up to their responsibilities for 
Canadian agriculture? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I can say that our 
Agriculture minister isn’t here bellowing from his chair as the 
Leader of the Opposition is. I can say that he is actively 
pursuing solutions with his provincial counterparts and with the 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

 

federal minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those discussions are taking place. The minister 
will report when he returns from Ottawa. I can say that our 
Premier is actively involved, Mr. Speaker. We intend to ensure 
that first ministers across Western Canada can speak and will 
speak with a united voice. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this is more than just a 
Saskatchewan initiative. This is a large trade initiative that 
needs to be managed and needs to be thought through in terms 
of process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the federal government has indicated to us 
that they intend to join us here in Saskatchewan to hear 
Saskatchewan people. We are in the process and will continue 
to be on the process until we’ve come to an agreement with our 
federal counterparts to find a process that will work, that will 
ensure Saskatchewan’s voice is heard to ensure that our 
farmers’ position and our farmers’ concerns are put forward, 
and that we find a solution that the national government can 
bring to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Effect on Agriculture of Government Policies 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
can be no doubt that the federal government is not living up to 
its responsibilities to the producers of this province. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan farmers are telling the Premier that 
his government is not living up to its responsibilities either. 
 
This morning APAS (Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan) released an open letter to the Premier. And it 
says, and I quote: 
 

On behalf of the farmers and ranchers of Saskatchewan, I 
would like to express our dismay and frustration 
concerning recent decisions of your government that affect 
crop insurance and the education tax programs. These 
decisions have had a negative impact on farm families, 
many of which are already struggling with low incomes 
and an impending drought. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough that Saskatchewan farmers have a 
drought and massive US subsidies to deal with, but they’re also 
under attack by their own NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government. Why is the NDP attacking the producers of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the member 
would have gone on in the open letter to the Premier by the 
Agricultural Producers Association, the letter also says, it says: 
 

We fully appreciate the increase . . . (contrary to what the 
opposition members have said). We fully appreciate the 
increased contribution of the provincial government and the 
impact of higher prices . . . (in the) production on the 
program. We also understand the role of the federal 
government in clawing back funds that were advanced to 

Saskatchewan’s safety net package last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that quite well summarizes the complete 
picture. The reason . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the reason for the increase 
in the crop insurance package is largely twofold. First of all 
there is a substantial increase in commodity prices reflected in 
the premiums, Mr. Speaker — that’s logical. And secondly, the 
federal government has not come to the table to meet its 
obligations and that’s why we have, that’s why we have the 
provincial Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa today, to get a fair 
deal for Saskatchewan farmers and for producers across the 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting that we keep hearing from that side of the House that 
the federal government has not met their obligations with crop 
insurance. They put $195 million in last year and they put $195 
million in again this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all we ever get out of this government is a lot of 
talk but no action. That’s what APAS is saying also. They said, 
and I quote — and we will tell the rest of this letter, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

. . . Actions must follow words . . . The Throne Speech . . . 
gave unprecedented priority to rural and . . . (agriculture 
issues). 
 
Unfortunately, the realities of your government’s decisions 
in the recent budget . . . do not echo . . . your words and 
send the wrong message to producers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, APAS is specifically talking about the NDP three 
attacks on Saskatchewan’s agriculture: the massive increase to 
the crop insurance premiums, the cancellation of spot loss hail 
coverage, and the cancellation of the property tax rebate 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier betray his own words in his 
budget speech by launching these three attacks on the 
Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is 
absolutely correct in saying the federal government put in 
exactly the same amount as it did last year, but as many people 
would know, that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. Crop insurance is 
a tripartite agreement, Mr. Speaker. It involves the producer, it 
involves the federal government, and it involves the provincial 
government. The provincial government increased its 
commitment by $14 million, Mr. Speaker — 14 million. The 
federal government has not matched our contribution and that’s 
a part of the reason why we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, and that’s part of the 
reason there’s a problem. Along with, Mr. Speaker, with an 
increase in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation has the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve said it a 
number of times, but I think it’s worth repeating: Saskatchewan 
on a per capita basis contributes three point four times above 
what the average of the other provinces contribute, Mr. Speaker, 
to agriculture — five times what the federal government 
commits, Mr. Speaker. I think that shows our commitment to 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
federal government would not agree to put more than they did 
last year into the crop insurance program because the NDP 
government had borrowed $20 million. The farmers, when they 
take a cash advance, they know they have to pay it back. I 
wonder if the NDP government could learn that they have to 
pay back theirs as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, APAS has said that they’re undermining 
their own credibility on trade injury compensation by sending a 
mixed message to Ottawa. They said, and I quote: 
 

We are pleased that the Government of Saskatchewan has 
joined the lobby for . . . Trade Injury Compensation . . . But 
. . . Mr. Premier, this sends a very mixed message to 
producers, when on one hand you argue the need for more 
money while on the other (hand) you reduce the funding 
and the priority of agriculture in your own government (in 
our own province). 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier undermining his own 
credibility with Ottawa and with the farmers by raising crop 
insurance premiums, cancelling spot loss hail, and cancelling 
the property tax rebate program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve quoted it once — I 
don’t know if I need to read it into Hansard again — but the 
Agricultural Producers Association, by their own admission, 
this letter acknowledges the increase that the province has 
made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They identify the fact that the federal government has not met 
their obligations. I’ve indicated that the province commits on a 
per capita basis more than any other province in Canada and 
five times as much as the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point is, Mr. Speaker, is that we all need to be united along 
with other provinces in trying to get the funding that this 
province and all the provinces and the producers of Canada 
rightly deserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell the minister 

there is no dispute — we all need to be united when we discuss 
federal government responsibilities. However, there is 
provincial responsibilities here as well, something that’s been 
neglected for 10 years now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, APAS notes that the NDP is even ignoring its own 
Farm Support Review Committee report. They say, and I quote: 
 

With producers facing potentially the most serious drought 
in decades, farmers have been forced without meaningful 
consultation to accept a diminished (insurance) crop 
insurance program. 

 
It is even more frustrating that not one of the industry’s 
recommendations from the Farm Support Review Committee 
advisory process was adopted in the 2002 crop insurance 
package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I ask, why did the Premier ignore his own 
Farm Support Review Committee? Why did he pick this year, 
of all years, to gut the crop insurance program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that member is 
asking Saskatchewan taxpayers to contribute an even larger 
portion to agriculture, then I guess that’s a fair request. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve indicated that Saskatchewan people contribute 
more to agriculture than do any other people . . . than do people 
in any other province, or for that matter than does the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I look, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, again I remind everyone 
that it’s important that we stay united in our focus on the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. I look, I look though, Mr. Speaker, I 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m getting my exercise here today, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I look at the document that the 
Saskatchewan Party put forward in the last provincial election, 
Mr. Speaker, under agriculture. And do you know what? They 
have not one commitment there other than lobbying the federal 
government under every bullet that they’ve got. Lobbying the 
federal government — no commitments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we stay united and that 
we do lobby the federal government. And in terms of provincial 
contribution, I’ve indicated that Saskatchewan contributes, Mr. 
Speaker, on a per capita basis, more than any other province 
does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Ethanol Industry 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier or his designate. Will the Premier 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

 

confirm today that the NDP’s ethanol strategy does not include 
direct government investment of taxpayers’ money in the 
construction or operation of ethanol production facilities in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I want 
to share the worst kept secret in Saskatchewan with the member 
from Swift Current with respect to ethanol production. I want to 
say that I personally met, and government officials have met, 
with individuals, people who are interested in developing an 
ethanol industry in this province, with people who are interested 
in proposing investment to developing an industry in this 
province. And I have clearly outlined that we are interested in 
putting a business case together that makes some sense for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Would we preclude public sector investment? The answer is no. 
We believe that there could be room for public sector 
investment but . . . if members opposite will listen, Mr. Speaker. 
If members will listen . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, we will put together 
with the private sector — and it will be a private sector driven 
initiative — a business plan that will allow for ethanol 
production, that will allow for intensive livestock to be part of 
that, and allow for the development of an intensive livestock 
industry. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re going to do. We’re 
going to create investment opportunities. We’re going to create 
jobs for Saskatchewan people. We’re going to diversify the 
agricultural industry and that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the former 
Energy minister, the member for Regina South, announced the 
NDP’s ethanol strategy in March, here’s what he told 
Leader-Post reporter, Bruce Johnstone, and I’m quoting: 
 

Thomson promised the province would not be involved 
directly in the industry either through equity investment, 
debt financing, or Crown corporation participation. 

 
Today in Crown Corporations Committee meeting, CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation) president, Frank Hart, testified that 
the government is considering direct multi-million dollar 
investment in the construction of ethanol production facilities in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The question to the Premier or his designate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the question for the Premier or his 
designate is this: who is in charge over there? Is it the senior 
civil servant, Mr. Hart, at CIC? Is it the bureaucrats at CIC? Or 
is it the Government of Saskatchewan? Why is this NDP 
government letting Frank Hart renege on their own promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 

satisfy the member’s curiosity and I’ll tell him who’s not in 
charge. They aren’t in charge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — They won’t be in charge and, Mr. 
Speaker, the reason why they aren’t in charge and why they 
won’t be in charge is because people don’t trust them. Because 
every day they trot into this legislature — half truths, half 
truths. 
 
And I want to quote what the member from Regina South said, 
if they’ll listen, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We want this to be a private sector driven process. (This is 
what he said.) If proponents come to the investment arm of 
the government through . . . (CIC) and ask for equity 
participation, we would look at that, (and we would in 
terms of any) as we would in terms of any other 
investments. I can tell you though, that we are not 
interested in setting up a crown corporation to market 
ethanol, to produce ethanol, we are simply interested in 
participating as any other Saskatchewan investor would, in 
terms of what makes sense, in terms of business. 

 
That’s what he said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on the soon and coming day when 
this party is in charge of the province, you can be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on the soon and coming day when 
this party is in charge of the province, we won’t have a situation 
where a minister says one thing two months ago and 60 days 
later the bureaucrats of the government, and now his successor, 
contradict what that minister said, Mr. Speaker. We won’t have 
that happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in March the former minister was 
pretty clear about the NDP’s position. Here’s what he said. 
Here’s what he said, and I quote: 
 

What this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Here’s what the former minister of Energy, the 
current member for Regina South said: 
 

What this policy does not do is pick winners and losers. It 
does not dictate the size and locations of facilities. 

 
And just to make sure that no one misunderstood him, the 
former minister also added: 
 

The private sector would make the investment in the 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

ethanol facilities and take the risk. 
 
But today Frank Hart said — that’s the president of the Crown 
Investments Corporation — he said the government is willing to 
invest directly in ethanol production facilities. Mr. Hart said 
that the NDP government, through its involvement, will also be 
directing the size and the scope of the facilities. And Mr. Hart 
also said that the NDP will be picking the winners and losers. 
Apparently they’ve already picked a winner — a company from 
Denver, Colorado. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Would the member go directly to his question now, please. 
Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The previous minister 
of Energy had it right. Will the current minister please tell the 
Assembly why in two short months this government has 
changed its plan with respect to ethanol. Why are they now 
investing directly into the ethanol industry when the previous 
minister said they would not be doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I gave a quote about a 
minute and a half ago, from March 22, 2002 quoting, quoting 
the former minister responsible for ethanol. And this member 
two minutes, two seconds later, stands up and indicates . . . and 
forgets and totally ignores what I just said to him and what 
quote I directly put. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, people see through this member because 
every day in here it’s half-truths and it’s innuendo. Mr. Speaker, 
I say the people see through him and know him for what he is, 
and that’s a stranger to the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the former minister 
was pretty clear about the government’s ethanol strategy. The 
former minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The former minister indicated that they weren’t 
interested in getting into the debate at all about the size or the 
location of the plants. The minister indicated as well that they 
weren’t going to be picking winners and losers. That is pretty 
clear what the minister said. Even this minister would agree that 
that is what his predecessor said two short months ago. 
 
And today we found out at Crown Corporations Committee . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order please, 
members. I’ve got to be able to hear the entire question and the 
comments. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, today we found out at Crown 
Corporations Committee that CIC is both picking winners and 
losers with respect to the international American-based 
companies they apparently are on the verge of signing a deal 
with; and they are getting involved in the discussion. They’re 
also getting involved, Mr. Speaker, if only indirectly, in 

determining the scope and the location of these particular 
plants. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is this, to this government: why 
are they letting the unelected officials of Crown Investments 
Corporation dictate their policies? Who is in charge over there, 
Mr. Speaker? Is it CIC or is it the Government of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, here he goes again. 
He’s in here portraying his interrogation of the Crown 
Investments Corporation officials this morning in Crown 
investments committee and having delivered some big 
revelation of some new-found secret. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I had conversation three weeks ago 
with one of the members of the opposition in which I outlined 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this big . . . this big 
revelation that the member from Swift Current brings into the 
House, I spoke with one of his members three weeks ago and 
indicated that I was going to be meeting with proponents in that 
area in the community with respect to where we thought ethanol 
development may take us. And do you want to know 
something, Mr. Speaker? I invited that same member to that 
meeting. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you, big secret. You know, 
that company that he’s talking about has been in this province; 
they’ve been talking to proponents of ethanol development in 
the different communities. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’ll 
be them that puts the deal together. If they can make a business 
case to involve Crown Investments Corporation, that’ll be fine. 
We’ll look at that. 
 
But I tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker, there is going to be room 
for local investment. There is going to be room for ethanol 
production. There are going to be winners in this province and 
that’s going to be all of us because we’re going to use ethanol to 
develop an intensive . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 42, The 
Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order, please. I would ask the two members just to hang 
on for a while. 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, today I table 
written responses to questions 152 through 161, and 164 
through 170. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to questions 152 through to 
161 have been tabled, and the responses from 164 to 170 have 
been tabled. 
 
Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Move to convert 
questions 162, 163 for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 162 and 163 are converted to 
orders for return debatable. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 8 — The Saskatchewan Economy 
in the 21st Century 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand and enter into a debate and applaud the efforts of 
Saskatchewan businessmen, co-operatives, communities, and 
entrepreneurs in building a 21st century Saskatchewan 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we know Saskatchewan has an economy that has diversified 
significantly over the last decade, Mr. Speaker. And that 
diversification has put us in a position that has allowed us to 
stand firm through one of the most difficult periods in our 
agricultural history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to start by first thanking all those individual business 
people — managers of businesses, owners, co-operative 
owners, and entrepreneurs that are looking to build within our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about our economic history in our 
province and where we’ve come over the last couple of decades 
and where we are today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In March 2002 we had the third highest March on record 
following two very good months for jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We saw a significant increase, Mr. Speaker, in 
employment month over month of 4,200 jobs in January and 
5,800 jobs in February. 
 
Saskatchewan has the third lowest unemployment rate in the 
country at 6.2 per cent, well below the national average of 8.3, 
Mr. Speaker. And we owe the credit to the business people of 
this province for our low unemployment rate and for the 
creation of jobs within our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 

The past decade, from 1991 to 2001, saw a net gain of over 
50,000 jobs in the non-agricultural sectors, including 2,500 jobs 
in the service sector, 6,100 jobs in manufacturing, 6,600 jobs in 
transportation, 4,500 jobs in resource sector, 4,100 jobs in 
construction sector, 3,700 jobs in finance, insurance, real estate 
and leasing, 2,900 in the trade sector. 
 
And the only industry in Saskatchewan to decline in the last 
decade, Mr. Speaker, was agriculture with 3,200 . . . 32,200 lost 
jobs. Mr. Speaker, there’s nobody in this Assembly that will not 
recognize the significant impact that those losses of jobs in the 
agriculture sector would have in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our province is going through a significant 
drought and a significant change in the agricultural sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a number of the things that 
impact the economy and, in fact, impact jobs, and how the 
Saskatchewan businesses have helped to grow this economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, business people know that perpetuating the myth 
that young people are leaving Saskatchewan to find 
opportunities does not reflect reality. In fact, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
figures show that over 90 per cent of their employed graduates 
were working in this province six months after graduation — 90 
per cent of the graduates of SIAST are working in this province 
within six months. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
asking if I’ve given this speech before. Not quite. But he will 
probably recognize many of the figures if he, in fact, reads 
newspapers and follows what’s going on in our province. 
 
The U of S (University of Saskatchewan) annual report states 
that 75 per cent of their graduates continue to work and live in 
Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, the U of S annual report 
states that 75 per cent of their graduates live and work in this 
province. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s an extremely high number. 
 
So the myth that our young people are leaving this province, 
Mr. Speaker, is just not, not true, Mr. Speaker. The majority of 
our youth are staying here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, despite obvious pressures in the 
last year or so, Saskatchewan’s economy has experienced nine 
years of positive economic growth prior to this year, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, you’ll recall that The Globe and Mail named 
us the star of the ’90s because Saskatchewan posted the highest 
growth rate in GDP (gross domestic product) per capita last 
decade — from 1989 to 1999 — of any province, including 
Alberta. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we owe a great deal of gratitude to the 
business people of Saskatchewan and their diversification of the 
economy over the last decade and their ability to generate 
revenue within our province, create jobs and make 
Saskatchewan a better place for our youth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can’t continue to talk negatively about 
those business people, those entrepreneurs that are building our 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

province. There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that we are going 
through a very difficult time in our agricultural sector but if you 
take the agricultural sector outside of Saskatchewan and look at 
what’s happening in their agricultural sectors, they’re also 
experiencing difficulty. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the difficulty is greater here, largely because 
we have a far greater portion of the arable land in Canada — 
agricultural land in Canada — in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we lost, have lost 32,200 jobs in the 
agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker, that’s obviously going to hurt 
our economy. But many of the things that are contributing to 
that are outside the control of any government or any employer, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to talk about a number of very good news items 
about our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Recently a new KPMG study on competitiveness ranked 
Saskatchewan as one of the most competitive jurisdictions in 
which to do business. Saskatoon ranked second among all 
major cities in the North American Midwest — second among 
all major cities in the North American Midwest. Regina ranks 
fourth when compared to the same group. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, number two and number four among all 
major cities in the North American Midwest is hardly 
something to run from or be afraid of or not, quite frankly, be 
very proud of. 
 
The Fraser Institute indicated that Saskatchewan will lead the 
nation’s capital investment growth this year. New capital 
investment is expected to exceed $6.9 billion in 2002, up by 9.3 
per cent from last year. Capital investment in manufacturing 
will lead the way with projected growth of 200 per cent this 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Recent economic indicators for Saskatchewan are positive. New 
business incorporations are up 24.7 per cent, January 2001 over 
January 2002. Retail sales up 8 per cent over the same period. 
Department store sales up 8.6 per cent. Building permits up 
94.1 per cent, February 2001 over February 2002. Building 
permits up . . . or pardon me, new motor vehicle sales up 12.3 
per cent. Oil production up 1.9 per cent. Natural gas production 
up 1.2 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just as important in a growing economy is, 
social assistance caseloads are going down, Mr. Speaker, 
continuing to go down as more and more people become 
employed in our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the tax front, our tax reform over the last 
decade includes many, many initiatives including an increased 
exemption of corporate capital tax to as high as $15 million 
announced in this budget. The provincial sales tax has been cut 
by 33 per cent, remains the lowest sales tax among the nine 
provinces that have one. Personal income taxes have been 
reduced four times in the last seven years; most recently, by 
$430 million when our government introduced the largest 
personal income tax cut in Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve eliminated the flat tax. We’ve eliminated the debt 

reduction surtax. We’ve eliminated the high income surtax. 
Business taxes have been reduced nearly every budget since 
1992, cutting small-business corporate income tax by 40 per 
cent and increasing the threshold by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We now tax capital gains from the sale of farm and business 
assets at our lowest tax rate, Mr. Speaker. And targeted tax cuts 
for livestock production, manufacturing and processing, mining 
and petroleum research and development, film and video 
production, small banks and aviation have helped to make those 
industries far more viable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to talk about some of the good 
news, economic announcements around the province in the last 
few weeks, Mr. Speaker, over . . . during the past year; pardon 
me, Mr. Speaker. Mainline Pulse in Chaplin, a $3 million 
project creating 50 jobs; Trailtech manufacturing in 
Gravelbourg, a $1 million expansion creating 10 jobs; Tolko 
Industries in Meadow Lake, $220 million construction this year, 
creating 130 direct jobs and 130 indirect jobs, Mr. Speaker; 
Williamson Seeds in Pambrun, $1 million expansion creating 5 
to 10 jobs; Saskcan Pulse Trading in Regina, $5.2 million with 
an estimated completion in July of this year, Mr. Speaker, 
creating 30 jobs; Minds Eye Pictures in Regina, $35 million 
co-production with H535 Media of Germany, creating up to 200 
jobs, Mr. Speaker; Grain Millers (Canada) Inc., $7 million 
investment; Centennial Foods, $35 million investment and up to 
190 new jobs created, Mr. Speaker; Dumur Industries in White 
City, $1.25 million expansion and 25 additional jobs, Mr. 
Speaker; New Media Campus, private animation and 
multimedia school, 25 jobs, Mr. Speaker; Veterinary Infectious 
Disease Organization in Saskatoon, planned $14.3 million 
expansion, up to 60 new jobs, Mr. Speaker; Doepker Industries, 
30,000 square feet production facility in Humboldt, 50 
additional jobs, Mr. Speaker; Notekeu Processing Plant in 
Vanguard, $3.5 million investment, 10 to 12 new jobs; Dryair at 
St. Brieux, 50 additional jobs created this last year, Mr. 
Speaker; Northern Steel, Tisdale, $1 million expansion, 40 
additional jobs, Mr. Speaker; Big Sky Farms in Wynyard, 
$700,000 expansion, 6 new jobs, Mr. Speaker; Premium Brands 
in Yorkton, $15 million expansion with 130 new jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. And the list could go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about what is being said about our 
climate in rural Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan in general, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to talk about an ad . . . or pardon me, an 
article from The Western Producer of March 28, 2002. And it 
says, “Rural west bubbles with positive attitude,” Mr. Speaker. 
And people in this province believe, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
that there is a bright future in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for 
investment in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to go on and talk about a number of comments made by 
various organizations around the province about Saskatchewan 
and where we’re going, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
talk a little bit about some of the news that’s coming out of rural 
Saskatchewan, in particular, about the positiveness about our 
businesses and our economic climate. 
 
Estevan region — Ceylon, Garry’s Express Bus Service is open 
with services to Radville, Ceylon, Ogema, Pangman, and 
Bengough, as well as Regina deliveries, Mr. Speaker. Garry 
Hofseth, a local area farmer, is the owner of the business. A 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

 

very positive new development in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Creelman — A & M Body and Repair is open. Owner, Adrian 
Macdonald will provide services such as vehicle repairs and 
auto body work. A new business in Creelman, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the list goes on and on and on. Moose Jaw region — 
Avonlea, construction of a $5 million specialty crop processing 
plant in Avonlea is beginning with construction, expected to be 
completed by late September 2002. 
 
Belle Plaine, CWS Logistics Ltd., a Regina-based trucking 
company officially unveiled its plans to build a new 1.5 million 
phosphate distribution centre at IMC (International Minerals 
and Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.). 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s pages and pages of good economic news 
for Saskatchewan and pages and pages of our business people 
in Saskatchewan creating new business growth and employment 
within our province. And, Mr. Speaker, what does that mean for 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about some of the 
comments made by the opposition about our province and our 
economic outcome. And I want to talk about how the opposition 
says they will stop the outflow of population in the province 
and grow the economy. 
 
Now I have a quote here from The Leader-Post, April 6, 2001: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party . . . 
 
And this is the Leader of the Opposition speaking, Mr. Speaker: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party wins the next election, 
Hermanson said the population outflow would be stemmed 
within a year or two and the province would then grow if 
the weather and the national economy co-operated (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
So their plan, Mr. Speaker, to grow the economy is that the 
weather has to co-operate and the national economy has to 
co-operate, Mr. Speaker. It says nothing about what they 
themselves would do to help stimulate the economy, Mr. 
Speaker. They are relying simply on someone else, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk for a second about an article from Ed 
Galenzoski, the president of the Regina Chamber of Commerce. 
Mr. Galenzoski for many years lived outside our province but 
returned to Saskatchewan, and these are his comments about 
our province: 
 

I look at the economic opportunities in this marketplace 
and I say we have to . . . all we have to do is take advantage 
of what’s here. 
 

Galenzoski said an attitude adjustment is the first order of 
business in Saskatchewan with business leading the way. 
 

Business has to make it happen. Business needs to take the 
leadership role. I don’t think we can sit back and rely on 
government. I think we should not be blaming government; 

we should be doing it (Mr. Speaker). 
 

He also goes on to say: 
 

If we as a province go forward with a single strategy to get 
the strength of our business community behind it, all of a 
sudden good things start to happen. 

 
Mr. Galenzoski does not have a negative attitude about our 
province. In fact, he says business needs to lead this economic 
growth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about the attitude of others about the 
province of Saskatchewan. This is an article from The 
StarPhoenix, February 6, 2002: 
 

Saskatchewan land of plenty for Alberta ranchers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they see Saskatchewan as a land of opportunity. 
I’d like just to quote a very small portion of this article, Mr. 
Speaker. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan has many challenges, but you don’t hear 
about Saskatchewan farmers packing up and moving to 
Alberta to farm. Everything considered, the agricultural 
advantage is here in Saskatchewan (Mr. Speaker). 

 
So others see the opportunity in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And our business community and our farmers, they share the 
optimism for the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about . . . I have an article here from 
The StarPhoenix, January 4, 2002, Mr. Speaker, talking about 
taxes. They’re playing . . . And it goes on to say: 
 

Saskatchewan taxes. About Saskatchewan taxes, they’re 
reasonably competitive in Western Canada, at least with 
Manitoba and BC, said Joel Ames, senior research 
economist with a Vancouver-based think tank. 

 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in comparing our taxes, the Fraser Institute thinks 
that we’re reasonably competitive. 
 
Here’s an article by Bruce Johnstone talking of, “Alberta 
advantage slowly disappearing,” Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

Let’s go back to 1993, when (Saskatchewan taxpayers were 
at their peak) . . . Saskatchewan taxes were at their peak, 
and look at the Alberta advantage. 
 
For families earning $50,000 a year, moving to Alberta 
would see their provincial tax bill (including income and 
sales taxes, health care premiums and other taxes) cut in 
half . . . 

 
In 1993, their taxes would have been cut in half, Mr. Speaker. 
 

. . . from $5,246 in Saskatchewan to $3,497 in Alberta . . . 
(they would be) . . . savings of about $1,750 annually. 
 
Skip ahead to 2002 (after two years of tax reform in 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

Saskatchewan and a tough budget in Alberta). 
Saskatchewan’s provincial tax bill for the same family 
(assuming their income hasn’t increased) has fallen to 
3,789 versus 2,896 in Alberta, a difference of just under 
$900, (Mr. Speaker). 
 
In other words, the Alberta advantage has been virtually cut 
in half in less than 10 years — for middle-income families 
at least. 

 
While taxes have gone down in both provinces, utilities, 
such as power and home heating and other charges have 
gone up (more than 50 per cent here, (and) more than 100 
per cent in Alberta) over the last nine years. 

 
Having said that, the Saskatchewan NDP government 
deserves some credit for slowly, but steadily, lowering 
taxes over the last nine years. 
 
We’ve come a long way and it hasn’t been easy. But there 
(is) still a . . . (ways) to go, (Mr. Speaker). 

 
So we’re being recognized for the amount of work done by 
Saskatchewan people to make our business climate more 
competitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about our credit rating. I 
want to talk about our credit rating and how others view that, 
Mr. Speaker. I have here CBC news interview with a Dave 
Rubinoff: 
 

. . . one of the people Calvert is making a pitch to. He is a 
(senior) vice-president and senior analyst with Moody’s 
Canada. We have reached Mr. Rubinoff in New York this 
morning. (And it says) Good morning, Mr. Rubinoff. 

 
I’m quoting from this address, Mr. Speaker. 
 

So we have an A-1 credit rating right now. Tell me why we 
have such a good credit rating. 

 
Well Saskatchewan has really done a great job over the last 
few years in getting its fiscal house in order. Saskatchewan 
was upgraded to an A-1 credit rating from an A-2 in 
August of 2000. Before that, it was upgraded from an A-3 
to an A-2 in July of 1998. So we have seen sort of a steady 
trend here, a steady progression. Saskatchewan has done a 
great job in addressing what was a very serious debt 
problem, has its fiscal house in order, and we are quite 
pleased with what we see. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the vice-president of Moody’s Bond Rating 
Agency is very, very pleased with what he sees in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we owe that to the business 
people, the citizens of Saskatchewan who have worked very 
hard to help turn around our situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with a news release from the 
Fraser Institute about our business climate, and this is dated 
March 25, 2002: 
 

Over the course of the last decade, Saskatchewan was the 
only prairie province to cut the real . . . that cut real 

government expenditures, reducing spending by 9.9 per 
cent between 1990, ’91, and 2001. Comparatively, real 
spending in Canada as a whole increased by 10.3 per cent, 
while real spending in Alberta increased by 6.4 per cent. 

 
So Saskatchewan was the only, only province to cut 
government expenditures over that decade, Mr. Speaker. A 
move in the right direction; a move to putting us in a more 
competitive position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan business people go on to talk 
about how good Saskatchewan is as a place to do business. Mr. 
Speaker, many, many Saskatchewan business people have 
invested their money, their time, and their efforts to making 
Saskatchewan a good place in which to do business, and in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, a good place to base their futures on. 
 
That’s why I would like to move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Victoria: 
 

That this Assembly applaud the efforts of Saskatchewan 
businesses, co-operatives, communities, and entrepreneurs 
to build the 21st century Saskatchewan economy, an 
economy projected to lead the nation in capital investment 
growth in 2002, and an economy building on nearly a 
decade of positive growth (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the question that I 
would raise at the outset of my remarks is, is the glass half 
empty or is the glass half full? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the member knows why I am 
standing, and you are not to use any type of exhibit in the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I was 
holding, in a sense, was a metaphor, Mr. Speaker, for what 
people generally agree is a statement on optimism or 
pessimism. 
 
It might equally be a metaphor for relative positions that people 
take with respect to the Saskatchewan economy. If you’re a 
member of the opposition you would say that the glass is half 
empty, consistently. In fact you would say more than that — in 
fact they do say more than that. 
 
And I think that any of the people who are watching today and 
who watch the Legislative Assembly regularly, they will know 
that the opposition on a regular basis will try to convey an 
impression of a provincial economy that is imploding, a 
provincial economy that is behaving so badly and has done so 
consistently since the election of the NDP in 1991, a provincial 
economy that is so underperforming, if you like, all other 
economies in Canada, in North America, in the Western world, 
anywhere in the world, Mr. Speaker. That is the impression that 
they try to convey. 
 
Well that is the nature of opposition, Mr. Speaker. If you’re in 
opposition, you want to be in government. The only way you 
get to be in government is to create an environment that so 
erodes the confidence that the people have in the government 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

 

that they look for a change. And part of doing that is to raise 
questions about how effectively the economy is doing under the 
government that is currently in power. That is the way that it 
works, Mr. Speaker, in our democracy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we can all agree, I think we can all 
agree — whether we think the glass is half empty, whether we 
think the glass is half full — I think we can all agree that the 
Saskatchewan economy is experiencing difficult times. And no 
one will disagree with anyone who makes that particular 
statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why is it that we’re having difficult times? Well I think you 
have to look, first of all, you have to look, first of all, at what 
are some of the major contributors to the Saskatchewan 
economy and what is taking place in that . . . or in those 
segments of the economy so as to have an impact on the overall 
economy. 
 
One of the major components of the Saskatchewan economy 
still — although not as significant as it used to be, and I’ll get 
into that in a few minutes — but still, is agriculture. And again 
the members of the opposition would agree with the 
government that agriculture is still an important component of 
the Saskatchewan economy. And it is. 
 
And at this point the total value of production in agriculture, the 
total value of goods and services produced in agriculture is still 
about seven and a half per cent of the overall economy — not as 
significant as it once was, but still significant — so that when 
we see, when we see worldwide trends, very, very powerful 
trends that affect agriculture, and that then, if you like, 
depresses the agricultural economy, it can’t help but have a 
significant impact on this overall Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And that impact is likely to be greater in Saskatchewan 
inasmuch as the agricultural economy, and in the main, we’re 
speaking about a grain and oilseeds production, that when we 
have that kind of an impact on that percentage of our economy, 
it is likely to be greater in Saskatchewan than it will be in any 
other Canadian jurisdiction. 
 
Because grain production in Saskatchewan, oilseed production 
in Saskatchewan, is a much greater component of the overall 
economy in Saskatchewan than any other jurisdiction in 
Canada. Full stop, period. And when that economy is impacted, 
Mr. Speaker, by these trends that I speak about, then it also has 
an impact on the overall economy in Saskatchewan to a much 
greater extent than would be the case in any other jurisdiction. 
 
What are these trends, Mr. Speaker? Well certainly depressed 
prices in agriculture. That’s something that people on both sides 
of the House have talked about for many years. It’s a situation 
that has been ongoing since, as I understand it, about 1980, 
whereas we saw net exports on the part of the major grain 
exporting countries increase over time up until about 1980, 
there is peaks and valleys, trending upward to about 1980. 
 
Since 1980 there’s been a relatively, if you like, flat line in 
terms of net exports by the major net . . . or by the major grain 
exporting countries of the world — Canada, the United States, 
Argentina, Australia — there probably would be other countries 
in that as well. Why is that the case? Well again, many 

countries that were not in a position to grow grain, much less 
export grain, are now in a position to not only meet their 
domestic demands but are also exporting. Why are they doing 
that? Well we have better strains and varieties of wheat today 
than we ever did 20, 25 years ago. And many more countries 
are able to grow grain now than they were able to do in those 
days and they don’t need our exports. 
 
There is also, Mr. Speaker, a recognition that in part the prices 
are depressed because some very powerful economic interests 
in the world — to name the United States as one, the European 
Union as another — who have decided to provide huge 
subsidies and support to their grain exporters as a means of 
enabling those exporters to stay in production. Whether that’s 
working or not is another question. But they are nevertheless 
providing huge subsidies which has the effect of lowering 
prices throughout the world. And again, that is having a major 
impact on the Saskatchewan economy because our agriculture, 
our economy, if you like, as a whole is very dependent on the 
health of the grain export industry in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
All of that in the last years . . . in last year has been also 
impacted by a drought which took place in Saskatchewan, 
which I understand was one of the — if not the — driest years 
. . . someone said the driest year in record, drier than any of the 
years during the 1930s that we remember as being a period of 
sustained drought in Saskatchewan. It was the driest year on 
record and which affected about 60 per cent of our grain 
production areas in Saskatchewan. So not only do . . . did many 
of our producers, were they faced with a situation of low prices, 
they’re also faced last year with a situation of low production 
— a double whammy, if you like — which also had a very 
grave impact on our economy. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Agriculture is still 7.5 per cent of the provincial gross domestic 
product. What is the gross domestic product? That is a figure 
that represents . . . a dollar figure which represents all of the 
production from all of the sectors in Saskatchewan. If you total 
those up, in Saskatchewan agriculture is still 7.5 per cent. 
That’s not 7.5 per cent of all the jobs in Saskatchewan, although 
it wouldn’t be far off the mark in this case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have seen an impact on this in people employed in 
agriculture. I think the latest group to bring this to our attention 
was the Action Committee on the Rural Economy. Rural people 
especially have been concerned about these trends for a number 
of years. 
 
They’ve done some very good work and they have shown us 
that employment in Saskatchewan agriculture, that is 
agriculture as a main job, has in fact decreased from in excess 
of 90,000 people who said that agriculture was their main job 
— 90,000 people in Saskatchewan in 1987 — to about 50,000 
people in Saskatchewan who say that agriculture was their main 
job last year. 
 
So you have a period of about 15 years in which agriculture 
being listed as the main job, the main occupation, has gone 
from in excess of 90,000 to about 50,000 today, late last year. 
That is a phenomenal drop, a drastic drop. 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

I think it would be fair to say, Mr. Speaker, if we were to see 
that kind of a drop in employment in any other industry in say, 
Ontario or if you like, Quebec, my guess is that the federal 
government of the day would say that we have a major problem 
in that industry and that we as a federal government need to 
respond. 
 
And that’s part of the message that we’re trying to bring to the 
federal government today, that this is a major industry, it is 
experiencing problems, we need your help. If there is to be a 
solution, then the federal government needs to be part of that 
solution. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, the trend line has been very clear, that 
employment in Saskatchewan has gone from in excess of 
90,000 to less than 50,000. 
 
The number of farms too in Saskatchewan, I think they peaked 
in the mid-’30s at about 140,000 to something less than 60,000 
farms today. That’s correct, Mr. Speaker. In the mid-1930s 
there were about 140 farms . . . 140,000 farms in Saskatchewan. 
We have less than 60,000 farms in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Now in part those trends have taken place because of better 
mechanization; better inputs; better technology, if you like, to 
assist farmers; better transportation to assist rural producers, but 
all of them have meant to decrease in farm sizes. All of that has 
also culminated in far fewer people being employed in 
agriculture today than was ever the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is an impact not only that is taking place in 
Saskatchewan, but that is an impact, as the ACRE (Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy) report pointed out, this is 
also taking place in United States, in the major grain producing 
areas — North Dakota being one and they show examples from 
North Dakota. I think the European Union is another example 
that, notwithstanding their very great subsidies that the 
European Union and the Americans provide for their farmers, 
they nevertheless have seen reduction in the number of farms in 
those jurisdictions as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when you have one portion of your economy, one portion of 
your economy that is so buffeted, if you like, by these major 
trends and that portion of the economy is so significant in 
Saskatchewan compared to other jurisdictions, then it’s little 
wonder that the trends in agriculture are having a huge impact 
overall on the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And I know that members opposite never want to hear that and 
their friends in the media never want to hear that. They all say 
that should somehow ignore the reality and just provide some 
other vision that ignores the reality, but you can’t do that, Mr. 
Speaker. You can’t ignore the reality of what is taking place 
and what has taken place. 
 
These days, of course, Saskatchewan people are greatly 
troubled by the recent events that have taken place south of the 
border where the US Congress is about to or has implemented a 
new farm Bill. A farm Bill that will increase the government 
subsidy for a number of commodities including cereals, coarse 
grains, and canola. And it’s everyone’s opinion that this will 
lead to even lower world prices for each of the crops. And the 
higher support prices in the United States — and my guess is 

that the European Union will also ratchet up their support for 
those commodities — the higher support prices will result in 
more acres being shifted to these crops and the use of more 
input to grow them. 
 
It will also mean that increased supplies of these crops on world 
markets will drive down prices. And that is a gravely troubling 
scenario for Saskatchewan that not only have we had to contend 
with these subsidies in the areas of cereals for these last 10 
years or so or longer, the fact of the matter is the situation is 
going to get worse. 
 
The US farm Bill also includes, for the first time, subsidization 
for pulse crops including dried peas, lentils, and small 
chickpeas. The prices for these crops are extremely sensitive to 
changes in world production levels; increased US pulse 
production will drive prices down significantly. And this 
change, Mr. Speaker, will hurt Saskatchewan producers who are 
among the world’s largest exporters of pulse crops. 
 
And the impact on the Saskatchewan economy will extend 
beyond reduced exports and lower pulse prices, as pulse crops 
have been a major diversification option for Saskatchewan 
producers faced with subsidy-distorting world cereal grain 
markets. 
 
And there are other changes in that Bill, Mr. Speaker, that will 
also increasingly hurt livestock production in Saskatchewan and 
Canada as the program is phased in over the next two years, and 
seriously again threaten diversification efforts as individuals 
attempt to move away from production of cereal grains to other 
primary agriculture production, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So whatever concerns we were having in Saskatchewan, these 
are hugely magnified now by the US farm Bill, and there is a 
great deal of uncertainty, Mr. Speaker, in the agricultural 
economy, indeed, and the whole Saskatchewan economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I had mentioned earlier that if you’re an 
optimist, or whether you’re a pessimist, you can look at these 
things differently. And now I’ve been presenting a . . . or 
portraying a picture of a Saskatchewan economy that has been 
greatly affected by changes that we see taking place and have 
taken place in a portion of our economy and the impact that it’s 
having. 
 
But the glass, to me, Mr. Speaker, is also half full because even 
though these changes have taken place in agriculture — and 
these have been massive changes because earlier I talked about 
the number of people being employed in agriculture having 
gone from in excess of 90,000 to something in the 
neighbourhood of 50,000 today, and this is huge, very huge in a 
province such as ours — the fact of the matter is that agriculture 
is today something less of the total economy in Saskatchewan 
than it was 10 years ago. 
 
Today, as I mentioned, agriculture represents about seven and a 
half per cent of the total gross domestic product in 
Saskatchewan. Ten years ago agriculture represented 10 per 
cent of the overall economy in Saskatchewan. And the changes 
that are taking place today in agriculture and the changes that 
are about to take place because of the US farm Bill, which 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

 

provide a great source of concern for us, if those changes had 
taken place 10 years ago, it’s fair to say that Saskatchewan 
would have been in a state of continual recession because 
agriculture was at that time a much greater slice of the pie. 
 
Now having said that, the fact of the matter is that even though 
agriculture as part of the overall economy may be less now than 
it was then, there are other aspects of the economy that have 
grown in Saskatchewan. And that’s a long, roundabout way to 
the point that I wanted to make in support of the motion that’s 
before us, Mr. Speaker. A motion that says that we: 
 

. . . applaud the efforts of Saskatchewan businesses, 
co-operatives, communities and entrepreneurs to build the 
21st century Saskatchewan economy, an economy 
projected to lead the nation in capital investment . . . in 
2002, an economy building on nearly a decade of positive 
growth. 

 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that we have seen a great 
deal of positive growth in Saskatchewan as aspects of the 
economy unrelated to agriculture have grown tremendously for 
a variety of reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And part of it is, I think, the fact that we have seen stability in 
government, unlike the kind of destabilizing investment climate 
that we saw in Saskatchewan especially in the latter part of the 
1980s and into the early ’90s, Mr. Speaker, where those people 
who wanted to invest in Saskatchewan were faced at all times 
with uncertainty as to what it is that they would expect to find 
in the Saskatchewan economy because of the actions of the 
government of the day. 
 
The fact of the matter is that we have, as a government, 
attempted to stabilize the investment climate. We have, as a 
government, set our books right. We have set our budgets right 
so that we no longer run deficits. 
 
Because if you run major deficits as a government as it was 
done in the 1980s, it creates uncertainty in the minds of 
investors about when it is and how it is that the government will 
attempt to pay those deficits back. Because everyone knows, as 
the former premier of Saskatchewan, Grant Devine, once said, a 
deficit is simply deferred taxes. So that those who are looking 
to invest could see that the government of the day was running 
huge deficits and they knew at some point that someone had to 
pay that price. 
 
Well what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is to be very clear in our 
budgets about what it is that we’re doing; that we’re not living 
beyond our means; that if we have rough years, that we set the 
money aside to deal with the changes that are taking place 
around us, Mr. Speaker, but that we not borrow and go further 
into debt as the Devine government did to the extent of . . . I 
think the total debt load in Saskatchewan was in the area of 15 
billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I might digress for a minute, I can never 
understand it. I can never understand it how members on that 
side of the House, the minute that you mention the Devine 
administration, you mention the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
government in the 1980s, they start getting up in arms. They’re 
being defensive about the things that were taking place in the 

1980s. 
 
But then in the same breath they say, oh that wasn’t us; we’ve 
got nothing to do with them; we’re not PCs, we’re 
Saskatchewan Party people. Well you know they say on the one 
hand there is no connection, but then by their very body 
language if you like, and their remonstrations here in the House, 
Mr. Speaker, you begin to wonder if there isn’t some 
connection between the Saskatchewan Party today and that PC 
government of the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, not only has the Government of Saskatchewan 
I think done a very good job in getting its fiscal house in order 
. . . and I’m not the only one that’s saying that. Every credit 
rating agency that we deal with in North America, whether it’s 
the two major credit rating agencies in New York, and the two 
Canadian credit rating agencies, all agree that Saskatchewan has 
done a very good job of getting its fiscal house in order, 
including their ability to then increase or improve our credit 
rating so that we as a province are seen as a more creditworthy 
risk for investors. 
 
And that also sends a very powerful signal to the people inside 
Saskatchewan who are looking to invest in our economy. They 
know without a doubt that our economy . . . or that at least our 
government is sound, and they need not worry on that score as 
to how it is that the Saskatchewan government will impact them 
and impact, for example, their ability to make a livelihood. 
 
In fact just about every budget that we’ve seen since 1991 has 
been very sensitive to that issue, and we have always tried to 
create and improve the conditions for investors in 
Saskatchewan so that we can see businesses grow and thrive, 
and that is exactly what has been taking place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of jobs, just this last month the 
statistics that I have for the month of March, it said that 
employment in March 2002 was down 1,100 over the same 
period a year earlier. And that is non-agricultural jobs grew, 
offsetting largely a decline — but not totally — a decline in 
agriculture jobs. So remember earlier I talked about that 15 
years ago we had over 90,000 agriculture jobs in Saskatchewan, 
down to 50,000 today, and that this trend is going down, and 
it’s a real trend. Nevertheless, we see job growth in other 
sectors. 
 
In this past decade, Mr. Speaker, from 1991 to 2001, there has 
been a net gain of over 50,000 non-agricultural jobs in 
Saskatchewan, including 25,000 jobs in the service sector; 
6,100 jobs in manufacturing; 6,600 in transportation, 
warehousing, and utilities — and you don’t need to go very far, 
Mr. Speaker, to know of some people who have taken jobs in 
these industries — 4,500 jobs in the resource sector; 4,100 jobs 
in the construction sector; 3,700 in finance, insurance, real 
estate and leasing; and 2,900 jobs in the trade sector. 
 
The only industries, the only industries, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan to see a decline, the only industries were 
agriculture with a loss of about 32,200 in that 10-year period — 
and of course it was greater over the 15-year period — and the 
public sector. And this is something that the opposition parties 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

don’t talk about. They like to give some impression that the 
only growth that we’re seeing in Saskatchewan is the public 
sector. 
 
That’s not true, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is that major 
growth in Saskatchewan has been taking place in those 
industries that I’ve mentioned. In the private sector, in 
manufacturing, in service, in transportation, in resource, in 
construction — that is where the growth has been. 
 
The only problem that we have, Mr. Speaker, is that we did not 
see the same level of growth that we would like to see in 
agriculture, but that is something that is beyond, beyond, I 
would submit, the control of the province of Saskatchewan. 
And if we’re to believe the stories that are coming out of 
Ottawa, it sounds like the federal officials are beginning to 
throw up their hands as well. We hope not, Mr. Speaker; we 
hope not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that the Saskatchewan 
economy has been — with the major exception of agriculture 
again, and agriculture being such a significant part of our 
economy — the fact of the matter is that if you were to take out 
agriculture, the Saskatchewan economy has been doing very, 
very well, thank you very much. And that is a credit to the 
many individuals, people in Saskatchewan who have chosen to 
invest in their own businesses and other businesses, in 
businesses that help Saskatchewan to grow. 
 
My colleague, the member for Regina Dewdney, went through 
a list of some of those recent businesses that we’ve seen. 
 
I know that in the case of Regina that we have seen significant 
job growth in all kinds of sectors that, well, 10, 15 years ago 
you would never have thought about. I think the film industry is 
one, is a very significant one, where we’ve seen tremendous 
growth. And it’s an industry where the government too has 
decided to make significant — or not significant — but 
appropriate investments so that we can see that industry 
continue to grow. 
 
It’s an industry where we’ve also made tax changes. Earlier I 
talked about how in all of our budgets, we have made changes 
that have enabled, that have encouraged economic growth. One 
of those changes is in the area of the film industry where we’ve 
made changes to the tax regime for people who are involved in 
the film industry and that has allowed the film industry to grow 
even more in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s an industry where the provincial government will be 
investing, along with the federal government, in a sound stage 
so that we provide, if you like, an infrastructure for even more 
growth in the film industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s some of the changes that I’ve seen in my own city, in the 
case of Regina, Mr. Speaker. But the story goes on around 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think Saskatoon significantly has seen a tremendous amount 
of growth these last 10 years as these other sectors, these other 
industries I’ve talked about have expanded; that these 50,000 
jobs have grown and many of those 50,000 jobs have grown in 
our major urban centres, Mr. Speaker, where there are economic 

opportunities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get into a list of all these 
businesses that my colleague got into. Suffice it to say that 
Saskatchewan over the period 1992-2000 had the third fastest 
growth in the gross domestic product among all the provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently a study by KPMG, which is a consulting 
firm, did a study on competitiveness and they ranked 
Saskatchewan as one of the most competitive jurisdictions in 
which to do business. Saskatoon ranked second among all the 
major cities in the North American Midwest. Regina ranked 
fourth when compared to the same group. 
 
So I think that we are well positioned, Mr. Speaker, to continue 
to grow in Saskatchewan. And again, Mr. Speaker, they may 
say, they may say that the glass is half empty. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I look at all the changes that have taken in place in the 
Saskatchewan economy. I look at all the things that the 
Saskatchewan government, over the course of the last 10 years 
has done to create a climate for business growth in 
Saskatchewan. And I say — and I say unequivocally, Mr. 
Speaker — the glass is half full. 
 
And without too much ado, Mr. Speaker, and without too many 
more years, that glass will be full, Mr. Speaker, because there is 
a brighter future in Saskatchewan thanks to this government, 
Mr. Speaker. And I will be supporting the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate an 
opportunity to respond to the motion that was put forward to us 
today. 
 
There was some interesting statistics brought forward, and 
statistics usually tell the story that you wish them to tell if you 
put them in the right place and you try to construct them . . . or 
construct the right message around them. I really do agree with 
the member from Regina Victoria that, in fact, if we look at the 
analogy of the glass half full, it probably is — the question 
should be why isn’t the glass full at this particular stage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — There’s been 10 full years of NDP 
administration trying to put those fundamentals in place. And 
what do we see? We don’t see any of the fundamentals that will 
create the confidence needed for investment in this province. 
It’s just, it’s just not there. 
 
When you look at the record, the record is quite clear. Whether 
you want to consider the numbers that the motion referred to or 
not, the fact is that people are leaving the province. The fact is 
that jobs are leaving the province. The fact is that the 
population has not grown in this province, and by the last 
census, the province has experienced a decrease in growth — 
the only one, the only province in all of Canada that has 
experienced a decrease in growth. That has got to be a signal 
that things aren’t right; that the fundamentals are, are not in 
place. 
 
Just this morning when we looked in the paper, there was a 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

 

headline “Sask. loses ground as a place to invest.” They talk 
about Saskatchewan dropping from third place on the survey to 
seventh place in the survey. 
 
And they outlined a couple of quick items that resulted from 
that. And they highlighted the fact that it’s high Crown 
corporate . . . high corporate income tax rates which we have 
tried to highlight to this government for several months now — 
the highest usage of corporation capital tax in the country. 
 
And they also included one other item that doesn’t come 
forward very often. And all of this corporate tax includes 
provincial sales tax on business input costs. That is not very 
competitive when we’re looking at other jurisdictions that we 
have to compete against, when we’re talking about our 
economy. 
 
You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that we in this province, 
whether we like to think we’re isolated and immune from the 
rest of the things that are happening in Canada and in the rest of 
the world, we have to be competitive in here. We have to be 
competitive to try to attract investment. We have to try to be 
competitive to attract the jobs and the businesses that will result 
from that investment. 
 
What we’ve seen is again those high taxes that have not been 
attractive to the investment in this province. We’ve seen things 
like the GDP. Just recently reported, the GDP in Saskatchewan 
was actually at a negative — the only place in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen, and again this is part of the record, the last two 
years we’re looking at a budgetary deficit. We’re looking at the 
revenues over expenses and we see budgetary deficits and, in 
fact, the total debt increasing when you look at the total debt 
and liability of the province. That is not a good signal. It is not 
creating the proper fundamentals for attracting that investment. 
Because investment, remember, is a basis of confidence. 
 
I remember a story once, Mr. Speaker, that was relayed to me. 
It’s not an original story; it was a story that was relayed at a 
conference on the economy. And they were talking precisely 
about this situation where investors need the confidence to 
come and do what investors do. 
 
And investors were . . . In this case, the analogy went, the 
investors are like gophers. Gophers, in fact, in this province — 
and we all know about them — gophers do what gophers do 
best and that’s dig. And where gophers dig is where it is the 
easiest for them to do the job that they are designed to do or 
destined to do, and that is digging holes. 
 
Investors are the same, Mr. Speaker. Investors do what they do 
best and that is invest wherever the opportunities arise and 
wherever there is confidence that a return can be made on that 
investment. The things that I talked about so far have not given 
the signals that would allow that kind of confidence in 
investment in Saskatchewan. 
 
What we have seen, as I alluded to, Mr. Speaker, is the outflow 
of jobs and people over the years. Month after month we get the 
statistics. In the last two years, the statistics are showing that the 
number of people and jobs are on the decline. 
 

And as the member from Regina Victoria alluded to, he focused 
particularly on the agricultural economy. And certainly there is 
some problems in the agriculture economy and we’ll talk about 
that in a minute. 
 
But the fact is that we are losing jobs from my perspective in 
my constituency, we can see people on the move virtually on a 
daily basis, moving across the border. And decisions are made 
on the basis of comparison from one side of the border to the 
other. And I’ve talked about that and I don’t mind using that as 
an example once again. 
 
The people that are moving is a big concern. The people that are 
moving across that border are the people that are in the age 
group that are the largest wage earners and therefore the people 
that we need to have in this province to keep them in the 
province or attract them back to this province so that we can 
start building the economy based on those kinds of people. We 
need that tax base so that we can provide what governments are 
supposed to provide in terms of infrastructure, roads, health 
cares, and schools. 
 
It is the dynamics of the age of the people that is most 
troubling. We certainly have a higher than normal proportion of 
age group up to 25, and we also have a disproportionate amount 
of people in the age group 65 and over. It is that centre group 
that are young and middle-aged high-wage earners, trained 
people, educated people that in fact are leaving the province. 
That is not the right way for the province to go if we’re trying 
to grow the economy. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Really to grow the economy by a mere 1 per cent a year surely 
is not too much to ask. And why can’t that be a legitimate 
target? The population of Canada is growing at 1 per cent a 
year. The population of most of the other provinces, growing at 
1 per cent a year. Our neighbouring province, which this 
government is reluctant to try to compare to, is growing at a rate 
of maybe 3 per cent a year and continuing to attract people out 
of our province. 
 
However, what we have to do is to try to put the fundamentals 
in place, not to try to ignore those things, but let’s put the 
fundamentals in place to see what is going . . . what they’re 
doing right in order to build that economy and attract those kind 
of people. 
 
The difference, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency in the city of 
Lloydminster is — and I’m going to use that comparison again 
— it’s the . . . it’s exactly the same people. It’s with . . . the 
same sun is shining and the same wind is blowing. 
 
There’s only two things different that results in the third. The 
first one is taxation difference between one side of the border to 
the other. The other is regulation. There’s a regulation 
difference from one side of the border to the other. Those two 
together, Mr. Speaker, result in a third and probably a more 
important factor, and that is an attitude or a confidence in what 
their future is. 
 
That confidence is a most critical element in developing and 
attracting investment and developing your economy. If you 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

don’t have the proper attitude, there’s a whole chain of things 
that will not happen. If the attitude is correct and the 
fundamentals are there to be the base level, that is a key 
element. 
 
And let me give you an example. In the last year or two the 
government has tried to put forward a strategy with glossy 
brochures and radio ads talking about, we have to change the 
attitude in this province; we have to get the attitude up and 
away and we can feel much better about ourselves. A very 
positive thing to do if in fact the fundamentals are in place. 
 
But you can’t, you can’t get investment, you can’t get the 
confidence of investment and you can’t get the confidence of 
people just because they have a better attitude. It has to be 
based on something that can make a return in the . . . in this 
whole process of attracting people and attracting investment. 
 
If you don’t have the confidence, first of all you’re not going to 
get the investment. And the investment I think is the most 
critical element of economic development. Investment is the 
key generator, and it has to be investment from an outside 
source. You can use investments from your own savings 
account for a period of time but you’ve got to have some kind 
of outside injection of capital or investment to make things 
happen. 
 
If you continually use the investment from within the province, 
for instance, with Crown corporations or taxpayers’ money, it 
would be similar, Mr. Speaker, to . . . I would compare it to a 
mechanic trying to make a living servicing his wife’s cars and 
his son’s cars. You’ve got to have something outside with fresh 
investment injecting into your economy to actually grow the 
economy, otherwise it becomes more and more stagnant; it 
becomes self-defeating and you finally run out of money and 
you run out of vigour. 
 
So the confidence is really a basis of where the . . . how the 
investment is going to be placed. If an investor has confidence 
and the project is right, the two will come together very rapidly. 
And we’ve seen that in all kinds of examples and models all 
across both our province but particularly in other provinces. 
Because if you don’t have the investment, you’re not going to 
create the businesses and you’re not going to then create the 
opportunity that the business can fulfill. And without the 
businesses, you’re not going to have the jobs that will follow 
through. And all of those things along that chain are the 
elements that will be supplying the tax base and an increasing 
tax base that we have to have in this province. 
 
And so it’s a spiral. It’s a . . . and it can spiral up and it can 
spiral down. And what we’ve seen in this province is that whole 
spiral going down and the economy going flat and without an 
increase in jobs or in numbers. That can be corrected because 
we . . . and it will have to be corrected if we want to develop the 
economy in this province. 
 
One of the things that we have to do in order to attract those 
kinds of people is to make sure that the confidence level is there 
and not deterred by the fact that maybe you’re going to be 
investing in the province and then in competition with 
government money through either Crown corporations or direct 
government intervention. That is probably one of the factors 

that will deter an investor more quickly than anything if he 
knows that . . . if he’s going to be competing against his own 
tax dollars. That just is one of the things that have to be 
corrected, and particularly if the investments are in areas where 
there’s already private industry invested, whether it be security 
systems or whether it be television cable distribution. The 
signals that are being sent there are most devastating when it 
comes to attracting investment and therefore those kinds of 
opportunity. 
 
That’s a huge thing that we have to overcome. And the signals 
that have been sent out so far with Crown investments into the 
economy certainly goes back to people remembering things like 
the potatoes. There’s about $30 million that was invested and 
then lost in potatoes. There was about $60 million now tied up 
in Information Services that still hasn’t been tested out to be a 
. . . and operating efficiently. That has yet to be seen. We’re still 
talking about a $20 million investment in places like Atlanta, in 
an Atlanta-based dot-com company. 
 
It just seems to me that if you’re going to put equity and 
investments into a . . . into an economy, it’s got to be here in 
this province, and it should be outside. We don’t need the 
public money that the government is responsible for to be 
invested in places from Australia to Alberta to Atlanta. 
Certainly we don’t need these kinds of investments in . . . from 
Tennessee to BC (British Columbia). We need the investments 
here. We need to create the opportunities. We need to create the 
jobs and the tax base so that we can expand this province here, 
and nothing that we have seen yet from this government in the 
last 10 years has turned that around. 
 
We’re still having problems trying to recover from a lack of 
money from this province, and we need to increase that 
investment and that tax base as I mentioned. 
 
When we’re looking at the investments that should be in this 
province, much of the time we’re seeing a reverse of these 
investments that are actually leaving the province. And 
unfortunately that’s the case with a lot of people that are 
leaving, certainly agriculture that has a large capital base. We’re 
seeing retirees leaving this province because they find that there 
is a better return on their scarce retirement investments in other 
provinces, and when that happens the investment goes and 
doesn’t come back. 
 
I know when there is a farmer that has decided to leave the 
province and he decides to sell some of the land, capitalize it, 
and it becomes part of his retirement fund, he will go to where 
he gets the best return or the best service for that money and 
very often than not that leaves the province. It not only leaves, 
but the investment leaves, the person leaves, and likely never to 
return. That’s something that is a real problem. 
 
We have . . . When workers leave the province to look for 
opportunities outside the province, we don’t see a great influx 
of those people coming back. When we see employers that have 
businesses leaving the province — they set up businesses 
outside — we don’t see them rushing back into the province 
under the circumstances that are in place now. 
 
What we have to do, in getting back to an earlier statement, we 
have to make sure that we in this province are creating a 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

 

competitive environment for investing here, a competitive 
environment for attracting those investments and for regulation 
as well. Without those two elements, we are going to continue 
to leave or have people leave and jobs leave the province. 
 
Some of the other signals that are rather disturbing, Mr. 
Speaker, that sends the wrong signals again is the budgetary 
process that we have. We’re showing that the budgets are 
focusing merely on one part of our economy in this province. 
It’s the General Revenue Fund budget and it’s being . . . 
numbers being added and subtracted so that it can end up with a 
supposed budget surplus of, in this case, a very small amount 
this year. 
 
But there’s other things that are leaving, taking out of that 
budget and being put into other areas such as the education 
capital proposal that is put forward here, things that are not 
under the perusal of the legislative debate when it comes to 
looking at the budget. 
 
And so a very large percentage of our population, a large part of 
our economy, Mr. Speaker, is in fact outside of the purview and 
the debate in this Chamber when it comes to the budget. That is 
not a great signal. We have to look at the entire picture of the 
economy in this province so that decisions by investors can be 
made on how the province is doing. We just don’t have that 
kind of information, certainly not at hand, when we’re trying to 
make these kinds of decisions. 
 
The agricultural part of our economy certainly is in some 
problems. We’re trying to work our way through these as a 
province, and we’ve had some suggestions that we thought 
might help. And the member from Regina Victoria is correct in 
saying that the percentage of the economy attributed to 
agriculture is in the . . . in decline and it would be certainly nice 
if we could make it . . . revive it to the point where it was — I 
think he used the figure of 15 years ago — that would make it 
look a lot better. Even though it’s not . . . it’s only 7 per cent, it 
is in fact a substantial part of our economy. 
 
But my question would be, what has been done in the last 10 
years to make it a better industry? What has been done to try to 
put the fundamentals in such a way that more investment can be 
made into agriculture? We haven’t seen an influx of investment 
capital into agriculture for a great long time. 
 
In fact, it looks like it’s . . . there are other signals that are in 
place. We’re seeing a reduction . . . or an increase in the crop 
insurance rates with a reduction in coverage. We’ve seen the 
hail coverage of crop insurance going down. We’ve seen an 
increase in the property tax base, particularly for education. 
 
Those are not comforting signs and signals to the producers in 
this province. And so the question that producers have, what do 
we have to do in order to try to make a living and what 
assistance is there? What fundamentals can be changed so that 
we can in fact make a living from this farm? 
 
Well what can be done is in fact you’ve got to start looking at 
the magic word of value added. You’ve got to look at the more 
intensive agriculture. And there are models around the world, 
and I’ve been there to see some of these models that have in 
fact turned the basic production agriculture into a much more 

valuable and value-added part of the economy. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And we need those incentives put in place from the 
government, not to get involved in an equity sense like we hear 
that they will be doing coming up in an ethanol case, but we 
need to have the government put the fundamentals in place that 
attract the investment and interest right across the board. 
 
We can’t be picking which we think might be a winner in the 
industry and going with that. The job of the government is to 
put those fundamentals in place that apply to everybody and try 
to attract. 
 
There is an opportunity in this province and I fully agree. The 
opportunity is immense in this province and I think basically 
it’s because the rest of the provinces and the rest of the world 
has had an opportunity gain and we have been very flat in the 
development of our economy here. 
 
That opportunity gap is substantial. But I think with the right 
fundamentals in place — and I’ve talked about some of the 
things that have to be done — if the right fundamentals are in 
place with the right incentives, there is going to be a great 
interest in that opportunity and that opportunity gap will close 
rapidly. And I think that there will be a great deal of interest 
from investors right across both Canada and from outside of 
Canada. 
 
So I implore, I implore the government that has the mandate to 
make sure that those fundamentals are in right for all aspects of 
our economy, to do the right thing. Don’t wait for something 
naturally to happen. Don’t wait to blame others for what can be 
done here. What we need to do is to make sure that that 
confidence is elevated, but the fundamentals are in place so that 
we can build on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like to move an amendment to 
that motion. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the amendment into the 
record. That . . . I move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That all words after “Saskatchewan economy” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 
despite the hurdles placed in their way by the NDP’s failed 
economic strategy which has resulted in Saskatchewan 
trailing all other provinces in economic growth over the last 
four years and also trailing the rest of the economy in job 
creation. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure this afternoon to rise to speak to the amendment 
to the motion. Certainly the amendment more accurately 
reflects the economic climate in Saskatchewan and certainly as 
we listened to the member from Regina Victoria in his speech, 
certainly be able to understand that he would also agree with 
that amendment. 
 
He has made some very thought-provoking comments that 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

reflect that the province of Saskatchewan has certainly been a 
detriment in the last 11 years to economic growth in Canada 
and certainly put a tremendous strain upon the province of 
Saskatchewan in the last 11 years as we’ve tried to recover from 
the detriment that was placed upon the province in the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we talk about economic development in the 
province, it’s often incumbent upon us to look back on how 
economic development, or lack of economic development, has 
affected the province in several areas. I can take a look in my 
own constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers and see, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the detrimental effect that the NDP government has 
had upon my constituency in the last 11 years. Businesses are 
closing at a record rate, at a pace that has been unprecedented 
probably since 1929. 
 
That’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at the 
change in the millennium, that what we have to hold up to is the 
huge Depression that hit our province, the huge problems that 
hit Saskatchewan in 1929, and reflect that we’re probably very 
much in the same situation today as we were back then. 
 
Unfortunately this province has tried its best to hold the 
province down, develop policies since the Regina Manifesto 
that has stated very clearly that we need to hold the province 
down, we need to depopulate rural Saskatchewan. Certainly the 
NDP government, in following its predecessor, the old 
Canadian Commonwealth Federation, that depopulation of rural 
Saskatchewan would be an unfortunate side effect of expanded 
socialism in this province. 
 
And it has certainly taken a tremendous toll on rural 
Saskatchewan and economic development in rural 
Saskatchewan. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that also 
reflects upon urban Saskatchewan, very much so. You take a 
look at urban Saskatchewan and what has happened throughout 
the many decades since 1944 is that urban Saskatchewan has 
not grown appropriately either . . . but because of the decline of, 
the decline of rural Saskatchewan since 1944. 
 
We take a look at some of the statistics that have been brought 
to us, certainly on this side of the House, where we have a 
preference for looking at statistics that have been brought to us 
by those in the statistics gathering area that have a credible 
reputation, rather than just come from, just come from assistants 
inside the NDP caucus office. 
 
But certainly what we have seen in the last several years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is a decline in growth in this province. We’ve 
seen investment leave this province. And unfortunately, since 
the election of the new leader in January of 2001 for the NDP is 
that the decline in economic development, the decline in 
economic opportunity in this province has actually accelerated 
at a rate, as I previously mentioned, probably comparable to 
1929. 
 
We certainly, of course on this side of the House, very much 
respect the efforts that have been made by Saskatchewan 
businesses, by Saskatchewan co-operatives, by the communities 
that we represent in this House all over Saskatchewan. And we 
certainly want to commend the efforts of entrepreneurs of all 
ages who’ve tried at their very best, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
achieve that type of economic development, economic growth 

that is necessary for sustainable communities — whether it’s in 
the hamlet of Bladworth or it’s the city of Saskatoon. That same 
entrepreneurial spirit exists in every community in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What is needed, what is really needed at this time in our history, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the kind of infrastructure, the kind of 
attitude change in this province that is so desperately needed, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to turn this province around and to make it 
into one of the most successful provinces in the country and in 
the history of Canada. 
 
Often we, we on this side of the House take a look at what we 
could achieve here on this side on the House. And certainly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, both you and I will be able to take a 
significant advantage of the five bucks that are now owed to us. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is 
probably one of the most blessed provinces and one of the most 
blessed jurisdictions in the world. We take a look, we can . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and the other side of the House we do this often 
— take a look at what we have in this province. 
 
We have a significant percentage of the arable land, the arable 
land, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Land that is some of the most productive, certainly in North 
America. Many areas throughout the world that are . . . that is 
comparable to the ability to grow all sorts of grains and 
oilseeds, grains and oilseeds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that can be 
used to feed the people of the world. 
 
We’re experiencing, unfortunately, at this time a bit of a tough 
time in the growing sector of the arable land sector. Many parts 
of the province have been suffering under a drought for a 
couple of years. And certainly the new US farm Bill is going to 
have . . . put a significant attack upon our agricultural 
producers. 
 
But it’s more than that, it’s more than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
What the attack that is being placed upon the agricultural 
producers in our province, and as the member from 
Lloydminster has actually portrayed, agriculture is a significant 
portion of the economy in Saskatchewan. It’s not the only one 
— we have many sectors and I will be getting to them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But certainly agriculture is going through 
some tough times right now. 
 
But probably the biggest attack, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being 
placed upon the agricultural producers of Saskatchewan is 
actually coming from their own provincial government. You 
know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This government actually has 
the highest . . . some of the highest property taxes in anywhere, 
anywhere; the highest in Canada, we have the highest property 
taxes in Canada. It’s more than double, more than double, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, than property taxes are for other jurisdictions 
on an average throughout the rest of Canada. 
 
That puts a significant strain upon, not only agricultural 
producers, although it puts a lot of strain on agricultural 
producers in this province having, you know, paid double the 
property taxes that their neighbours do in Alberta or Manitoba. 
 
But it puts a tremendous amount of pressure also on business, 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

 

on business, other business in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Whether we look in Saskatoon or Regina or Prince 
Albert or Moose Jaw, they are also suffering from the same 
economic doldrums because of this one issue alone, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And there are many other issues, and we need to spend some 
time this afternoon going through . . . we’ll spend some time, 
we’ll go through some of these issues to help the people of 
Saskatchewan understand just how devastating to the provincial 
economy this NDP government has been. 
 
We can move into the energy sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Saskatchewan again — like the agricultural sector, the 
agricultural sector is blessed with a high percentage of arable 
land in the country of Canada — in the energy sector, we take a 
look at the oilfields. We compare ourselves to the other 
provinces and territories in Canada. Again we can play a 
leading role in the development of oil in this country. 
 
Since 1944 it has been the practice of first the Canadian 
Commonwealth Federation and then its successor, the New 
Democratic Party, is that we need to save oil energy in this 
province for a rainy day. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest to the NDP 
government today is that it is a rainy day. People are leaving 
this province in droves, our tax base is shrinking. And so then if 
that doesn’t constitute a rainy day . . . When in fact in the year 
2001 we were the only province, we were the only province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that actually suffered a recession. We 
suffered a recession last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Canada. 
And so then if that’s not a rainy day, then certainly on this side 
of the House we don’t know what else could be. 
 
Apparently, you know, they talk about the half-full cup 
syndrome. And certainly that’s one way to look at it. The NDP 
have always preferred only to have their cup half full. 
 
On this side of the House . . . And it was previously mentioned 
by the member from Lloydminster, is that with all the wealth 
and resources that we have in this province our cup should have 
been full from day one. It was full during the ’30s; it was full 
during the ’20s. It was full into the ’40s — it was full into the 
’40s, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But for some reason or other because of the proponents of the 
Regina Manifesto, it was decided that half full, half full was 
adequate; we need to wrestle control of the economy away from 
those people who wanted to succeed in life and hand it over to 
those people who have absolutely no business background and 
see if they couldn’t even do worse and . . . which is exactly 
what they did, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We also — in the energy sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker — is that 
the province of Saskatchewan has been blessed with natural 
gas. Certainly as politicians we’ve heard quite often that . . . 
Many people refer to the NDP government as being already 
being blessed with natural gas, but it’s not that natural gas I’m 
referring to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(16:00) 
 

We have a natural gas wealth in this province that is being, 
again, hoarded for a rainy day. Certainly jurisdictions 
surrounding us, to the east of us, to the south of us, are looking 
for cheap energy. And Saskatchewan is blessed with plenty of 
this cheap energy. And for some reason this government has 
decided it would be more appropriate if we waited, if we waited 
just a little longer, then we would be able to use that in a more 
appropriate fashion. 
 
Well what’s appropriate here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do we use a 
commodity that has a price and a value to it today or do we wait 
for 40 or 50 or 100 years and wait for an alternative energy 
source to be developed and lose that opportunity and lose a job 
creation and the economic growth that could be related to the 
energy sector through the sales of natural gas and the 
development of energy that we could use in this province for 
economic growth and certainly for the economies of 
jurisdictions, more specifically to the south and east of us, that 
are crying for that type of an energy, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Again as we look around the province at all the opportunities 
that are available and that the NDP government has decided that 
it’s more appropriate to save for a so-called rainy day. The only 
rainy day that we’ve ever noticed from this NDP government, 
of course, is their rainy day fund, which turns out that nobody 
can find and doesn’t have a bank account number and is 
probably registered with the bank of never-never land. 
 
But anyway as we look around this province and certainly in 
my area of the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and other members 
from farther north, you get north of Saskatoon and into the 
areas of Shellbrook-Spiritwood, Carrot River Valley, 
Athabasca, Meadow Lake, Cumberland, one of the most 
incredible renewable — renewable — resources that we have, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is our forestry sector. 
 
Large, very large tracts of Saskatchewan have been blessed with 
some very outstanding forestry opportunities. A forestry 
opportunity that is looked upon in this province with a great 
deal of pleasure. It’s something that can be used for tourism, 
people are willing to travel from all over the world just to see 
our pristine forests. 
 
And certainly one of the things we have not done very well is 
gone out into the world, is in fact . . . and saying that we’ve not 
done very well, of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a bit of an 
understatement. The fact of the matter is the Government of 
Saskatchewan has seen in their wisdom is that we don’t want 
people, we don’t want people from around the world to know 
about us, as that . . . I’m not sure whether they believe that 
Saskatchewan should be the world’s best kept secret or what it 
is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But certainly we take a look at forestry 
and the opportunities of being able to sell our pristine forests to 
. . . for the pleasures of . . . viewing pleasures of the people of 
the world. We have done almost nothing in allowing that to 
happen. 
 
But there’s a bigger . . . There’s a bigger aspect to that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. When we talk about forestry, we have a bit of 
a curious phenomenon with our forests in Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly we’ve heard from groups throughout the world 
that there needs to be an appropriate harvesting method and we 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

look at forests that protects . . . that protects new growth and 
protects young forests from raping and pillaging. And certainly 
that’s very appropriate. 
 
We take a look at jurisdictions, whether they’re in North 
America or whether they’re in Europe or Asia. They’re talking 
about . . . They’re talking about forest, that we need to protect 
young forests and allow them to mature appropriately so that 
the species can regenerate and that our forests will continue 
forever. 
 
Well in Saskatchewan, of course, our forests are slightly 
different than forests in many parts of the world. We can take a 
look at some of the old growth forest, whether . . . in British 
Columbia. We can take a look at some of the old growth forest 
down that entire West Coast seaboard, right down into northern 
California. They’re talking about old growth forests that 
achieve ages of up to 300 years of age — 300 years of age, of 
course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well in Saskatchewan our forests are a lot different from that. 
They’re a lot different. The trees are smaller. They don’t have 
the blessings of the rain that the West Coast get, certainly. So 
the trees are smaller here. And unfortunately, because of the 
drier conditions, they’re also . . . they’re also much more 
acceptable to disease at a much younger age. 
 
A very, very old forest, a very, very old forest in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is actually 90 years of age. 
It’s only 90 years of age. Old growth forest or a forest that’s 
considered to be old growth in Saskatchewan is actually only 60 
years of age — 60 years of age, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and 
that’s in the coniferous forest, in the pine and the spruce, the 
balsam. 
 
When we take a look at other species and most specifically the 
aspen — the aspen, Mr. Deputy Speaker — in the provincial 
forest, the fact of the matter is an aspen is . . . actually reaches 
maturity at only 20 years of age and is actually in quite a 
disrespectable . . . disrespectful state by the time it reaches 40 
years of age for a tree, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’re having, what we’re seeing 
now is that, because of the invasion of man so much more 
significantly into Saskatchewan in the last 200 years, is that 
forests in Saskatchewan, because of better firefighting methods 
and care and nurturing of the forests is that they’re . . . forests in 
Saskatchewan in a much larger scale are staying on and living 
to reach maturity. 
 
Because of that, because of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we now 
have forests that are dying from old age, that they’re dying from 
disease. We have spruce budworm getting into the old growth 
forest. We have dwarf mistletoe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, getting 
into the old growth forest. 
 
What’s going to happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we’re going to 
be struck with a tragedy. So that what’s going to happen is if we 
don’t take advantage of these forests, a tragedy is going to 
strike the forests and we’re going to lose them. We’re going to 
lose them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so then we need to develop harvesting practices to 

immediately take advantage of this opportunity so that 
economic growth and economic development and economic 
wealth — economic wealth most specifically, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — can be taken advantage of in this forestry sector. 
 
The last little one I just want to make a few comments about, of 
course, is the mining sector in the province. Certainly we saw in 
the budget that the government has put together some rather, 
some rather iffy numbers surrounding potash in this province. 
And we certainly see that what’s happening is of course potash 
is probably not going to see any growth in the next little while 
because of economic conditions in this province. They’re 
heavily taxed and because of that they’re going just to kind of 
maintain a constant level for the next few years until after the 
next election. 
 
One of the things though that we also notice on this side of the 
House is that what’s happening is that in the uranium sector, is 
that again it’s kind of on a hold basis. And what’s happening is 
that the mining companies are just producing enough uranium 
to just help to pay their taxes, make sure they can pay their 
wages, and produce enough product for their parent companies 
in France and Germany. And again, they would like to take a lot 
more advantage of economic growth and development and 
wealth in this province, and are being restricted because of the 
regressive tax policies of this NDP government. 
 
And so then it is with a great deal of pleasure today that I’m 
supporting the amendment brought forth by the member from 
Lloydminster. I think it’s a great amendment. It most accurately 
reflects the economic conditions in Saskatchewan. But more 
time needs to be spent by this government to take a look at the 
wrongs that they’ve inflicted upon the province of 
Saskatchewan. And so it’s most appropriate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Motion No. 9 — Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to 
stand in the House today to talk about one area of government 
that affects most people in this province, and that is education 
and usually our children’s education we’re talking about. 
 
The government’s decision this year to change the Department 
of Education to the Department of Learning and combine the 
two departments is something that ensures us that we all know 
that learning for life is going to be a recognized name or a 
recognized slogan that we should be hearing right across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last number of years we’ve heard about the 
problems in health care and the problems with highways and 
the different problems that we believe happened because of this 
NDP government. But education is one area that we don’t hear 
about very often. 
 
And I think we can actually congratulate the school boards and 
the teachers for the fact that they are holding together a 
department or an area of life that the government has let down, 
that they’ve assumed the responsibility and they’ve made sure 
that there’s still work going on and that we . . . and that 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

 

education is still going to be a priority for their children and for 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s easy to 
talk about the problems in health care when we have waiting 
lists that are increasing every year. It’s easy to see that there’s 
problems with the highways when you have pieces of asphalt 
coming through people’s windows. But with education, we’re 
not going to see the problems till later on, till down the road, 
because in the meantime school boards and teachers have been, 
have been making sure that they pick up the slack and taking 
the responsibility that this government has ignored. 
 
The Throne Speech this year was interesting and I was 
delighted to hear that the government indicated that education 
was the third pillar in their stone of building the province. 
Quality education, they said. And this is something that I think 
most, most of the people in the province thought finally the 
government has their priorities straight. It’s something that we 
can all bank on and ensure that not just children but adults and 
very young people are going to have an opportunity to be the 
very best people they could be. 
 
But just 10 days later our hopes were dashed when the budget 
came down and we realized that this government again just 
gave lip service to education. The SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) and people right around the province, before the 
budget came down, had indicated that there was going to have 
to be $25 million added to the education budget just to have the 
status quo. That wasn’t going to include any of the increases for 
teachers’ salaries that are being negotiated. They weren’t 
talking about the increases to the fuel or the utility rates. Just to 
maintain the status quo was going to be $25 million. 
 
And on budget day, what happened? We learned that there was 
only going to be $14 million put into education, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So again the province has let down the children of the 
province, and they’ve let down businesses, and they’ve let 
down the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the, when . . . This winter the member from 
Lloydminster and the Leader of the Opposition party went to 
Ireland to look at the Irish model that had been worked on for 
the last 10 years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Ireland was in the same 
sort of situation that Saskatchewan was about 10 years ago. 
They had a . . . they were in a recession; they had people 
leaving in droves; they had businesses that were not encouraged 
to go to Ireland. And they made a turnaround that was 
remarkable in the European economy. 
 
And when our leader and the member from Lloydminster went 
there and talked with these people, they learned that although 
there was lots of different issues that had to be dealt with, there 
was three areas that basically had to be changed in order to turn 
the economy around. 
 
The first one was cutting taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s 
something that we as the Saskatchewan Party have talked about 
a lot. 
 
The second one was a social partnership making sure that all 
people that were dealing with the economy, that is the business 

people, the working people, labour people, First Nations people, 
all worked together. And that was one of the keys to changing 
— to turning the economy around. 
 
And the third part of it was education. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
Ireland they recognized that education was the key to success 
and they worked on that, and we have found that Ireland is now 
the jewel in the economy. 
 
In 1905 when Saskatchewan was made a province — that’s less 
than 100 years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker — our pioneers and 
our grandfathers knew that there was some areas that they 
couldn’t look after themselves. And they elected a government 
and told them that the responsibilities that they were entrusting 
to them where ones that no matter how hard they worked 
themselves they couldn’t look after these areas. That’s health 
care, and highways, and a social safety net, and education. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s something that we feel that 
this government . . . all four of them is something this 
government has been neglecting. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the cuts on budget day we have had 
many phone calls from different school boards and teachers 
saying that because of the downloading again onto local school 
boards, there’s going to be, there’s going to be cuts; there’s 
going to be cuts to programs that are issued that are available to 
students. There’s going to be cuts to staff. We’re going to see 
teacher layoffs right across the province. 
 
(16:15) 
 
We’re going to see more school closures and we’re going to see 
a rise in taxes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatoon Public School Board’s 
chairperson, Mr. Gordon Wyant, actually talked to the media 
about the changes in funding and what has happened to his 
school board because of the decrease in funding. 
 
And he’s made the point that the government has unilaterally 
changed the rules governing education, leaving the Saskatoon 
Board of Education in the untenable position of having to raise 
taxes on our ratepayers or cut services to students. 
 
He acknowledges there was an enhancement to the foundation 
operating grant but the board’s actual funding from the province 
decreased by 1.71 per cent, despite the fact that the province 
then indicated K to grade 12 education increased about 4.2 
million. 
 
The Saskatoon Public School Board received less funding 
because of its decision to change the elements of the funding 
formula, known as the computational mill rate, to 17 mills from 
16 mills. 
 
This is the discussion I had with the Minister of Learning for 
the last time we had estimates up and he wouldn’t acknowledge 
that this change was actually going to affect taxpayers in this 
province substantially. By making that change $37 million of 
responsibility for education is going to be downloaded onto 
taxpayers. 
 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

The change has a dramatic impact on the budget in Saskatoon. 
It signals a belief that a greater portion of the cost of public 
education should be controlled by local taxpayers, contrary to 
the government’s stated policy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has to be an acknowledgement that 
by changing this mill rate the government is actually ensuring 
that taxpayers are going to take up more of the burden of paying 
for education and the province itself is taking less 
responsibility. 
 
In my area, in the Wadena School Division, there was the . . . 
the administrator says that the most prominent questions that 
were at . . . should be answered on budget day were still 
unanswered. There are a lot of numbers to come forward and 
they . . . the government has not acknowledged that there is . . . 
the teaching negotiations are still going on and that the 
decisions on the increase is going to be made by the 
government. And that responsibility is going to be passed down 
and the ratepayers are going to have to pay for it. 
 
Three quarters of the budget is going to . . . depends on 
teachers’ salaries. And when that change happens, it’s going to 
be the responsibility of not just the school boards that get some 
money from the government but there are now 14 school 
divisions in the province that have zero grant forwards, 
meaning they get no funding from the government at all. 
 
So then the negotiations are going to be going on and then the 
government is going to say this is how much you have to pay 
your teachers this year. That responsibility then is going to be 
going back to the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1992, the operating grant from the . . . 
for K to 12 education was $374,346,000. In 1997-98 it was 
370,000. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in that time, in the . . . from 1991 
to 1998, the amount of money that government cut out of 
education was $357 million. 
 
In other words, if this government would have frozen the 
funding at the level that they . . . was given . . . that they gave 
taxpayers in 1991-92, there would have been $371 million more 
to our education system. 
 
So I am always amazed at the members opposite when they talk 
about freezing. I think the education sector would have been 
delighted that this government would have froze spending to 
education. At least they wouldn’t have downloaded that much 
onto the taxpayers. 
 
The members opposite have been talking today about the 
province suffering because of revenues going down and the 
budget, whenever we talk about the budget and the amount of 
money that’s being spent, they continue to say that they’re . . . 
because of the decrease in revenues they’ve had to make 
cutbacks that are going to be hurting across different areas. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the province is suffering 
not so much because revenues are down, but because this 
government has misplaced priorities. There is lots of money as 
far as they’re concerned for out-of-province investments and 
overseas investments, but there isn’t money for education and 
health care and the priorities for people of this province. 

Indeed, this NDP government has ignored schooling and 
municipal funding for the last 10 years and it’s not . . . we can’t 
continue to do that and see our province grow. 
 
The Canadian taxpayers association indicated that in 2001 
Saskatchewan families were hit with huge property tax 
increases. The total property taxes, municipal and education, 
were up 7 per cent. The total rural property taxes were up 9.5 
per cent. The total urban property taxes was up 4.3 per cent. 
The total property taxes on agricultural land, up 10.3 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the kind of information that we are 
trying to make sure the members opposite recognize when we 
talk about farm families and the hurt that’s happening to them 
financially at this time and . . . along with the drought and the 
other, the other experiences with subsidies from the US that’s 
hitting them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan schools have the . . . school 
taxes is the highest in all of Canada. Saskatchewan pays 59 per 
cent of education funding is derived from property taxes. The 
Canadian average is 25.9. We’re over double the Canadian 
average for the amount of money that we’re expecting property 
owners to pay for education. This is affecting businesses right 
across the province. It’s affecting landowners; it’s affecting 
people’s decision on whether they should live in this province 
or not. It’s not something that the government recognizes and I 
. . . or publicly recognizes. They have talked about the decrease 
in personal income tax, but the education property tax is 
something that I don’t hear the government talking about. 
 
The education costs due to . . . The provincial government has 
indicated that because of the decrease to property taxes, Regina 
public and separate school boards are going to have an increase 
this year of over 1 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the situation has progressed to a point 
where there was tax revolts across the province a number of 
years ago, and we’re hearing talks of that happening again, 
especially since the NDP has cancelled the education property 
tax rebate program. That’s something that although a lot of 
farmers had indicated it wasn’t a lot of money and the programs 
could have been carried out . . . administered a lot better if it 
could have been done through the municipalities rather than 
having to send it into Regina. It was still some monies that they 
could count on. And this year that $25 million was cut out of 
the budget. 
 
What the NDP doesn’t seem to understand as well, property and 
education taxes have been increasing, taxpayers’ incomes have 
not been increasing. And it’s not just farm families, it’s 
labourers and seniors. The wage earners of this province are not 
seeing the increases that they need, but the property taxes have 
been going up. 
 
I believe that the Minister of Learning hasn’t lived up to his 
responsibility as the one who is the caretaker of learning in this 
province. When he was the . . . When he was campaigning as 
the leader of the Liberals in 1999, he campaigned on a promise 
to increase the provincial share of education up to 45 per cent. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this isn’t happening. The people 
across the province would have loved to have seen any kind of 
an increase and it didn’t happen; there was actually a decrease 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

 

this year. 
 
Saskatchewan’s Department of Education is actually planning 
for a loss of 35,000 students by the end of the decade. This is 
the type of situation where we know the government has 
decided to manage a decline instead of working for a growth in 
the province. 
 
Saskatchewan is ranked 8th out of the provinces in terms of 
provincial operating grants per student. Many of our schools, 
colleges, and universities are working out of facilities that are 
using obsolete materials. They are . . . and the buildings 
themselves have been condemned and they have deteriorated to 
the point that we acknowledge that there is 70 per cent of our 
educational facilities are over 30 years old and they are all 
going to be in need of major repairs. 
 
While many states and provinces and private educators are 
offering complete high school, college certificates, and diploma 
classes through long distance education on-line, Saskatchewan 
has been slow to utilize that technology. Again, this is a place 
where the government seems to be . . . (inaudible) . . . to lead 
rather than . . . rather than to lead, you’re going to follow. 
 
Small town populations are declining and schools are struggling 
to recruit and retain teachers. This is an issue that we hear about 
whenever we go out to our small towns to talk about the 
problems with getting not just math and science teachers but 
principals and . . . and it’s an issue that we have to be facing. 
 
Twenty-five per cent of youth are at risk of not completing high 
school and the figure is moving towards 40 per cent, in spite of 
some of the actions that are taking place. Forty-eight per cent of 
public respondents to surveys believe that the major issue or 
problem facing Saskatchewan schools is lack of funding. That 
number has risen from 38 per cent in 1995 and 14 per cent in 
1984. 
 
Rural taxpayers are extremely disappointed with the NDP’s 
decision not to continue with the educational farm land property 
tax rebate and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) has indicated it’s disappointed with this 
decision as well. 
 
Education numbers aren’t just an indication of the number of 
students in the school system. They’re an indication of the 
economic climate. A growing education population means a 
growing economy — other provinces have done it but 
Saskatchewan has not. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, education is not a stand-alone department. 
When we have this . . . when we talk about education needs 
we’re talking about one of the departments; it’s a cog in the 
wheel. We have the economic climate in this province is not 
encouraging growth. That means our young people are leaving 
and young families are leaving the province in groves and this 
government has done nothing to change that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been the other . . . one issue that I haven’t 
heard the minister speak about very often is the First Nations 
children. Last week or two weeks ago there was a report that 
was brought forward by FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) and FSIN Vice-chief Lindsay Cyr made some 

comments that I think the Minister of Learning and the 
department itself should be very concerned about. 
 

The province’s education system both on- and off-reserve 
is failing to provide First Nations children with the basic 
level of knowledge and skills to complete their schooling. 
Cyr, who holds the education portfolio, said that a study 
released shows 78 per cent of First Nations youth have less 
than a high school education, compared to 49 per cent of 
non-Aboriginal youth. 
 
We have work to do in terms of guaranteeing our people 
have the tools that are required to deal with the education 
needed at the post-secondary level. Despite the amount of 
money spent on educating First Nations people and 
preparing them for universities, entry-level tests show that 
they lack the level of education that is required. Certificates 
show that the students having a grade 10 level education, 
but with their own testing and military testing it shows they 
do not. 

 
This is a concern that should be seen by the minister and by the 
government as something that’s really disheartening and 
frightening when we realize that perhaps the level of education 
that the kids have going out of school is not adequate. 
 
Are they prepared to compete on the same basis as other 
children? And what are we doing to make sure that we’re all on 
the same playing field? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Role of the School and SchoolPLUS 
documents was brought out last year and it actually had a 
number of recommendations that many of us could agree with 
and something that we feel could change the province and help 
many of the problems that we do have. 
 
Teachers and boards are dealing with issues that are far beyond 
the education issues. They’re dealing with health care. They’re 
dealing with social services and justice. And many of them are 
indicating that some of the problems that they deal with is 
making sure that the students are even fed and clothed and 
know that they’re ready to learn when they get to the school. 
 
So the community schools initiative that the government has 
implemented is something that we can believe in but at the 
same time we aren’t seeing the dollars go forward to actually 
work with the role of the schools to ensure that the children are 
ready for learning. 
 
Last week I had the opportunity to attend a community school 
meeting with some of the teachers. And I was interested to hear 
them note that when they came to school they all were working 
on the same line — that they all had the needs of the children in 
mind. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they open with a prayer that I think the 
members on both sides of the House would be interested in 
hearing, and I’m going to read it to you. The teacher that 
delivered it told me that I could share it with you and I’m 
hoping that the members opposite will understand that when the 
teachers go to their jobs in the morning, they’re doing the 
wishes of the parents and of the school boards and knowing that 
in their hands is the future of the children and thus the future of 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

our province. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The prayer starts: 
 

Lord, let me remember that today is a new day. 
 
Let me forget about Johnny sharpening my favourite pen in 
a pencil sharpener. 
Let me forget about Sarah breaking her crayons into a 
million little pieces. 
And let me forget about messy desks and spilled glue and 
paper airplanes that never quite made it to the garbage can. 
 
Dear Lord, this is what I pray that you will help me to 
remember. 
Remind me that Jennifer’s mom and dad just divorced so I 
may need extra patience and understanding. 
Remind me that Chris needs a snack when he gets to school 
and he rarely gets to school on time for breakfast and he 
can’t pay attention when his tummy is growling. 
Remind me that Cassie has a brand new baby at home and 
make sure I give her plenty of attention. 
And Lord, remind me not to frown when Joey tells me he 
didn’t get his homework done again. Let me not forget that 
he doesn’t have a desk, that he doesn’t have a room, and he 
doesn’t have a home of his own, and he does the best he 
can. 
 
There are so many needs to share with You — children 
who need shoes on their feet, jackets on their backs, and 
school supplies — and these are just the physical needs. 
 
Lord, you hear their prayers at night. Give them strength 
and courage to be the best they can be. Please let me be a 
positive influence on their lives and let my classroom be a 
warm, safe haven against the storm. 
 
And, O Heavenly Father, I almost forgot. Lord, I pray that 
you will help me to teach every child how to read and write 
and count. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we can get really carried away in politics in this 
room and think that we’re talking about numbers all the time. 
But we’re not. We’re talking about children and we’re talking 
about our future. If we don’t grow our children, we’re not going 
to grow our province. 
 
We don’t have silos in government. We don’t have different 
departments that work independently of each other. We have 
people that are working together as cogs in a wheel to make 
sure that everybody can grow together. 
 
And when this government makes decisions to invest in another 
country rather than to invest in education, when they make 
decisions to download onto taxpayers so that they move away, 
that’s affecting our children. And I don’t see the sincerity that 
this . . . that the budget speech talked about when it they said 
that education’s the third pillar in growing the province. I don’t 
see it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Your actions follow your words. And if they are . . . when we 

. . . when I hear it and then I see that they’ve decided that again 
we’re not going to fund education, then I can’t believe that 
there’s any truth to what the . . . to what this government is 
saying. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to bring forward a motion and it’s 
seconded by the member from Humboldt. And I would like 
leave to make a change in the wording. There was a . . . It’s 
actually a typographical error that I will take blame for. I want 
to say, with leave: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the provincial government 
for its continued downloading of education costs onto 
boards of education, forcing cuts in programming, teacher 
layoffs, and higher property taxes. 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to engage today in the debate 
regarding the motion put forward by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. The motion that reads: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the provincial government 
for its continued downloading of education costs onto 
boards of education, forcing cuts in programming, teacher 
layoffs, and higher property taxes. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the entire population of Saskatchewan 
have made it known to this NDP government for the last five or 
six years for sure that their priorities are misplaced, that their 
priorities are not on the children of our province, on the 
education of those children. 
 
The people of this province are really concerned that this 
government’s priorities are spending millions of dollars for 
out-of-province and overseas investments — dollars that have 
been lost, taxpayers’ dollars that have been lost, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; money that could have been put into education; that 
could have been put into health; that could have been put into 
any of the services that we need in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me give you a bit of a rundown on the 
losses that the taxpayers of this province have incurred at the 
hands of the NDP government in Crown corporation 
investments overseas and within our province. 
 
Eighty million dollars lost so far by the NDP’s new Information 
Services Corporation on a computerized land titles system that 
still doesn’t work. Sixteen million dollars lost on Channel Lake. 
 
Twenty-eight million dollars lost, and counting, on the NDP’s 
government-owned potato farm. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
was one of their success stories. There appears to be dollars for 
rotten potatoes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but nothing for school 
boards. 
 
Two point three million dollars lost on IQ&A, a company the 
NDP set up to sell personal health information; $2 million lost 
on an on-line auction company the NDP set up to compete with 
eBay, a private business; $80 million on an investment in 
Australia by SaskTel; $3 million lost by the NDP trying to buy 
a power company in Guyana. And millions more being invested 
by the NDP in money-losing dot-coms in British Columbia, 
Ontario, and even Nashville, Tennessee. 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

 

SaskTel has spent millions to set up new Crown corporations to 
compete with existing private sector security companies, cable 
companies, and farm implement dealers. Rather than letting the 
private sector do business, this NDP government is insisting 
that they’re going to compete with businesses, driving private 
business people out of the province — fewer taxpayers for our 
tax base. How in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do we expect 
to have funding tax dollars to support education? 
 
As a result, what the government does — because they don’t 
have any policies to grow this province — they download on 
municipalities, they download on school boards. And our 
children are the ones that end up paying the price because they 
no longer have programs in place that will help them become 
well educated. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other part of this is we’re losing 
teachers because school boards have had to lay teachers off 
because they can’t afford to keep them. So we now have higher 
student/teacher ratios than ever before. I ask you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that going to, is that going to point to quality 
education for our children? I think not. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has time and time 
again been trying to instruct the government that we need to 
grow the economy in order to have the tax base here to provide 
services to our children, to schools, to our health sector, to 
improving highways and every other sector. If we do not grow 
the population, we cannot possibly have the money to supply 
the services needed. 
 
We need to have competitive tax rates in this province. We need 
to have streamlined regulatory environment. We need fair and 
competitive labour laws. We need to have an 
investment-friendly economic development policy. And that is 
not the case under the existing NDP government. 
 
We need to have some requirements put in place for growth. 
We need to have a strong supply of private sector investment 
capital. We need strong infrastructure. And we need public 
policy that eliminates barriers to the flow of private sector 
investment capital. 
 
What we have now under the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, 
are high taxes; we have over regulation; we have unfair labour 
laws; we have Crown corporations that are competing with 
private sector business. These things do not contribute to an 
expanded population or to an expanded tax base, which we need 
in order to ensure that we have funding for quality education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to just read to you some of the media 
releases that came across from the SSTA which reflect their 
disappointment in the NDP government and its promises. It’s 
asking the government to back up its promises. There was a 
media release from the SSTA on March 14, 2002. It said: 
 

Boards of education want the provincial government to 
back up statements made in the Speech From the Throne on 
Thursday with action on Budget Day, March 27. 
 

They say: 
 

We have heard the government’s talk, and on budget day 

we want to see them walk that talk . . . 
 
And that was from the president of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, which represents all boards of education 
in the province. The president says: 
 

Boards of education want to provide the best possible 
education and other services to students, but often (they) 
are limited in that ability because of lack of resources. 
 
Over the past number of years, the increased costs of 
funding education have fallen too heavily on property 
taxpayers. Boards have repeatedly said that they cannot 
continue to go to property taxpayers to make up for a 
provincial shortfall. The government funds just 40 per cent 
of education costs on a provincial basis. Property taxes 
cover 60 per cent. 
 
For instance, we know that teachers will ask for salary 
increases at the provincial bargaining table, . . . (Now) The 
government makes the decisions at that table, but boards of 
education are left to pick up the tab. The government must 
follow through on promises to cover those costs, in addition 
to the costs of provincial programs. 
 
Boards of education appreciate government support for 
new programs such as ones outlined in the Role of the 
Schools Task Force report, but that support must be backed 
(up) by financial support, not just increased expectations 
placed on schools. 

 
And what did the SSTA get when the budget came down? 
Barely enough money to cover the increased cost of salaries, 
$14 million — $4 million for specialized programs; $10 million 
is actually what they got. They had been asking for $25 million 
in order to just keep up with the cost of inflation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they expressed their disappointment 
subsequently to the government and they are very, very upset 
that this government is expecting, yet one more time, that at the 
local level the boards of education in municipalities have got to 
increase their taxes in order to maintain somewhat of an 
education system for the children. 
 
This is not fair. It’s impossible for property taxpayers to 
continue to pick up the pieces and to go on. 
 
Rural families have been hit the hardest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and the Canadian Taxpayers Federation recently put out some 
reports about how the downloading on municipalities and 
school boards is affecting the rural area of the province. 
 
As recently as October 2001, the Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation did a lot of research and they started to renew their 
fight for lower property taxes. And they released numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, from the provincial Department of Education itself 
through the freedom of information Act that showed that: 
 

. . . the burden of education taxes on Saskatchewan 
property owners is more than twice as heavy as the rest of 
Canada. 

 
“Property taxes in Saskatchewan (they say) are punitive 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2002 

 

and out of whack with the rest of the country . . . The 
enormity of the gap between this province and the rest of 
the country is just astounding.” 
 
Property taxes fund 59% of education costs in 
Saskatchewan, compared to the average of 26% for all 
provinces. The next heaviest burden is in Manitoba, where 
51% of education is paid for by property taxes, while in 
New Brunswick . . . (Prince Edward Island) and 
Newfoundland education is funded entirely by the province 
with other tax revenues. 

 
School taxes (they say) have increased dramatically across 
the province since 1985, but particularly in rural areas 
while farm income has plummeted. This has prompted 
grassroots “tax revolt” meetings across the province. (And) 
last spring . . . the (Canadian Taxpayers Federation) 
presented a petition with the names of 12,500 taxpayers to 
Premier Calvert demanding a significant decrease in 
education taxes. 

 
And they go on to say: 
 

“The government’s policies on property taxes and school 
funding have compounded the problems facing 
Saskatchewan, particularly in rural areas. There needs to be 
some serious changes in the next budget as to how we fund 
schools,” . . . 

 
(16:45) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what the Canadian Taxpayers Federation have 
said has certainly been backed and concurred with by the 
Saskatchewan Party. Because I have another Saskatchewan 
Party press release dated April 15, 2002, where the member 
from Saltcoats puts forward his views on how farm families are 
hit because of downloading by this present NDP government. 
 
And this press release goes like this, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan Party municipal affairs critic Bob Bjornerud 
today said that many farm families will pay as much as $10,000 
more as a result of the NDP budget. And that’s just this past 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he goes on to say changes to the computational mill rate 
and the foundation grant formula as well as the cancellation of 
the farm land property tax rebate program will mean a property 
tax hike of at least 30 per cent over last year. If you combine 
that with increases in crop insurance premiums and spot loss 
hail coverage, farm families are taking a huge hit. 
 
And Mr. Bjornerud goes on to say in this press release, the NDP 
can drop 20 million at the snap of their fingers into American 
dot-com companies and $80 million for telephones in Australia, 
but hit Saskatchewan farm families with a $10,000 bill. 
Bjornerud says it’s wrong. Rural Saskatchewan cannot continue 
to pay for the NDP’s wild spending sprees. 
 
And the member from Saltcoats says that the assault on rural 
Saskatchewan in this budget flies in the face of what is needed 
to revitalize the economy and that we cannot continue to pay for 
the NDP’s wild spending sprees. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation in the province that is totally 
deplorable and will continue to be as it is as long as the NDP 
maintains governing the province. Rural taxpayers are 
extremely disappointed with the NDP’s decision not to continue 
the farmland property tax rebate, and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) has also indicated its 
disappointment. 
 
It’s no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP-Liberal coalition has 
dropped the incentive for the property tax rebate because like so 
many other things that should be done to help grow 
Saskatchewan, the NDP has given up. It says, the status quo is 
good enough. It says, that things can’t change, that the situation 
can’t be improved. 
 
And instead of addressing the issue, the NDP have told their 
departments to manage the negative change. How very 
disappointing and how devastating this is for Saskatchewan. 
 
Education numbers aren’t just an indication of the numbers of 
students in our school system, they’re also an indication of the 
economic climate in the province. A growing education 
population means a growing economy. Other provinces have 
done it, but Saskatchewan has not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has failed miserably in managing 
our province’s affairs properly and it appears that their idea of 
growing Saskatchewan is to grow the Crown corporations — 62 
Crown corporations whose goal it is to control all of the 
province’s resources: human, mineral, and vegetable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the way to grow a province. The way to 
grow a province is to have the private sector be able to grow. 
 
In Saskatchewan, most people know that we could be and 
should be a have province. We have millions of acres of best 
farmland in the world. We have more natural gas, oil, and coal 
than Alberta. We have all the potash in Canada with the best 
quality in the world. We have the richest uranium deposits in 
the world. We now have gold, diamonds, copper, and other base 
metals. We have pulp and paper. We have 100,000 lakes, yet 
we have the second-lowest standard of living within the 
Canadian borders. And this government, this NDP government, 
appears to have more purpose in destroying small business and 
farms by ways of rules, legislation, taxes, and unfair 
competition by its Crowns than having the foresight of allowing 
the natural successes for independent thought. 
 
NDP repressive control of businesses in this province and the 
private sector investment is what is destroying the province and 
destroying our education system. Mr. Speaker, in the long run, 
the children of our province are the ones that are the losers. This 
is not acceptable. And the Saskatchewan Party, when they form 
government after the next election, will make sure that things 
are changed. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
because I can’t stand to support this motion. I think this motion 
illustrates how the other side focuses on the doom and gloom, 
talks about a totally deplorable situation, and that’s just not the 
situation here in Saskatchewan. We do have some challenges, 



May 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

 

that is for sure. But with our partners, with the SSTA, the STF, 
we rise to those challenges. And I think that this budget this 
year speaks well to that. 
 
What kind of things are we doing in this budget this year? 
We’re allocating $474.3 million to the school divisions — an 
increase of 3.1 per cent. Community schools, an excellent 
example of how we’re reaching out to the kids who are at risk 
— a very, very important initiative. 
 
As well, two important programs that we’re very proud of. The 
pre-kindergarten program, that this year we have started six new 
programs that help kids get a good start. As well the early 
childhood development program, an excellent example. 
 
So therefore I would like to move an amendment, seconded by 
the member from Regina Dewdney that: 
 

Delete all the words after “Assembly,” and replace it with 
the following: 

 
. . . applaud the government’s continued commitment to K 
to 12 education, demonstrated by a 19.3 per cent increase in 
funding over the past three years. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand and second the motion made by the member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. Mr. Speaker, as the member very 
accurately pointed out, the government has put 19.3 per cent in 
over the last three years, Mr. Speaker. And clearly, unlike the 
members opposite, we have an optimistic outlook for our 
children in this province and the future of our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to conclude my remarks by 
talking a little bit about how their platform in the last election 
saw a freeze, Mr. Speaker, a freeze in education spending — 
certainly wouldn’t have been 19.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So due to the facts that the opposition put forward a zero per 
cent increase over five years, Mr. Speaker — in fact a freeze — 
and we’ve spent 19.3 million . . . 19.3 per cent over the last 
three years, obviously the members opposite have a distortion 
in the reality of what the situation is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I will . . . I’m extremely pleased to support the 
amendment made by the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld and 
of course oppose the original motion. 
 
And at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:54. 
 


	Financial Effect on Agriculture of Government Policies
	Financial Effect on Agriculture of Government Policies

