















































Hansard: December 13, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2961 
 December 13, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Clerk: — It is my duty to advise the House that Mr. Speaker 
will not be present to open this morning’s sitting, but he will be 
here presently. Thank you. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
to present a petition on behalf of the snowmobile industry in 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails, and obtain funding 
for this through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown land and 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registrations. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by residents of Lloydminster, Livelong, 
and other communities in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable 
condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Shamrock and Coderre. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact 
that it’s too late to roll back the premium hikes in crop 
insurance for this year, I’m going to present this petition in 
hopes that it will have some impact for decisions for the 
upcoming year. The prayer, Mr. Speaker, reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage, in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from 
Riverhurst, Fort Qu’Appelle, and Eastend. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
constituents in my area have asked that I present these petitions 
regarding the Kyoto accord on their behalf today. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And this is signed by people from Estevan, Torquay, Steelman, 
Lampman, and other places within my constituency. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and throughout the province that are concerned about 
the Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitions are signed on behalf . . . by residents of 
Bienfait, Asquith, Brooks, Alberta, Calgary, Battleford, North 
Battleford, Regina, Bengough, Weyburn, McTaggart, Moose 
Jaw, Ogema, Bengough, and there’s several pages of 
Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to rise on 
behalf of constituents concerned about the implications for our 
part of the province of the Kyoto accord. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
All of the petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise with a petition from citizens from the Southwest that 
are concerned with the impact, economic impact of Kyoto. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 



2962 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is also signed by the good 
citizens of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about actions of Crop Insurance. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance to 
reassess the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers 
in 2002, and further that the government review the 
definition of viable farming practices outlined in the 
present Sask Crop Insurance policy. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Hanley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the effect of the Kyoto accord on 
the Saskatchewan economy. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present on behalf of constituents. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
Regional Health Authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Bulyea and Duval. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and received as addendums to previously 
tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 169, 437, and 438. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it is my privilege today to 
introduce two very special people to you. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
This morning I would like to introduce to you, Dr. Dmytro 
Cipywnyk, who earlier today received a state award, the Order 
for Merit, from the Government of Ukraine. The order is the 
highest honour a non-resident of Ukraine can receive. He has 
received this honour for his tireless contributions to 
Canada-Ukraine co-operation through his involvement in many 
community and professional organizations that promote 
Ukrainian-Canadian relations. 
 
He is accompanied by his wife, Ms. Maura Gillis-Cipywnyk 
and I welcome them both to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — (The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Ukrainian.) 
 
I would also . . . It is also my pleasure to introduce His 
Excellency, Dr. Yri Scherbak, ambassador of Ukraine to 
Canada, who is visiting us today specifically for the purpose of 
conferring recognition to Dr. Cipywnyk on behalf of the 
Government of Ukraine. Dr. Scherbak. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And accompanying them are a group that 
were part of the ceremony and I’d like to put their names into 
the record. And would the people please stand when I mention 
them and we will recognize them at the end. 
 
Here we have with us today, Mr. Orest . . . Ostap Skrypnyk and 
Nadia Prokopchuk. Ostap is the national secretary of the 
Ukrainian-Canadian Committee. 
 
Dr. Bohdon Rozdilsky and John Rozdilsky; Mr. and Mrs. Jayne 
Paluck — pardon me, Ms. Jayne Paluck and Mr. Paluck; Mr. 
Paul Ortynsky and Doreen Ortynsky; Ed Lysk; Gerald and 
Cathy Luciuk; Terry and Vera Labach; Father Methodius 
Kushko; Eugene Krenosky and Mrs. Krenosky; Boris and Marie 
Kischuk; Mr. and Mrs. Albert Kachkowski; Iris Feist; Adrian 
Boyko and Mrs. Sonia Boyko; and with them also is Debbie 
Albus from Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
I welcome you all here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, while not traditional in the 
introduction of members, I do want to take this opportunity, and 
I think I will be joined by the Leader of the Opposition, in 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2963 

 

rising on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan to 
congratulate . . . to offer our congratulations to Dr. Cipywnyk 
for the high honour that has been presented him today by the 
nation of the Ukraine. 
 
Dr. Cipywnyk today has received Ukraine’s highest order. It is 
rare, I understand, for this order to be presented outside of the 
Ukraine and we, as government, share congratulations with you, 
Dr. Cipywnyk. 
 
In addition to this prestigious honour, Dr. Cipywnyk was 
invested, as you know, Mr. Speaker, in the Order of Canada in 
1992. He has received the Canada 125 Commemorative Medal. 
In 1995, he was awarded the Shevchenko Medal by the 
Ukrainian Canadian Congress. Mr. Speaker, he is currently the 
Chair of our Advisory Committee on Saskatchewan - Ukrainian 
Relations. 
 
We all know, in this province, the vast contribution that the 
doctor has made to health care in our province, the contribution 
he has made to Ukrainian-Canadian relations, the contribution 
that he makes to . . . continues to make to 
Saskatchewan-Ukrainian relations. 
 
And so, our congratulations to you, Doctor. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of 
the official opposition of the Saskatchewan Party, I too would 
like to join with the Premier and welcome our special guests in 
the legislature today. 
 
Particularly we want to extend a warm welcome to His 
Excellency, Dr. Yri Scherbak, from the Ukraine. We would also 
of course extend our congratulations to Dr. Cipywnyk and his 
wife on the prestigious award of one of the Ukraine’s highest 
medals of honour, a truly great honour for a resident of 
Saskatchewan, from outside of the Ukraine, and I think a very 
fitting honour given Dr. Cipywnyk’s association with the 
Ukraine over the years. 
 
Also like to welcome other members of the Canadian-Ukrainian 
community, residents of Saskatchewan who are here to share in 
this honour. 
 
Dr. Cipywnyk’s achievements are many. He’s been involved in 
health care, in international relations. He has been an 
outstanding example of a great citizen of our province, of our 
country, and of our world. And we obviously are very pleased 
that you have been honoured in this way today. We extend our 
congratulations to you. 
 
We extend our thanks to you for such excellent service to this 
province, to Canadian-Ukrainian relations, and to the many 
activities and challenges that you have applied yourself to. 
 
Congratulations from the official opposition. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an honour to rise in the Legislative Assembly this 
morning on behalf of a number of MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) who are of Ukrainian descent and I think 
on behalf of so many people in Saskatchewan who have a 
Ukrainian ancestry. 
 
I want to first of all extend my congratulations to Dr. Cipywnyk 
on this prestigious award and secondly to have Dr. Yri 
Scherbak, as ambassador, back again in the city of Regina and 
in Saskatchewan. I had the pleasure of listening to Dr. Scherbak 
nearly two years ago and I’m very impressed with your 
comments. And I welcome you again. 
 
And I welcome all the people in the gallery. I’m not going to 
mention individual names except for my two constituents. Paul 
and Doreen Ortynsky have travelled from Canora to be here this 
morning and to celebrate this joyous occasion. 
 
And as we near the festive season, Mr. Speaker, we heard this 
morning that we will look forward to a very merry Christmas, 
and on behalf of the many people of Ukrainian descent as well: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a special day for multiculturalism in the legislature. I just want 
to mention my own Ukrainian grandmother came here all by 
herself when she was 16, with not a word of English. And I think 
that’s the kind of roots a lot of people had coming from the old 
country to Canada — what we called the old country — but I very 
much empathize with how it difficult it must have been at that 
time for her to do that. So I have a place in my heart when we 
recognize you today. 
 
And along with that, we have a school visit from Connaught 
School and this is a very smart group of students. They speak two 
languages. This is the French immersion class and you know, Mr. 
Speaker, I went to the school and I discussed legislation, budgets, 
and government services and I was just amazed at how much these 
young people knew about the work of government. 
 
Now although I don’t . . . I’m a little bit cautious to do this, but I 
do want to recognize my granddaughter. Serena, can you stand 
up? And as you can see, she’s grown a little. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And accompanying them today are 
teacher Deena Combres, parents Jim Mitchell, Ted Delanghe, 
Chris Harbron, and Susan Birley. And I guaranteed them 
everybody would be on their best behaviour so we’ll get a report 
card after. Okay. Thank you for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly I’d like to introduce 22 
grade 7 and 8 students from Milestone High School. Mr. 
Speaker, you’ll be quite familiar with these students as we made 
a tour to the school about two weeks ago when we worked 



2964 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

through some legislation in the classroom and passed a couple 
of Bills. It was a very interesting, interesting visit. 
 
And I was most impressed, as I’m sure you were, at the 
preparation work that was done and what a good job that the 
class had done. I want to congratulate the teacher, David 
Hawkins, for doing such a great job. And also no stranger to 
this House is Judy Bradley who is sitting . . . and also sat in on 
that session and probably, with lots of experience in passing 
legislation, also did some prep work as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accompanying these grade 7 and 8 students are 
Rod Cole and Tammy Jones who made the trip in from 
Milestone. 
 
And I was thinking, Mr. Speaker, and we mentioned it when we 
were at the school visit, how Milestone High School has had 
maybe a bit of a penchant for putting people into the public 
light. Mr. Ralph Goodale, the hon. minister of the federal 
Crown, went to school in Milestone as did Judy Bradley who 
was the minister of Highways in this, in the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and with that it is with a little bit of nervousness 
that I look towards the future. But I guess if I am defeated, it 
will be in the Sask Party nomination by one of these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are three 
people seated in the east gallery that I take pleasure in 
introducing to you. 
 
First is Rob Norris. Rob is coordinator of communications and 
program development for the University of Saskatchewan 
International. As such, he’s marketing Saskatchewan skills 
around the world. He’s also — I’d ask him to please stand — 
he’s also the Liberal candidate in Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
With him today are Curtis Kimpton who is his business 
manager and is also just completing a term as the governor of 
the Kinsmen organization for Saskatchewan. 
 
And for the third individual, I would say for the benefit of the 
Minister of Health that it’s not normally given to us to know 
our end. But if he would like to know his end, he need only turn 
around to see the Liberal candidate from Regina Lakeview, Mr. 
David Brundige. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
also welcome Mr. Dave Brundige here, and I have done that 
before as he is one of my constituents. And I know that this 
latest venture into politics for my friend is causing a lot of 
difficulties at home in that his wife has worked hard on my 
campaign for a number of years. So . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
introduce a nominated candidate for the Sask Party, Mr. Dan 
Thibault, who’s sitting in the east gallery. 

People in the Regina Wascana Plains are quite familiar with 
Dan Thibault as he came within a whisker of sitting in this 
House after the last election. Now a whisker will have been 
shaven off this time and he’ll be firmly seated on that side of 
the House as a Saskatchewan Party government member after 
the next provincial election. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Oil and Gas Exploration 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s another good 
news story for Saskatchewan — one of those stories where the 
simple, unadorned facts tell us all that we need to know in one 
more way, that the future is wide open in Saskatchewan. 
 
The other day I was happy to announce to the Assembly that a 
record number of natural gas wells had been drilled in 
Saskatchewan. Today I’m just as pleased to tell members that 
so far this year the land sale of Crown petroleum and natural 
gas rights has exceeded $100 million. The December sale 
generated $16.7 million, bringing the total this year to $102.9 
million. 
 
The dollars are good, of course, and even more encouraging I 
think is that included in the December sale is a record-high 51 
exploration licences. This means that the industry is encouraged 
by our recent change to its tax schedule; that it is optimistic 
about the potential reserves still to be discovered. And it means 
more prosperity for local communities and more jobs for 
Saskatchewan workers. 
 
That’s a plan in action, Mr. Speaker. A slogan didn’t get these 
results; a plan did. Our plan is working and our future is wide 
open. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

References to Matters in Litigation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, over the past several days 
during question period both the Premier and the CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) minister have 
refused to answer questions regarding the government’s 
ill-fated venture into the potato business. 
 
On Wednesday the minister specifically cited the sub judice 
convention as grounds for refusing to answer these questions. 
Simply put, this is a gross misinterpretation of the sub judice 
convention. Section 507(2) of Beauchesne's states: 
 

In civil cases the (sub judice) convention does not apply 
until the matter has reached trial stage. 

 
Furthermore, section 510 in Beauchesne's states: 
 

The Speaker has pointed out “that the House has never 
allowed the sub judice convention to stand in the way of its 
consideration of a matter vital to the public interest . . . ” 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2965 

 

The loss of 28 million taxpayers’ dollars due to this 
government’s mismanagement of its potato business and its 
apparent attempts to disguise the true nature of this deal are 
most certainly matters vital to the public interest. Therefore it is 
unacceptable for ministers to cite the sub judice convention like 
some parliamentary version of the US (United States) Fifth 
Amendment to absolve them of their responsibility to be 
accountable to the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
At best, this is a misguided interpretation of the sub judice 
convention. At worst, it is yet another attempt by the NDP 
government to cover up the facts behind this loss of $28 
million. 
 
I trust the Premier will begin to answer questions again, and I 
hope he would direct his ministers to do the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increase in Regina’s Housing Starts 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Despite the doom and 
gloom coming from the opposition, Saskatchewan’s future and 
Regina’s future is indeed wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — People are responding. Mr. Speaker, Regina’s 
housing starts are up over 10 per cent from a year ago. There 
have been over 619 housing starts so far this year and I wish to 
point out that the trend is gaining momentum. By way of 
example, in November, the last month for which there are 
statistics, there’s a 42 per cent increase over November last 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, housing starts are a sign of a strong economy. The 
people of Regina, the people of Saskatchewan, are actually way 
ahead of us all. They do know that the economy is growing and 
they’re showing it by building houses, by moving into houses. 
They know that Regina is a terrific, terrific city to raise a family 
in, and they’re responding by putting down firm and permanent 
roots here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is a pleasure to congratulate everyone involved in Regina’s 
housing industry, both the builders and the purchasers and 
people who live in these housings. Our future is growing. We 
have a wide open future and I, for one, am going to be very 
proud to be part of that wide open future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Soccer Teams Excel 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Humboldt indoor soccer teams have one again excelled in their 
sport. 
 
The under-16 Hurricane girls team took part in the annual 
SISCO (Saskatoon indoor soccer competition) indoor soccer 
tournament held recently in Saskatoon. There were a total of 
132 teams at that tournament, with the participants ranging in 
the age from 12 to 18 years. Now the under-16 Hurricane girls 
team came away undefeated and returned with the gold medal. 

They will attend a tournament in Calgary from January 2 to 5. 
 
And the Humboldt Hurricane under-18 boys team also won 
gold at the SISCO indoor soccer tournament. This was the 
second year in a row for the gold medal accomplishment. 
Strong goalkeeping, good defensive and offensive play by the 
whole team was key to their victory. 
 
The under-12 Hurricanes entered a division 3 soccer tournament 
also held in Saskatoon, and they advanced to the gold medal 
game undefeated. The final game was tied at 4 and was decided 
after 10 minutes of overtime with a shootout. The Hurricanes 
settled for silver. 
 
The coaches credit the successful weekend to good ball control, 
great team effort, and fantastic fan support. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the players and 
coaches for their accomplishments and for doing their very best. 
We’re extremely proud of you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government of Saskatchewan Web Site 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday my 
colleague from Saskatoon Southeast mentioned the Internet and 
its role in promoting education and information to students and 
ordinary citizens alike. 
 
I’m happy to announce today, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
is making it easier for students and citizens to find government 
information and services on-line. The government has just 
redesigned its central Web site, which includes quick links to 
feature areas and major initiatives of particular interest to the 
public. The site also has a fresh new look, but also maintains its 
basic navigational features which have proven very popular 
with Internet users. 
 
Just as we know that the future is wide open, Mr. Speaker, we 
believe in open, accountable, visible government. These days 
that includes electronic visibility and our intent is to make 
electronic access to government information and services as 
effortless as possible. 
 
The Web site is a quick and easy entry to services available 
from various government departments and agencies. This site 
features direct links to business, investment, and tourism 
information and provides quick access to frequently requested 
information and services, such as birth certificates, licences, and 
health cards. 
 
I invite you and all citizens to visit the site at www.gov.sk.ca. 
The government is at your fingertips, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 

Carrot River Active Living Complex 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the residents of the town of Carrot River and surrounding area 
are an innovative, hard working, and very determined people. 



2966 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

Over the years they’ve had many services stripped from their 
town by the NDP government, including their acute care 
hospital. However instead of simply accepting the fact that their 
hospital has been taken away from them and leaving a new 
building to sit vacant, they worked to convert the former Carrot 
River hospital into an active living complex. 
 
This facility will feature 20 housing units for people who feel 
that it is not yet time for them to be in a long-term care facility 
but are unable to cope in their own home. Project organizers are 
proud to point out that no government money has been provided 
or sought for this project. The committee says that one reason 
they wanted to avoid any government involvement because it 
would mean increased paperwork, red tape, and regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Carrot River would rather find 
innovative fundraising ideas than to have to deal with the 
immense bureaucracy of this NDP government. They have 
surpassed their fundraising goal of $100,000 and to date have 
raised nearly 110,000. They are planning for the opening of the 
facility in early 2003. They have held luncheons, a trade fair, an 
amateur night, and other fundraisers. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in congratulating the 
members of the Carrot River Active Living Committee and 
other volunteers who have devoted so much of their time and 
effort in order for this project to become a reality. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Schools 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very proud of the fact that one of the very first designated 
community schools in all of Saskatchewan was Kitchener 
Community School, located in my constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone; a school, by the way, that I had the privilege to 
attend. 
 
I am also very proud that six other schools in Elphinstone are 
community schools. And today we are joined by a group from 
Connaught Community School. I’m sure they will all agree 
with me when I say community schools are very cool. Why so 
cool, Mr. Speaker? Community schools are those in which the 
government provides extra financial assistance so that parents 
and the school community can provide enhanced programming 
such as pre-kindergarten, nutrition programs, cultural activities, 
adult education, and training opportunities. 
 
As the Minister of Learning has said, and I quote: 
 

We know that the support provided through community 
schools pays off in long-term benefits. 
 

Put another way, Mr. Speaker, we are making certain that our 
future is wide open. I have seen the value of this program first 
hand and I am pleased to acknowledge that our government is 
providing funding for five new community schools this year, 
bringing the total to 88. This number has more than doubled in 
the last two years and now includes elementary and secondary 
schools right across the province. 
 

The new schools are in Yorkton, Cando, Canwood, St. Louis, 
and Green Lake. This is more good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

References to Matters in Litigation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week the 
NDP government has been ducking questions about the $28 
million blunder it made in the potato business. 
 
To try to absolve themselves of responsibility, the minister 
responsible for CIC has grossly misinterpreted the sub judice 
convention . Mr. Speaker, his response has been nothing but a 
weak-kneed excuse. It’s been concocted so that both the 
Premier and the minister can avoid answering proper questions. 
The questions that we are asking deal with the policies and the 
actions of the NDP government — actions that cost 
Saskatchewan taxpayers $28 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier and will his government quit 
ducking their responsibilities and start answering questions 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, this is an important 
issue, not only for the operation of this House but also for the 
operation of courts and the operation of law. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is the responsibility of all members — and 
the Supreme Court of Canada has recently restated this — it is 
the responsibility of all members to pay particular attention to 
matters that are before the courts and to take every step that 
they don’t, that they don’t in any way, Mr. Speaker, 
intentionally or unintentionally affect those proceedings, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I have advised as the legal adviser to the government on 
this matter is that these proceedings are before the courts — are 
before the courts. 
 
The member from Swift Current talked about documents which 
were presented by plaintiffs. They must therefore be of some 
importance to their case, Mr. Speaker, and it is proper for us to 
pay due caution to this matter and to ensure that we don’t 
prejudice these matters. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on that basis, ministers will not be answering 
questions on matters which are before the courts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re talking about a matter that has not gone to trial yet and 
it’s a civil matter. And this government has a responsibility to 
answer questions. And we’ve had rulings — many rulings in the 
past — that indicate that they are accountable and have every 
right and every freedom to answer those questions. Mr. 
Speaker, instead they’re acting like Enron executives hiding 
behind the US Fifth Amendment . 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2967 

 

Mr. Speaker, we asked the NDP, why did they call it a 
partnership when it wasn’t a partnership? They refused to 
answer. We asked the Minister of Industry . . . we asked why 
the Minister of Industry took the wrong information to cabinet 
in 1997. The Minister of Industry refused to answer. We asked 
the NDP why they covered up the truth about this deal. Mr. 
Speaker, they refuse to answer. We asked the NDP why they 
drained nearly $4 million out of Rafferty and Ducks Unlimited 
trust accounts to pay for this mess. They refused to answer. Mr. 
Speaker, we asked the Premier if he thought that this was 
acceptable, and even he refused to answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve answers. 
When is the NDP going to start answering the questions that 
they’re supposed to answer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The responsibility to not interfere with 
the appropriate, fair passage of justice is one that members on 
this side of the House treat seriously. Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite have obviously decided that they’re prepared to risk 
the fairness of that trial for the purposes of raising these matters 
here in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a choice they . . . that is a choice they are 
free to make. That is a choice they are free to make, Mr. 
Speaker. But as the members know, this is not . . . this is not the 
normal course of procedure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada, in a civil case, at a 
stage of proceedings very similar to this, ruled that it was 
inappropriate for members to speak — members — ministers 
and members, Mr. Speaker. We will stick to that. 
 
The member may be entirely irresponsible in this matter; that’s 
up to him. But we will be responsible on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Participation in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear from this 
week that what the Minister of Justice said is true. This 
government refuses to take any responsibility at all for the loss 
of 28 million taxpayer dollars 
 
Mr. Speaker, one answer that the minister did give this week — 
the minister for CIC — one answer that he did give was, check 
the annual reports. He said, it’s all in the annual reports; there’s 
no secrets here, Mr. Speaker — except that it isn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we checked the annual reports. In 1998 cabinet 
received an Ernst & Young audit that said this deal that they 
characterized as a partnership was not a partnership. It was set 
up to look like a partnership to avoid international trade laws, to 
get around their own construction tendering policy, and to 
create the optics for Saskatchewan people that there was a 
private partner, when there was no private partner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Could he please show us in the 
1998 Sask Water annual report where any of that is mentioned? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m interested and have been 
observing over the last week the comments that have been made 
by the member from Swift Current — and his theatrics of this 
morning by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker — 
where he says clearly that this is a $28 million blunder. 
 
Then he goes on to say that this has been a loss to the 
Saskatchewan government, to the people of Saskatchewan, for 
$28 million. And then, Mr. Speaker, I received this week, Mr. 
Speaker, I receive a letter from the industry. And this is what 
the industry says, Mr. Speaker. They say: 
 

Some people don’t want to hear the word “potatoes” . . . 
Harvest was a pain this year but yields were pretty good, 
around 15 tonnes per acre. That adds up to about $20 
million off 4,000 acres. It would take 250,000 acres of 
dryland (Mr. Speaker, in drought) . . . Those spuds are 
going to Manitoba . . . (they’re going to) Alberta, (Mr. 
Speaker, they’re going to) Northwestern USA and (they’re 
going) . . . to PEI. 
 

And they go on to say about 200 people are working at 
harvest time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say this, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite. Mr. 
Speaker, I say this. Taxpayers are on the hook for 28 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the people in the potato industry of 
this province are telling us that far from any help, this NDP 
government and the squandering of 28 million taxpayers’ 
dollars has set that industry back, Mr. Speaker, has almost 
destroyed that industry, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they tell . . . 
that’s what they’re telling us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question was for the minister. He himself said, 
check the annual reports. The minister responsible for CIC said 
that, and that’s what we’re talking about today. We’re talking 
about Sask Water’s annual reports. 
 
What about the 1999 annual report he told the media and others 
to check? Well in 1999, the premier received a memo from Sask 
Water saying that Sask Water was effectively insolvent. The 
memo said, quote: 
 

Without any financial assistance from our shareholders, 
(that would be CIC), Sask Water will experience an 
increase in its debt to equity ratio to 80 per cent plus over 
the next two years. While Sask Water is taking steps to 
minimize expenditures and increase revenues (it says), 
neither of these courses of action will be able to address the 
size of the financial problem (Mr. Speaker). 
 

None of that is in the 1999 report. Will the minister responsible 
stand up and show us where is it in this 1999 annual report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2968 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite just 
stands on his feet and says that the industry has decreased its 
value in the province over the last several years. Mr. Speaker, 
the industry, the potato industry, since 1998 in Saskatchewan 
has gone straight up, Mr. Speaker, is where they’ve gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And I say to the members opposite this. 
The fundamental question that we’re debating today, Mr. 
Speaker, is who . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the fundamental debate in 
this House today, and this week, has been, who is it that’s 
investing in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They say $28 million today is a blunder, is what the Leader of 
the Opposition says — a blunder, he says — in Saskatchewan, 
to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Where are those $28 million invested, Mr. Speaker? They’re 
invested in the potato industry in those communities, Mr. 
Speaker. And are they working for Saskatchewan potato 
growers today, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely they’re working for 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the fact that 
the industry could be that much better than it is today were it 
not for the NDP government, notwithstanding that fact, imagine 
the spectre, Mr. Speaker, of any government, of this NDP 
government, justifying — justifying — what they did, justifying 
covering up the real nature of this potato deal from the US 
Trade Commission, Mr. Speaker, from the taxpayers, to avoid 
their own union-only tendering policy. That Deputy Premier 
stands up and defends it, Mr. Speaker. That is disgraceful, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And the people of the province will hold them 
accountable, I believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s a very quick question for the minister, a 
very quick question, Mr. Speaker. Did Sask Water meet all of 
the legislative requirements in terms of orders in council, all of 
the legislative requirements for the construction of potato 
storage facilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you and this House 
what’s disgraceful, Mr. Speaker. What’s disgraceful, Mr. 
Speaker, is this party policy from the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is what it says: 
 

Under the . . . 

And this is resolution DG0103, and it states this. Under the 
Saskatchewan . . . under an SP government: 
 

. . . there will be no direct investments or grants given to 
business. 
 

There would be no investment made in jobs. And there would 
be no investments made in ethanol, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say this, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The Leader of the Opposition stands up a 
minute ago and he says . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members. Order. I must be able 
to hear the responses, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
Leader of the Opposition starts out his questions today by 
saying, what’s your policy; you have no policy on investment 
and you have no action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well we have a policy, Mr. Speaker. This is his words, 
investment in Saskatchewan, exactly what he said, Mr. Speaker. 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, in the agricultural rural 
Saskatchewan community, we are growing it. And when 
members opposite say that we’ve invested $28 million in an 
industry today, that’s a blunder, I say to the members opposite, 
in your part of the world today in industry and agriculture, in 
irrigation, those facilities are helping to grow the industry, Mr. 
Speaker, in spades. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you have not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I remind the minister in his 
response to continue the entire response addressing his remarks 
to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The question was very serious. The question was, 
did Sask Water meet their legal requirements when they 
invested and risked millions of taxpayers’ dollars in these 
storage sheds? The Ernst & Young report says that they did not, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the answer to the question. Ernst & Young 
points out that Sask Water must obtain cabinet approval for any 
equity investment or loan over $250,000. This did not happen 
with the first three storage facilities built in ’97 for $8.4 million, 
Mr. Speaker. Ernst & Young says because of this an order in 
council was probably required. But this never happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how did the NDP allow an $8.4 million deal to go 
ahead without an order in council ? Not only were they 
deceiving Saskatchewan people and the trade commission, they 
were operating illegally, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister stand 
in his place and tell us why in the world the government would 
do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The members opposite talk about a $28 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2969 

 

million investment in potato industry in their part of the world, 
in the Lucky Lake area, as being a blunder, Mr. Speaker. They 
say it’s been a blunder. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, let’s examine what ACRE (Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy) has said in this House. Let’s 
examine what ACRE has said in this House, Mr. Speaker. They 
said that two of three primary goals, Mr. Speaker, is to put 
money into infrastructure and to put money into capital, Mr. 
Speaker. And today, this government put $28 million into 
infrastructure and into capital, into the potato industry, Mr. 
Speaker. And today that industry, on the recommendations of 
ACRE, Mr. Speaker, are going upwards, Mr. Speaker. The 
potato industry is going like that. 
 
Now why did that happen? Because we made an investment in 
the potato industry of which ACRE says — ACRE says — we 
should and we are. And that’s the difference, Mr. Speaker, 
between the people on this side of the House and the people on 
that side of the House, is that we have a plan, Mr. Speaker, to 
grow the economy. They have a slogan, Mr. Speaker, only. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this has been a very, 
very . . . a serious week, I think, for the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly. I think it’s been very serious. 
 
What cabinet documents have portrayed . . . What cabinet 
documents have portrayed is that a minister brought a cabinet 
item to the cabinet that didn’t tell all the facts. A year later 
when they knew all the facts, instead of putting a halt to this 
investment, they poured more money in; they risked more. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Well they did it to avoid their own union 
tendering policy. They did it to fool our trading partners, Mr. 
Speaker. And they did it for the optics, it says in these reports, 
to fool Saskatchewan people. That’s what the evidence proved 
this week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier had a chance, has had many chances, to show 
some leadership, Mr. Speaker, to stand in his place and say 
we’re going to be accountable and this minister or that minister 
— because there’s a number of them, frankly — are going to 
lose their jobs over this matter, Mr. Speaker. But he has never 
taken that opportunity. He hasn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’re going to ask the Premier again today: will he quit 
hiding behind the courts, Mr. Speaker? Will he assume the 
responsibility of leadership and stand in his place and tell the 
people of Saskatchewan who on that side of the Assembly will 
take responsibility for this deception of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I couldn’t agree more with the member 
from Swift Current about what this debate in this House this 
week has all been about. 
 
This debate, Mr. Speaker, this week, has been about identifying 
who it is who’s investing in Saskatchewan and building 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and who in fact is abandoning 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this debate’s about 
because by the Saskatchewan policy resolution of their own, 
Mr. Speaker, they say that they will not be investing in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — in spades is what they say. 
 
And today the member from Swift Current and the Leader of 
the Opposition have been on their feet all week saying that an 
investment in the potato industry today is a blunder, Mr. 
Speaker. And we were making that investment for 
Saskatchewan people. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the 
same position they take on the hog industry. That’s exactly the 
same position they take on the ethanol industry. 
 
And you have a group of men and women who sit over there, 
Mr. Speaker, who have hog barns in their backyards, who have 
ethanol plants in their backyards and they, Mr. Speaker, are 
saying that this policy of investing in rural Saskatchewan 
doesn’t work. That’s what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Premier. To the Premier: yesterday the Provincial Auditor 
released his fall report. One of the auditor’s biggest concerns is 
the misuse of gaming revenues by the Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority. Virtually all of the revenue generated by 
casinos in Saskatchewan comes from the operation of slot 
machines and the Provincial Auditor says that every dollar of 
revenue generated from slot machines is taxpayers’ money. 
 
Yesterday the Provincial Auditor had this advice for his 
taxpayers about the money SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority) is spending. And I quote: 
 

(Well) . . . it’s your money (that) they’re spending . . . 
 

And if SIGA is not spending it properly there’s less money that 
comes to the provincial treasury to use for important programs 
like health and education. 

 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree with the Provincial 
Auditor? Does the NDP government agree that all of the 
revenue generated from slot machine operations in 
Saskatchewan is taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to respond once again to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to first of all point out — I think it’s important to point 
out — that since the Provincial Auditor first reported on the 
SIGA situation two years ago, the organization has reduced its 
expenses by $9.3 million and increased its net income by $11.4 
million. 
 
SIGA, Mr. Speaker, is a young organization but it has made 
significant progress in improving its policies and processes. 
SIGA has recently developed a plan to address the Provincial 
Auditor’s recommendations. 
 



2970 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to — in advance of some other 
anticipated questions, if the members would care to listen — I 
want to talk to them about Dr. Harold Wynn, who is a noted 
Canadian gaming researcher based in Alberta, actively involved 
in treatment of problem gambling as well as broader gaming 
issues. 
 
This is what Dr. Wynn says — please — Dr. Wynn refers to the 
new agreement SIGA has, FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations), with the provincial government as the leading 
edge and the most progressive Aboriginal gaming agreement in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I again ask the Premier of 
Saskatchewan to stand in this House and answer this simple 
question. Does the NDP agree with the Provincial Auditor that 
all of the revenue generated from slot machine operations in 
Saskatchewan, is it taxpayers’ money? Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very evident that there’s 
serious disagreement between the member from Weyburn and 
the Leader of the Official Opposition . I’m going to quote one 
more quote from what he said last February to the chiefs of 
First Nations of this great province. This is what he said: 
 

Gaming will certainly play an important role in successful 
future First Nations economic development. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me now go back to what Dr. Wynn said. 
He said the new agreement is a leading edge and the most 
progressive Aboriginal gaming agreement in Canada if not in 
the continent, Mr. Speaker, particularly in terms of the 
revenue-sharing approach and the dedication of funds for 
problem gambling programs. 
 
He noted that the agreement deals with issues such as First 
Nations jurisdiction for on-reserve gaming and for on-reserve 
gaming regulation in a straightforward manner that 
demonstrates a willingness of the province and First Nations to 
work together to resolve these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — . . . refuses to answer the question. And 
Saskatchewan taxpayers have a right to expect their government 
to ensure all public monies are spent according to the law. 
 
Taxpayers certainly expect their government not to approve or 
endorse any illegal expenditure of public money. And where 
their government delegates responsibility for the management 
of taxpayers’ money, as in the case with SIGA, taxpayers also 
expect the government to ensure the management of those funds 
is done according to the law. But the Provincial Auditor says 
that SIGA is spending taxpayers’ money without legal 
authority, and the auditor says that the NDP government knew 
about this illegal spending and actually approved of the 
spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to put a stop to any 

further gaming expansion by SIGA until the Provincial Auditor 
is satisfied that SIGA is managing public funds according to the 
law and that SIGA is operating with sound business practices? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, we have been responding to 
the Provincial Auditor’s reports. We have been . . . I welcome 
the Provincial Auditor as the auditor of record, from the fall of 
2000. We have been working with him, and have made a 
commitment with the new people that are in place at SIGA, the 
board of directors, and SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority) . We are working towards a strategic plan 
which is currently underway and will be prepared in the near 
future to deal with a lot of these issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t understand why the members opposite refuse to support 
an industry in this great province of ours, with a partnership 
between First Nations and this government that last year 
employed 1,107 people, and the salary worked out to about 
$25,000 per person. Sixty-eight per cent of those employees, 
Mr. Speaker, were First Nations people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, last spring this minister stood in 
the legislature and justified signing a 25-year gaming agreement 
with SIGA and part of that agreement gave SIGA the exclusive 
right over expansion of casino in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, at the 
same time, at the same time as this agreement was being signed 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Order. 
I would ask members to allow the question to be put. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, at the same time as this 
agreement was being signed, this minister was also approving 
illegal payments by SIGA to the FSIN and its licensing 
authority. This according to the Provincial Auditor. And all the 
while the minister knew that many of the recommendations that 
had been made by the Provincial Auditor had not been met. 
And this in the wake of the multi-million dollar scandal at 
SIGA, and they were being ignored. 
 
How can the minister justify to the people of Saskatchewan his 
actions, actions that did not properly protect public funds, and 
that allowed some of these funds to be spent illegally? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t recall anywhere 
in the Provincial Auditor’s report that there is a term, illegal. I 
don’t recall that being said. And I hope the member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
continues to talk about illegalities. There was no mention of 
illegal, any of the illegalities. Before I answer, before I 
acknowledge that, I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to 
stand in this House and repeat what he told the chiefs of the 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2971 

 

First Nations of this province. Or has he rescinded his feelings 
about that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor suggested that SLGA approved 
improper use of public money by allowing SIGA to pay 
$400,000 to the FSIN. The auditor says he thinks the payments 
were inappropriate. We think they were reasonable and 
appropriate under our First Nations gaming agreement. 
 
When we had the framework agreement negotiations, Mr. 
Speaker, we felt it was extremely important to ensure that the 
negotiations were fair. And we wanted to make sure the FSIN 
had the resources to participate fairly in arriving at a good 
agreement that I believe will serve the people of this province 
well for the next 25 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To request leave to introduce a guest, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the House, 
sitting in the west gallery, a visitor this morning, Mr. Jeff 
Kallichuk who is the president of the United Steelworkers of 
America Local 5890 that represents the workers at IPSCO steel. 
 
I would like to welcome Jeff to the House and thank him for 
coming in to witness the events of this morning and the 
proceedings. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Auto Theft Strategy Evaluation 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a stated objective of the new 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety to work towards 
keeping Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan communities 
safe. Today I am pleased to table in this Assembly an 
evaluation of the Regina auto theft strategy. 
 
This evaluation was done by Dr. Pfeifer, Dr. Jeff Pfeifer at the 
University of Regina, who is an internationally recognized 
expert in criminology, and Kim Skakun of the Canadian 
Institute for Peace, Justice and Security at the University of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this evaluation shows that the government strategy 
to deal with young car thieves in Regina is working. Since the 
implementation of the auto theft strategy in February 2002, 
there has been a 43 per cent reduction in the auto thefts 
compared to last year. Mr. Speaker, this is the lowest level since 
1995. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in real terms that means 
that to the end of November there have been 1,450 fewer car 
thefts in Regina this year. I want to state that while there is no 
acceptable level of car thefts, the statistics show that the report 
indicates the strategy is working. The strategy was developed 
and implemented through a community partnership involving 
the provincial departments of Justice, Social Services, 
Corrections, Public Safety, together with the Regina Police 
Service and the Regina Intersectoral Committee. 
 
The auto theft strategy consolidates resources and uses strict 
controls on high-risk repeat offenders. This includes 24-hour 
supervision and close monitoring of young offenders who are 
not in custody. 
 
I want to report to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that since 
mid-October there has been an increase in the number of 
judicial interim release reports ordered by youth court judges. 
This has been instrumental in allowing the Corrections and 
Public Safety youth workers, the Crown prosecutors, and the 
police to ensure that an appropriate risk management strategy is 
in place to supervise and support those youth who pose a 
continued risk to reoffend. The integrated task group remains 
confident the strategy will be effective in addressing the cycle 
of offending behaviour and continues to emphasize the positive 
effect in the reduction on auto thefts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an effective strategy because it is a targeted 
approach. It builds on a number of earlier programs and a 
commitment of resources over time. That includes programs 
like the serious habitual offenders comprehensive action plan, 
or SHOCAP (serious and habitual youth offender 
comprehensive action program). 
 
Community partnerships are at the heart of this strategy. Youth 
workers and police are working together to address the cycle of 
offending behaviour and to reduce the number of auto thefts. 
 
The diversion program aptly named, HEAT — help end auto 
theft — is now under way. To be referred to the HEAT program 
offenders must admit their guilt. Youth who steal cars are held 
responsible for what they have done and we have Crown 
prosecutors working with the police, Social Services, 
Corrections, community organizations, and families to help turn 
these young offenders’ lives around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that the youth workers and 
police continue to conduct frequent night checks on chronic 
repeat offenders and other auto theft . . . other people involved 
in auto thefts. 
 
The auto theft strategy is based on three principles. Firstly, it’s 
based on the principle of responsibility. Young offenders will 
be held responsible for their behaviour and action. 
 
Second of all, we believe in rehabilitation. Young offenders will 
confront and address the factors underlying their involvement in 
crime. 
 
And third, we believe in reintegration. Young offenders will 
need to learn the skills necessary to participate in community 



2972 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

life without resorting to further offensive behaviour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his evaluation, Dr. Pfeifer states, and I’m 
quoting: 
 

It is clear that the Regina Auto Theft Strategy has been 
effective in implementing a number of innovative 
approaches and techniques to address the issue of young 
offender auto theft. 

 
This is positive news for our city. It is positive news for our 
province. And I want to thank, very directly and personally, the 
departmental officials, the prosecutors, and the city police for 
the work that they have done in supporting and developing this 
strategy. 
 
An important part of our commitment to keeping communities 
safe, Mr. Speaker, is protection of people and property, and the 
early results of the Regina auto theft strategy are proof that that 
commitment is working. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in applauding the reduction in car thefts in 
Regina and the Regina auto theft strategy. I think it’s a very 
good step that we’re seeing auto thefts down in this city. 
 
It’s a little bit ironic though, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the lowest 
since 1995. That tells myself and people of Saskatchewan that 
we’ve gone some seven years with an increasing auto theft rate 
until we actually had this government do something about it. 
 
And I believe this government waited until they were first. They 
like to be first at something. So when we hit that magical figure 
of being first at auto theft, then the government decided to do 
something about it. 
 
Now if that strategy would work with the exit of people, maybe 
we could get on that or maybe we’re not quite first yet with the 
exit of people from this province before this government will 
get serious about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I’d like to comment on the fact that this is a 
Regina auto theft strategy. It’s very nice to see crime reduced, 
but it’d be nice to see crime reduced province wide. 
 
Now if this government would have complied with their 
election promise of providing 200 more police officers 
throughout the province, maybe we would see crime reduced in 
other areas of the province also. This member’s statement deals 
specifically with auto theft in Regina. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, although we applaud very much the reduction 
in auto thefts in Regina, we think this government can go a lot 
farther in helping crime reduction throughout the whole 
province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

Bill No. 215 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to move first reading of Bill 215, The Medical 
Profession Amendment Act, 2002, be now introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 83 — The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers 
of America, Local 5890, Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 83, 
The IPSCO Inc. and the United Steelworkers of America, Local 
5890, Collective Bargaining Agreement Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 83 – The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers 
of America, Local 5890, Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the Bill 
that has just been given first reading. I’m confident that all hon. 
members will be able to give support to the Bill. This morning 
I’d like to take just a little of the Assembly’s time to briefly 
outline the background of this legislation and to detail what it 
does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to provide for a 
collective agreement that is longer than three years in duration. 
Members will know that section 33 of The Trade Union Act 
effectively limits the length of collective agreements to three 
years. An employer and a union may agree to a longer contract, 
but either side may give notice to begin bargaining a new 
agreement at the end of the three-year period. 
 
It is important to note that section 33 of The Trade Union Act 
fulfils a useful and legitimate purpose. The provision is in effect 
because, generally speaking, a shorter term agreement protects 
the interests of both employers and workers in ensuring that 
wages and benefits reflect current economic circumstance. 
 
Longer term agreements, on the other hand, are subjected to the 
volatility of the markets, and there is concern that they lock 
both parties into terms that do not reflect the changes in the 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provision in The Trade Union Act does what 
all good legislation does. It balances the needs of the parties and 
provides real and important protection to both. 
 
There are occasions, however, when one size doesn’t fit all, and 
this is one of those occasions. IPSCO and the United 
Steelworkers of America agree that a four-year term is the best 
choice for their specific situation. They have jointly approached 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2973 

 

the government and asked us to honour in their decision. Mr. 
Speaker, their agreement with this move is in evidence by their 
attendance in the gallery — Mr. Jeff Kallichuk from the United 
Steelworkers and Mr. Mike Carr, VP (vice-president) of human 
resources from IPSCO Inc. 
 
For IPSCO this agreement means a longer period of labour 
relations stability, a period during which they can focus on 
delivering their high-quality products to their many customers. 
 
For the workers, this contract makes them the highest paid in 
the country’s steel industry. They have also achieved 
improvements in their vision, medical, and drug benefits, as 
well as in their pension plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are delighted to accept the joint 
recommendation of IPSCO and the United Steelworkers, and I 
invite all members to support this Bill. It’s good for the 
employer, it’s good for workers, and it is therefore good for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to respond to 
the minister’s comments about Bill No. 83 concerning the 
collective bargaining agreement between IPSCO and the United 
Steelworkers of America. 
 
It’s very interesting to see that the government has really 
ignored the collective bargaining process in Saskatchewan in 
this matter, and this relates to other agreements in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have seen, a union and a very important 
industry and business in the province has worked through the 
collective bargaining process and came to an agreement. And 
they have agreed on a four-year contract which they have felt 
was in the best interests of the both the workers and their 
families, and IPSCO. 
 
(11:15) 
 
But they, of course, don’t have the last say in the collective 
bargaining agreement as we find out today. We find out today 
that the government has the last word in collective bargaining 
agreements in this province. And it seems that the NDP 
government is really interfering with the collective bargaining 
process, and I think other unions and other businesses in the 
province will take this as a warning and should. And I’m sure 
they have talked to the government about the interference of the 
government in the collective bargaining process. 
 
As we see, Mr. Speaker, the long arm of the provincial NDP 
government is looking into and has their hands on all sorts of 
areas in the province. As we see, the government likes to run 
the businesses in this province to the detriment of the taxpayer 
of this province. Now they feel that they have to micromanage 
everything in the province including the business industry of 
this province and of the labour negotiations. And as we’ve seen 
that the government barely can manage their own affairs 
without micromanaging collective bargaining units. 
 

The people of Saskatchewan have no faith in this government 
as we have seen in Sask Water; the loss of $28 million in potato 
industry; we have seen Liquor and Gaming, the debacle that has 
been caused there. And now, now the government feels that 
they should interfere with this collective bargaining agreement. 
 
When we talk about IPSCO, not only this agreement but look 
what has the government done concerning the Kyoto 
agreement. IPSCO is on record as saying that this Kyoto accord 
could force them out of Saskatchewan, losing the 700 jobs that 
are in Saskatchewan. And now we see through extreme 
government regulation the NDP are putting more restrictions on 
the businesses of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it must’ve came as quite a surprise to the union 
negotiators and IPSCO management when they sat down and 
worked out a fair agreement among themselves, working 
through the collective bargaining process, to find out that they 
don’t have the last say in this matter. 
 
What we see, Mr. Speaker, is a government that has lost really 
the direction, lost its way. And it really is highlighted with this 
legislation and in labour legislation as a whole. They have put 
on layers of regulation and legislation and to really control 
every aspect of the business environment in this province. It 
could control every aspect of the bargaining units in this 
province. 
 
And as we have seen, these actions by this government has only 
had a negative effect on Saskatchewan and on the taxpayers of 
this province. We see people leaving this province in droves to 
go to other jurisdictions where the labour laws are more 
friendly and where there’s a growing economy. And this is 
another example of the government really putting restrictions 
on this economy for the NDP’s own self-interest and not to the 
self-interest of the taxpayers of this province as a whole. 
 
What we need in this province is more flexible labour 
legislation. What we need for this government is to get out of 
the way of the collective bargaining process, Mr. Speaker. Why 
would this government have restrictions on a collective 
bargaining process when the bargaining unit, the union and 
employers, sit down, negotiate a collective bargaining 
agreement, and that should be the end of it? 
 
But no, we have this government in this area and so many other 
areas of labour legislation that they have their hands in, 
muddying up the water in so many areas in this province. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party believes in more flexible labour 
laws. And we believe that by mutual agreement the unions and 
the employers of this province should come to agreements that 
allow flexibility within the workplace, that . . . And we have 
seen in small businesses in this province have very flexible 
arrangements with their workers and to take time off with their 
family when needed or emergency arises or medical care is 
needed. And employers in this province are more than happy to 
accommodate these changes without having to go to the 
provincial NDP government to get permission to do . . . to make 
these changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that we need to take a look at this bill 
and not only restrict it to one collective bargaining agreement. 



2974 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

What we need to do is do this province wide, get the provincial 
NDP government out of the way of the collective bargaining 
process, and let unions and the employers work out their own 
agreements. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 83 — The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers 
of America, Local 5890, Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Act, 2002 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is my 
deputy minister, Christine Tanner, and sitting directly behind 
Christine is Jim McLellan, the manager of legal policy in 
legislative services. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I welcome 
the deputy minister. This is our first opportunity that we’ve had 
to ask her questions in this Committee of the Whole. I’d like to 
ask a question concerning why has the government restricted 
this Bill just to this particular collective bargaining agreement, 
and why has the government not expanded this to the province 
as a whole under all agreements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I guess to clarify a few issues 
that the member may have. First off, in his remarks he said that 
the negotiators for the union and the company would have been 
surprised during negotiations that there is a three-year limitation 
on the term of a collective agreement. I would sincerely doubt 
that, since this is the second time that this piece of legislation 
will be coming forward. We accommodated the IPSCO and 
United Steelworkers of America in a previous agreement that 
was a five-year term. 
 
And maybe to clear up another misconception, to have a 
three-year limitation in the agreement in no way limits any 
company or a union from negotiating an agreement that is 
longer than the three-year term. They are quite able to do that. 
The only difference being is that they will still have the open 
period at the end of the three years, so either party could open 
the negotiations again to look at any agreement that is currently 
in place. That open period would exist. 
 
What this piece of legislation does, and being it was requested 
by the steelworkers and by IPSCO, is give the security of a 
four-year continuous agreement. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d 
like to just clarify that. I think the surprise in the eyes of the 
union and the business, IPSCO, would be that this Bill, this Act 

hasn’t been repealed, and allow them to come to their own 
agreement. 
 
They had to come to the legislature I understand in 1995 as 
well. And I would think at that time that the government of the 
day should have changed this Act so that businesses and unions 
don’t have to come to the legislature and get permission to 
finalize a collective bargain agreement. 
 
And again I’d like to ask the minister: has the government 
contemplated, and I believe the government should repeal this 
Act and allow the bargaining units . . . this clause, repeal this 
clause, and allow the bargaining unit and the industry to come 
to their own agreements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I guess I would stress again 
that being the three-year term is in section 33 of The Trade 
Union Act, it in no way restricts the parties from negotiating a 
longer agreement. It is done fairly frequently throughout the 
province. 
 
What IPSCO and the United Steelworkers of America are 
looking for is just that little extra security that the four-year 
agreement is a continuous agreement and doesn’t have that 
open period at the third year. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I’d like to ask the 
minister, formerly the clause stated two years and it’s been 
increased to four years . . . or to three years and you’ve 
increased it by 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I still don’t understand why the government would 
feel that it has to have control over the collective bargaining 
agreement and not repeal this clause and not let the unions and 
the industries work out their own collective bargaining 
agreements without having to come hat in hand, basically, to 
the legislature every time to get permission to act on an 
agreement that they have negotiated. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The three-year term really is put in place 
to protect really the economic interests of both parties against 
volatility in the markets and drastic changes that may take 
place. And I would stress again that there is nothing that 
prohibits two parties from negotiating and agreeing to a contract 
and a process that is longer than the three years stated in The 
Trade Union Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again to the 
minister, it seems that the government and this minister doesn’t 
have any confidence in the union movement of this province 
and of the employers of this province. What would be wrong 
. . . The union movement and the industry of this province are 
mature enough to make their own agreements. And what you’re 
saying is you don’t trust them to negotiate, through a collective 
bargaining process, their own agreements. So you want to look 
over their shoulder and have final say about any agreement. 
 
Why would it be wrong to have a collective bargaining 
agreement that runs five years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now, Mr. Chair, I guess I would stress 
again that the Act does not specifically prohibit the parties from 
agreeing to longer contracts. It enables either party, at the end 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2975 

 

of the three-year period, to give notice to enter into collective 
bargaining negotiations and reopen. So there is no restrictions 
whatsoever. 
 
(11:30) 
 
If anyone wishes to agree to . . . If both parties involved wish to 
agree to a longer contract, they can. And there is a number 
throughout the province that have done that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess the 
question has to be asked again. If those clauses are in place, 
why, why do they have to come to the government, hat in hand, 
to get the okay of the legislature to finalize their collective 
bargaining agreement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Chair, I would say to the 
member opposite that the only reason the steelworkers or 
IPSCO would come to the government hat in hand was because 
it would be inappropriate to wear your hat in the House. 
 
But they are not doing that. What this does, it requests a more 
permanent so you do not, after the three years, have the open 
period. This will be a continuous four-year agreement. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The Minister of Highways has requested leave 
to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, members. I’d 
like to introduce to you Roger Juarez, who is in the west 
gallery. Roger is senior vice-president with IPSCO 
Saskatchewan Inc. This is Roger’s first visit to the legislature 
and he’s really quite pleased to see how smoothly things run 
here. 
 
And so we’re happy to welcome you . . . we’re happy to 
welcome Roger here to the legislature, and I soon will be happy 
to welcome him as a constituent as he’s got property out in 
Deer Valley and will be a resident out there, probably sometime 
within this next year. So I’d ask you to join me in welcoming 
him to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 83 — The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers 
of America, Local 5890, Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that Bill 83, The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of 

America, Local 5890, Collective Bargaining Agreement Act, 
2002 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Before orders of the day, I ask leave to bring a 
motion under rule 46. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — What is the subject matter, hon. 
member? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The proposed by-election in the constituency 
of Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Request for General Election 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank 
you to hon. members of this House. 
 
Of course we all share in the sadness for the reason for the 
vacancy in the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency. And we all 
share in our conviction of the importance that the people of that 
constituency are represented in our deliberations at the earliest 
possible moment. 
 
However we note that that constituency has now been abolished 
by the work of the redistribution commission which of course 
we . . . whose report we adopted on Monday. 
 
We also note that we are into the . . . we’re moving into the 
fourth year of the election cycle, and that we have had a 
Premier in office now for nearly two years without a mandate 
from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think it only makes sense that rather than go to the 
expense of electing a member in a by-election for a seat that no 
longer exists, that in fact the people of Saskatchewan should be 
consulted and there should be a general election rather than a 
by-election in the constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Now I note that the Premier, the Premier this week said that he 
wants a member from Battleford-Cut Knife very soon because 
he is confident the NDP will win that by-election and he’s 
looking forward to another member on the government side of 
the House from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I hate to burst the Premier’s bubble but if I 
was laying money, I’d give better odds to the Taliban than the 
NDP there. In fact, Mr. Speaker — in fact, Mr. Speaker — the 
chances of the NDP winning the Battleford-Cut Knife 
by-election are a little bit less than the Minister of Culture being 
named Saskatoon citizen of the year. 
 
But if the Premier still thinks I’m wrong, if the Premier still 
thinks, if the Premier still thinks that he can outpoll the Taliban 
in Battleford, then call a general election so we can have all 



2976 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

these new NDP members he has confidently predicted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many reasons, there are many reasons 
why the people of this province should be consulted. We have 
heard about the $28 million SPUDCO fiasco. We have heard 
that the government sold this to the people initially as a 
public-private partnership when in fact there was no partnership 
at all. The people need to be consulted as to whether they 
approve of a government that says there is private involvement 
when in point of fact the private involvement was 52 bucks. 
 
We need to consult them on the Broe deal. We need to consult 
them on the ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), Information Services, the automation of our 
land titles system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that we could have acquired the 
automated land titles system from the province of Alberta for 
little or nothing. Instead, we were going to spend 20 million — 
now up close to 100 million. 
 
And they told us they were going to market this around the 
world. They tried to market it in such exotic destinations as Fort 
Lauderdale and Australia. And of course they tried to market it 
in Albania, but unfortunately it was difficult to sell it to Albania 
because unfortunately that country’s telephone lines had 
apparently been turned into fencing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the fact that our land titles system . . . Vast 
cost overruns; not working; that enormous global travel for 
non-existent sales — the people of Saskatchewan have to be 
consulted about that. 
 
The people of the Battlefords, the people of the Battlefords 
want, want their opportunity to thank this government for 
cryptosporidium, and I think I know how they will express their 
gratitude to this government for its handling of water in this 
province — now water crises spreading across Saskatchewan. 
Maple Creek’s on a boil-water order. 
 
Well it would be a waste of money, Mr. Speaker, to call a 
by-election in Battleford-Cut Knife; we need a general election. 
 
I also think, on a personal level, it would be tragic, it would be 
tragic, Mr. Speaker, for the person elected in that by-election 
because, as I mentioned a few minutes ago, whoever is elected 
as the new member for Battleford will only be able to sit for a 
little while, then we’ll have a general election under the new 
boundaries. 
 
And of course, as we all know, after the general election under 
the new boundaries, the MLA for Battleford will be myself. So 
I don’t think we should set someone up for disappointment by 
electing him to Battleford today when we all know that they 
won’t have that job for very long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has not been in office for 11 
years. This government has been in office for two years. This 
government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan. This Premier has no mandate; he wasn’t even a 
candidate in the last election. He should want to receive a 
mandate from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

And in the two years that this new government has been in 
operation, they have reversed the fiscal management of the 
Romanow government and they have replaced it with deficit 
financing that they have tried to hide through elaborate shell 
games. 
 
I think most of us would agree that the prime achievement of 
the Romanow administration was getting the province’s 
finances back into the black. Tragically that has been 
squandered by a Minister of Finance who thinks — in the words 
of the Provincial Auditor — that transferring funds from one 
account to another changes the province’s financial outlook. 
And as the Provincial Auditor reminded us, it does nothing of 
the sort. 
 
So I think the people of Saskatchewan need the opportunity to 
tell us whether they are happy about the Minister of Finance 
taking us back into deficit financing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many issues that I think require the input 
of the people. We should not elect a by-election member who 
will lose his or her seat in a few months. I would remind hon. 
members that in the last House, in the twenty-third House . . . in 
the twenty-third legislature we elected three MLAs by 
by-election who never took their seats in this Assembly. And I 
think we should try and avoid that sort of waste again, to elect 
three people who never even so much as take their seats. So we 
don’t want that. 
 
But we also don’t want Battleford-Cut Knife to be left vacant. 
The solution clearly is for the government to seek the mandate 
from the entire people — not just the constituency but the entire 
people. 
 
This constituency borders on the Kindersley constituency where 
we just had a by-election, and I welcome our newest MLA. And 
of course in that by-election the NDP ran third and got 16 per 
cent. And all I can say is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s 
all. 
 
(11:45) 
 
And I would say to the Premier if he expects much better results 
in the neighbouring constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife, then 
maybe that amendment to the Criminal Code they were talking 
about in Ottawa is already in effect. Because he is sadly 
mistaken if he expects results that are going to be a whole lot 
different in the seat just to the north of Kindersley. 
 
So we have Crown corporations run amok. We have 
globe-trotting officials spending money but making no 
contracts. We have a Minister of Finance who transfers money 
from one fund to the next and says he’s balanced the budget. 
We have the government saying they have a partnership with 
private investors and when we find out that this partnership 
consists of 28 million of taxpayers’ money and 52 bucks of 
private investment . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fifty-one. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Fifty one. I overstated. My apologies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now is the time to ask the people of Saskatchewan 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2977 

 

whether they want to move forward, whether they want to 
develop this province, whether they want to move onward and 
upward, or whether they want more cryptosporidium. And for 
that reason, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member 
from Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Premier to call a general 
election in Saskatchewan within six months of the 
Battleford-Cut Knife constituency becoming vacant in 
order to avoid a costly by-election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an honour to be able to second this motion and 
enter the debate, Mr. Speaker, that the heart of the motion of 
course calls for a general election to happen. 
 
I mean, we have a . . . There’s the prospect of a by-election 
upcoming in the Battleford-Cut Knife and I think the previous 
speaker, the member for North Battleford, quite rightly pointed 
out the reasons why we ought to have a general election and 
ensure the representation in the Battleford-Cut Knife, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But also because, of course, the results of a 
general election would be a change in the government and that 
would be even more important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a list of reasons and the previous 
speaker went over them as to the need for a general election in 
this province. There are a whole host of reasons, not the least of 
which is the budget, which clearly is in a significant deficit 
position. The budget, the fiscal health of the province, is an 
issue, as it was — as it was — during the election of 1991. And 
quite rightly it was an issue then and it’s an issue today. It’s the 
same problem, Mr. Speaker; we’re in a deficit situation. 
 
There are many other issues. Health care is an issue. In my area, 
I think the people of Swift Current, for example, would be 
looking forward to a general election in the hopes that a general 
election might answer a question that this government has been 
unable to answer as regards their regional hospital. I think 
they’re . . . be ready for one in terms of health care, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I think the whole issue of Crowns begs for a general election. 
And how the Crown sector of this government is completely out 
of control. And how this government refuses to rein them in. 
How the government of this province is prepared to risk $80 
million in Australia, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while they’re cutting 
the agriculture budget, and while, Mr. Speaker, the health care 
needs of the province go unaddressed. I think that’s a good 
reason for a general election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think the fact that this government is prepared to invest $22 
million in a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia, while they ignore the 
priorities at home, I think that’s a reason for a general election, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think their willingness to risk $30 million in Chile and 
Mexico, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while they ignore the problems at 
home in agriculture and health care, I think that’s a reason for a 
general election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think the case for a general 
election could be made any better, could be made any better, 
than it is made in this document, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
document that we spoke of in the legislature this week. This 
document which was a review of the government’s potato 
investment. A review of SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) by a reputed national firm of 
chartered accountants known as Ernst & Young. 
 
This document provides every reason for a general election in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, because it answers the questions we 
had on Monday and Tuesday that the government wouldn’t 
answer. Do you remember those questions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Those questions were pretty simple. 
 
Why in 1997 would the current Minister of Industry and the 
then minister of Sask Water walk into cabinet and recommend 
the risking of millions of dollars in the construction of potato 
storage sheds in Saskatchewan and not provide an accurate 
picture of the new company that was proposed to do the deal? 
Why would he do that? 
 
The Deputy Premier seems to be interested in the debate. He 
didn’t answer any of that . . . he didn’t answer that question 
today. Maybe he would like to stand on his feet in this debate 
and answer the question. Why would he portray this deal other 
than as it should have been portrayed to his own cabinet 
colleagues? We ask that question. 
 
And more to the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why, one year later 
when CIC officials of this government came to the cabinet and 
said, by the way, what you were told last year, it isn’t true; there 
is no private sector partner; there’s no private sector partner at 
all and the taxpayers are on the hook for 100 per cent — why 
then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would the government, would the 
cabinet ministers . . . And you can look across the way and see 
them all, those cabinet ministers that got that report. Why 
wouldn’t they have said, this is not wrong; we are going to put a 
stop to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
There’s the member for Regina Victoria. He sat at that cabinet 
table. There is the member for Meadow Lake. He sat at that 
cabinet table. And there’s the Minister of Finance and the 
Deputy Premier. And, Mr. Speaker, they had an opportunity at 
that time to stand up in 1998 and say, what the minister of 
Industry told us in ’97 wasn’t true. We will not risk any more 
taxpayers’ dollars in this. We’re going to put a stop to it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they didn’t do that 
then. And that is a reason for a general election in 2003, as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question then that is begged by all of 
that is: why? Why in the world would they do that? Why in the 
world would they ignore advice from officials that said, you’ve 
been misled a year ago? Instead they put millions more, 
millions of dollars more at risk, and end up losing 28 million 
taxpayer dollars. 
 
Well this document this week answered the question why. It 
answered it clearly, Mr. Speaker. You could find it and you 
could get . . . You know, not long ago, earlier on I think the 
member for Regina Dewdney said, he hollered across the floor 
and asked me if he could have a copy of this Ernst & Young 
report. Well the whole point of this week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 



2978 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

is that it’s this government’s report. He ought to ask the 
Minister of Industry. He ought to ask the Deputy Premier or the 
Premier. Maybe they’d share the report with him. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this report answers the question why in 
the world a government would do such a thing. Why wouldn’t 
they come clean with Saskatchewan people? Why would they 
continue to risk money in a venture they knew had been not 
portrayed truthfully to them? 
 
And here’s the answer. Here’s the answer. Southwest . . . I beg 
your pardon. Sask Water Corporation management has 
indicated that the current ownership structure provides a 
number of potential benefits, including avoidance of 
international trade investigation, use of non-unionized labour 
for construction, and the optics that there was a partner in the 
private sector when there wasn’t. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think I just heard 
the Deputy Premier say, well those guys are good at theatrics. I 
think that’s what he just said from his seat. 
 
This document, Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly portrays once and 
for all that this government, this government, knew it wasn’t 
telling the truth — knew it wasn’t telling the truth but continued 
to risk millions of dollars. And that member right there sat at 
the cabinet table and did nothing. And that’s why we need a 
general election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — What does this document say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as to why they would do this? Why would they allow 
this ruse to continue? In the best of Nixonian fashions, why 
would they not let the truth come clean, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Because they wanted to trick our trading partners? They wanted 
to make this deal look what’s known as NAFTA-green (North 
America Free Trade Agreement) so that it would follow all 
NAFTA rules when they knew that it wasn’t because in order 
for it to be NAFTA-green, the government can’t be a majority 
owner. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they wanted to fool our trading 
partners. 
 
Do they understand what the implications could have been, not 
just for our potato industry but for the potato industry across 
Canada? If the Americans would have found out or any of our 
NAFTA partners would have found out about this — we know 
how willing the Americans are to sabre rattle and act over every 
little, tiny trade issue — imagine how they would have been all 
over this. It could have destroyed not only the industry in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the industry in Prince 
Edward Island. And they don’t seem to care. 
 
The Deputy Premier was grinning today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
about all of this. He was grinning in his answers that never got 
to the point. So that’s the first point. They wanted to deceive or 
trick their trading partners. That’s what the report says. 
 
The second thing they wanted to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
and get this — the second thing they wanted to do was avoid 
their own union-only construction tendering policy. And get 
this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All these ministers that I’ve pointed 

out, all these ministers that sit across the way, they read that. 
They read that. They read it in the report and what did they do 
about it? They did absolutely nothing. 
 
Here’s what they did. They committed more millions of dollars 
at risk of the taxpayers’ money. That’s what their answer was. 
Why would they do that? Well we can’t let the truth get out. 
 
Well I’m going to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this week the 
truth is out. The truth is out and the people understand this 
government for what it is. They understand this government for 
what it is and the member for Regina South and the Highways 
minister better pay attention because the people understand the 
government for what it is. And because they understand that, 
those members on that side of the House are headed for a huge 
election defeat at the polls, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s what’s going to happen to them. I can’t . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You know what, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? The Minister of Highways just hollered from his seat 
here, we don’t have . . . that we don’t have a clue. Well how 
about Ernst & Young, that was commissioned to do the report 
by his own government — by his own government? By his 
government. His government commissioned the report. Do they 
know what they were talking about? I would argue that they 
did. 
 
And what was the final reason? The final of the three reasons 
why they would mislead the people of Saskatchewan in this 
way, why they would cover it up with millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars, the final reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is for the optics 
— so they could trick the people of Saskatchewan into thinking 
that there was a private sector partner when there wasn’t a 
private sector partner. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of reasons, there are a lot 
. . . Well, and the Deputy Premier’s laughing, he’s laughing. 
He’s laughing about it. It’s a big joke. It’s a big joke to him, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that his government didn’t tell the truth, 
that his government tried to cover it up with other people’s 
money. You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Enron 
executives who did that sort of thing, they weren’t just fired, but 
the only deals they’re negotiating are with their prosecutors — 
that’s the deals that Enron executives are negotiating. 
 
But what about this outfit, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What happens 
to the minister that started all of this? Is he still negotiating 
deals? You bet. The Premier gives him a credit card for another 
100 million taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Deputy . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening carefully 
to the fantasy ramblings of the hon. member for Swift Current. 
And I’ve been reading very clearly the resolution that is before 
the House at this moment. 
 
I remind the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the resolution is 
calling for a general election within six months of the 
Battleford-Cut Knife constituency becoming vacant and in 
order to avoid holding a costly by-election so close to the next 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2979 

 

general provincial election. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would wonder — although it’s amusing, 
I find the hon. member’s musings amusing — that what the 
relevance is to the resolution that is before the House. And I 
would ask that you would ask the hon. member to direct his 
remarks in the context of the motion that is before us. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 
all about the reasons why there needs to be a general election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — It’s the government’s Deputy House 
Leader that is fantasizing about his inability to recognize the 
truth in this document, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the fantasy 
lies, is in that government side and their belief, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they can avoid a general election as long as 
possible. 
 
The people of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, want a 
general election. That’s what this motion is about, is having a 
general election rather than wasting more money — after 
they’ve wasted $28 million on SPUDCO, to not waste more 
money, Mr. Speaker, on a general election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:00) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I thank the hon. member for 
raising the point of order, and the hon. member for speaking to 
it. 
 
In reading the motion, I do believe that there is a great amount 
of latitude for spreading — pardon me — that there is a great 
deal of latitude available to the hon. members in speaking to 
this motion. 
 
So I would rule that the point of order is not well taken, but I 
would ask the hon. member for Swift Current to ensure that he 
links his remarks back to the motion before the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d be happy to do that 
because that is precisely the point of my remarks to this point 
— the point of what I’ve been trying to portray and better yet, 
what Ernst & Young portray. 
 
What Ernst & Young portray in this report on this government’s 
investment in potato is that it speaks to a government, it speaks 
to a government that has lost its way. It speaks to the issue of a 
government that has lost its moral compass; that’s more 
interested in covering up the truth and avoiding the political 
accountability that would go with that truth. It’s more interested 
in that than it is in the interests of the taxpayers of the province, 
so much so that they would commit millions more to continue a 
cover-up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
That’s why we need a general election in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to get rid of a government that would have that 

those kinds of priorities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, I heard even in the point of order intervention, and 
I’ve heard from the seats over there, that, well this is fantasy; 
it’s musings. Yes, well it’s musings of chartered accountants 
who are commissioned by this government, by this government, 
commissioned by this government to look at the SPUDCO 
fiasco. 
 
And they came, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the reasons why the 
government would cover this up. Why would they mislead the 
people of the province about these millions of dollars — why? 
There they are again. One final time, very quickly, here the 
three reasons are, Mr. Deputy Speaker: one, they did it to avoid 
their own union tendering policies; they did it to trick our 
trading partners, international trade organizations; and they did 
it to try to trick the people of the province. 
 
And for that reason as well as the many others — but were there 
no others, for that reason alone — I would be seconding this 
motion, and asking all of the members of this Assembly to 
support its call for a general election so we can get rid of this 
NDP government in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, hopefully for the edification of the members and for 
the edification for the people who might be watching this, I 
would like to speak to the motion that’s before us, and indicate 
at the outset that I would encourage members to oppose the 
motion, to defeat the motion that’s before us. 
 
The motion before us talks about a general election. The motion 
before us talks about a by-election. And it talks about a 
by-election that might be close to the next general provincial 
election. Well first let’s get out the facts about general elections 
and by-elections, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First, with respect to general elections, I would like to quote the 
law on this matter so that people are familiar with what the law 
is exactly. And it states in section 3 of the Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council that: 
 

Each Assembly shall continue for five years from the date 
of the return of the writs for the election and no longer, but 
the Lieutenant Governor may at any time dissolve the 
Assembly and cause a new one to be chosen. 

 
So what the law says is that when election is done, the 
government will be able to serve for a period of five years. 
That’s not normally the practice in Saskatchewan. I think most 
of those who are watching will know that most elections are 
usually, usually, held after a period of four years — give or take 
six months. 
 
There has been at least one occasion in my term as an elected 
member that an election took . . . or that it took five years for a 
government to call an election. Of course that was in 1991 after 
five years of a Progressive Conservative administration that Mr. 



2980 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

Devine finally called . . . Well I don’t think he had a choice any 
more. I think he was pretty much forced by this law to have an 
election. And I think there was one time back in the 1930s, 
again a Progressive Conservative administration, that carried on 
for a period of five years. 
 
I might add in both those instances that those two governments 
were decisively defeated, and I think that reflects a sense by the 
voters that they don’t have much stomach for governments 
lasting the full five years. 
 
Again as I indicated, the practice is to go for about four years, 
or give or take six months or so. So we’ve seen elections that 
have gone for approximately four and a half years; we’ve seen 
elections go for approximately three and a half years. But the 
average is four years, and also the median or the most occurring 
sort of time between elections is four years in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to clear that up because members are 
indicating in their remarks or by way of this motion that an 
election might come soon. Well it might come soon, Mr. 
Speaker. Three and a half years would roughly be next spring; 
four years would be September 2003; and four and a half years 
would be, roughly speaking, the spring of 2004. But it’s 
possible that there could be a general election as early as this 
spring, but it’s not necessarily the case. 
 
Well what they’re saying is that we think there might be an 
election next spring so therefore you shouldn’t have any 
by-election, Mr. Speaker. And I guess the implication of that 
being is, if there’s no general election until the fall, then the 
people of this constituency, this part of Saskatchewan, would go 
unrepresented for almost a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s another law that I should like to familiarize people 
with, and that is the law pertaining to by-elections. And that law 
states that a by-election to fill a vacancy in the Assembly shall 
be held within six months, six months after a seat in the 
Assembly becomes vacant. And of course we know in the case 
of this constituency there is a vacancy because of the 
unfortunate passing of the former member, Rudi Peters, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now when was this law enacted? The previous law with respect 
to governments serving for five years has been around I think as 
long as this Legislative Assembly and as long as this province 
has been around, but this law with respect to by-elections has 
only been around for a few years. That law was enacted in 1991 
and it was one of the first things that the then newly elected 
NDP government of Roy Romanow undertook to pass. 
 
Why did we have this law and why did the Romanow 
government move with such speed to have that kind of law 
enacted, Mr. Speaker? Well that relates back to the conditions 
of the 1980s where contrary to the practice, the practice that 
prevailed in Saskatchewan, whether it was the previous 
government of Blakeney, the previous government of Tommy 
Douglas, Ross Thatcher — all previous governments — where 
more or less the premiers respected the fact that if there is a 
vacancy in a constituency and a by-election is necessary, that 
that by-election should be held within a reasonable period of 
time so that those people might then have an opportunity to be 
represented by a member of the Legislative Assembly. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And there was no law that stipulated 
what that length of time should be and . . . because most 
premiers I think acted honourably in that regard and respected 
the wishes of the people in that matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I indicated, the 1980s, things went awry not only in this 
particular situation but went awry in many different ways for 
the people of Saskatchewan. But one of the ways in which the 
practices that had prevailed was not being respected was with 
respect to the calling of by-elections. 
 
So we had situations where in the constituency of Kindersley, 
we had in 1989, in December of 1989, the then-serving 
member, Bob Andrew, resigned. And there was never a 
by-election and the seat was vacant for 22 months until there 
was a general election. So those people in Kindersley went 
unrepresented for a period of 22 months. 
 
And the then premier, Grant Devine, refused to call a 
by-election. I guess he feared what might happen in the 
by-election, although again the prevailing practice had not been 
that premiers would put their political interests ahead of the 
interests of the people of the constituencies who demanded to 
be represented. 
 
Similarly, Graham Taylor, he resigned in January 18, 1990 in 
the seat of Indian Head-Wolseley; that constituency was vacant 
for 21 months. Colin Maxwell, who represented the Turtleford 
constituency, he resigned in July 1, 1990; that seat was vacant 
for a period of 16 months. And Eric Berntson who resigned 
from the constituency of Souris-Cannington, that seat was 
vacant for a period of 15 months. No by-elections were ever 
called by the government. The government took the point of 
view if we don’t have to do it, well we’re not going to do it and 
we’ll do whatever is in our own, narrow political interest to do. 
 
And I think that was part of the reason that the people of 
Saskatchewan were so revulsed by what they saw in the Devine 
administration, which was just a sheer arbitrary exercise of 
power. No, if you like, heeding of what past practices had been; 
no heeding of what was in the best interest of the people in the 
province as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it was for that reason then that in 1991, that one of the 
early acts of the Romanow government was to put some limits, 
limits on future governments. And that was a law that we didn’t 
have before, never really needed prior to Mr. Devine. But we 
put in place some limits as to the calling of a by-election. That 
limit that was chosen was six months. There was some debate 
about whether it should be six months or something else. But at 
the end of the day, the government said that there should be a 
six months limit. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we have the 
law that we do. 
 
Now the opposition is criticizing that, you know, it’d be too 
costly to have a by-election within the next few months and 
then some months after that have a by-election . . . or have a 
general election. It would be too costly to do that and they say 
for that reason, well you shouldn’t have by-elections. 
 
And that reminds me too of the criticism that we heard prior to 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2981 

 

1999 general election when there were a couple of vacancies 
and there were by-elections held both in Saskatoon Fairview 
constituency, I believe, and certainly I know in Regina 
Dewdney constituency, when the opposition say oh well, it’s a 
waste of money to have these by-elections and this is not a very 
good law, Mr. Speaker, but . . . Well, that’s their criticism, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Of course now they’re making another criticism saying there’s 
all these issues that are before the public and therefore you 
should call a general election, notwithstanding the fact that a 
government is theoretically and legally elected for a period of 
five years. They say because of those issues . . . And I don’t 
think that those things are particularly relevant to the motion 
before us, but nevertheless, that’s what they address, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I don’t want to get into a debate of all the issues that they’ve 
brought up, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have time to get into all of 
those issues. But I would have a question about — which I find 
very puzzling — where they attack us on making the financial 
decisions that we did with respect to paying for the suppression 
of forest fires during the course of this year, paying as we did or 
taking . . . allocating monies as we did to cover the losses in the 
Crop Insurance Fund. 
 
(12:15) 
 
What alternative would they suggest to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Why is it that they’re not in a position to 
advocate what the alternatives should be, Mr. Speaker? Because 
I frankly find it puzzling that when you have catastrophic, 
catastrophic occurrences such as the drought we had this year 
and the forest fires that attended that, that the government 
should not respond in the appropriate fashion that it has, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also found it bizarre, laughable, when members 
of the opposition who were active in the previous Devine 
administration, use words such as cover-up as a means of 
criticism. I think these are people that very clearly need to look 
in the mirror and understand cover-up and what was going on in 
the course of the 1980s before they start attacking this 
government. 
 
And I also find it kind of odd that they would access or have 
access to documents that portray criticisms of the government, 
they say, and then say well this is a cover-up. Well if it’s a 
cover-up, how did they get the information, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are a country of laws. We are a country 
of due process. We do not believe in the arbitrary exercise of 
power or that the government can arbitrarily deny laws or make 
laws. And that’s what separates us, Mr. Speaker, from 
dictatorships. 
 
We don’t believe that there should be a whimsical approach, if 
you like, to governing and the observance of legislation. We 
have not only legislation, but courts that uphold those laws. We 
also have oversight committees in the Legislative Assembly in 
addition to a process where members can question the 
government on the observance of laws, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
kind of system that we have in this country. 

And that is also the system that men and women fought for this 
country, Mr. Speaker, because we believe in the kind of society 
and we believe in the rule of law and due process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now to hear again that the opposition would somehow 
arbitrarily want us to ignore the law, even though there is a law, 
I find troubling, Mr. Speaker. But I guess it’s not unusual that it 
would come from those members opposite because that has 
been their approach to governing, or at least it was in the 1980s. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan will be concerned and 
might be part of the reason that people are concerned about this 
party even with its new name, that they seem to have this kind 
of arbitrary approach to laws that are there and arbitrary 
approach to due process. 
 
And people sometimes wonder that if they were the 
government, would we be going back to the 1980s where 
governments ignored laws, or if there were no laws, they would 
ignore reasonable practice that . . . practices that were in effect? 
And I think that’s one of the fears that people have about the 
Leader of the Opposition and the men and women that he leads 
in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also find it odd that here we have a situation that is caused by 
a set of circumstances, as I’ve indicated, which is a . . . the 
untimely passing of Rudi Peters. And therefore now we have 
this vacancy that exists, that they wait for this vacancy to exist 
to complain — that they wait for this vacancy to exist to 
complain. And I guess that’s understandable because 
oppositions always, always complain after the fact. Oppositions 
are never, or never, or rarely ever try to anticipate what might 
happen and what should be done. 
 
We have never seen for example, in the years that I’ve been 
here, from this opposition, since the law was changed to put 
into effect that there should be no longer than six months before 
the calling of a by-election, I’ve never seen any proposal by the 
opposition members to change that law to however they might 
want to make the law more effective so as to preclude a 
by-election taking place within a month of, say, some general 
election. I don’t know how you would do that, but I’ve never 
seen any attempt by them to put before the Legislative 
Assembly an Act that we might consider and . . . as a means of 
improving the law that we have before us. 
 
Certainly they have had lots of opportunity. People who watch 
this channel will know that on almost any given day, and again 
today, that members will put forward Bills that they think will 
improve legislation. We’ve seen some, if I might say, some 
pretty silly ones over the years, Mr. Speaker; but again the 
opportunity is there for them to do that. So again my question 
is: if this is such a concern, why haven’t we seen proactive 
legislation from the opposition to deal with this particular issue, 
Mr. Speaker? They’ve had the opportunity. 
 
I wonder too, Mr. Speaker, if this is not when the member for 
the Battlefords says, I’m going to be running in this new 
constituency and I don’t want there to be a new member that 
might potentially oppose me in that constituency. I wonder 
what that says, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Again in summing up, Mr. Speaker, nothing, nothing is perfect 



2982 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

as I have found — whether it’s legislation or whatever it is. 
Nothing is perfect but we make choices. 
 
We have on the one hand, Mr. Speaker, a law that says a 
by-election must be held within six months of there being a 
vacancy, Mr. Speaker. Now that might mean that a member 
might only be serving for a few months until there is a general 
election. And that’s not the most perfect situation, admittedly, 
Mr. Speaker, but I would want the people also to consider what 
is the alternative. And the alternative would seem to be no law 
whatsoever and then again back to governments exercising 
arbitrarily, arbitrarily what should or should not happen when it 
comes to the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And again, there have been many governments that have treated 
those vacancies, that have treated the interests of the people 
with a great deal of respect over the years. But that is not 
something that we saw from the Devine Progressive 
Conservative administration during the 1980s where we saw 
such a rampant, rampant abuse of power the likes of which we 
have never seen in this province before, the likes of which we 
have never seen in Canada before, Mr. Speaker. And we I think 
are right to have a law that prevents us ever, ever going back to 
such an abuse of power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I just want to say that even the people in 
the Battlefords who are most affected, through their newspaper, 
in their editorials, are saying there should be a by-election as 
soon as possible so that the people there can be represented. 
They too don’t want to go back to the kind of situation that we 
had in the 1980s where we had this flagrant abuse of power, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage members to 
oppose the motion, to defeat this motion, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I won’t be long in my remarks this afternoon but I do 
want to speak to this motion, and I know that members of the 
opposition will be very interested in what I have to say. 
 
The motion calls for a general election within six months. Now 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that you will know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we are just over three years into the mandate of this 
government. And you will know as well, controversy when 
governments exceed a sort of historical four-year term. The 
opposition will cry wolf when a government calls an election 
prior to the four years of an historic and a normal mandate of 
government. They cry wolf. You can’t, I say, Mr. Speaker, 
make members of the opposition happy. 
 
And I think that’s very much evidenced by the approach that 
has been taken by the Saskatchewan Party because they oppose 
everything that happens in this province whether it has positive 
economic possibilities and benefits or whether it’s good public 
policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they take the opportunity to attack government. 
And so I say in the context of this motion, which I won’t be 
supporting, we on this side of the House are looking forward to 

an election. 
 
And we’re looking forward to an election because I think 
people are taking the opportunity to define people, members on 
this side of the House, who are achieving economic 
development initiatives in a positive way. This economy is 
growing. And they’re going to have an opportunity to compare 
people who are going to be running for the Saskatchewan Party 
in the next provincial election. 
 
And I think there’s some evidence building that people, as my 
colleague who spoke before me has indicated, are concerned in 
terms of what kind of a list of candidates might come to the 
fore, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to speak a little bit about why I believe members on this 
side of the House are interested in seeing an election because I 
think it’s going to be very much focused on our economic 
development record. 
 
It’s going to be focused on the strength of this province. It’s 
going to be focused on a vision for the future. And it’s going to 
be a comparison of what people on this side of the House want 
to see as it relates to economic development versus the 
sloganeers in the Saskatchewan Party who are totally void of a 
thought as it relates to developing the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s become very clear that members of the 
Saskatchewan Party are focused on criticism. That’s what 
they’re about. They’re focused on negativism. That’s what 
they’re about. 
 
They attacked the wide open future campaign, Mr. Speaker, to 
promote this province as a good place to live, a good place to 
do business. They don’t like to hear that and they don’t like to 
hear about the positive things that are happening in this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they can chirp from their seats. But I want to 
share with them the economic development plan that’s put 
together by this province which is a plan and not a slogan. 
 
And I want to . . . why I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has little more than a slogan to offer the 
people of Saskatchewan, a few short weeks ago I noted their 
caucus releases. And it was one after another after another. And 
the plan at that time was the Saskatchewan Party has a plan to 
grow the population of Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And that was their plan, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re cheering. They’re cheering. And that was 
their plan. 
 
What were the details, Mr. Speaker? There were none. What 
were the details, Mr. Speaker? There still are none. But I also 
noticed a headline on that caucus . . . on their caucus sheets 
changed about a week or two ago. And it says, not that the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan — they don’t have a plan any 
more — they’ve . . . even they have recognized now that 
they’ve got a goal. 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2983 

 

Now there’s a difference, Mr. Speaker, between members on 
this side of the House, and members on that side of the House. 
They’ve now got a goal. It’s a goal. They don’t have a plan any 
more, and they’ve admitted it. 
 
We’ve been asking for details of where they would head this 
province for months. And the answer to that is absolutely 
nothing. And members on the opposition are saying, we’ve 
been asking about your plan. Well, I’ll tell them about the plan. 
 
The plan is to continue to develop jobs and job opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people, and the records are showing through 
Statistics Canada that it’s happened. Mr. Speaker, we’ve posted 
seven straight months of solid job growth. The last four months 
have been record-breaking job numbers in this province, which 
turns into a population increase, Mr. Speaker. In November, we 
had more people going out to work every morning in this 
province than we’ve ever had in the history of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re yelling and they’re hollering. They 
don’t want to hear this. But they’re going to have to bear with 
me because I think the people of Saskatchewan want to know 
where this government is taking them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had 24,400 new jobs this November over last 
November — as I said, a record number. And that’s been going 
on for four months . . . seven straight months of job growth in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve got the third lowest unemployment rate in this country, 
Mr. Speaker. And how does this all happen? I want to tell them 
about the economic development plan of this government. We 
embark upon a program of meaningful tax reductions, Mr. 
Speaker — the largest personal income tax cut in the history of 
this province. We’ve introduced the most comprehensive 
mining package that this province has ever seen which makes 
us among the leaders in this country in terms of investment 
attraction. We put in place a prospectors and a developers 
incentive program, and it’s been very well accepted by the 
mining industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have put in place competitive oil and gas royalties in this 
province, the most competitive in the history of this province. 
And Mr. Speaker, members on that side of the House say it’s 
not enough. 
 
But one of my colleagues today talks about land sales — over 
$100 million, the biggest land sales in the last five years here in 
Saskatchewan. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s progress. It’s part 
of our economic development plan, and it’s working. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we mandated ethanol. We introduced legislation 
to mandate ethanol, and we’re developing an ethanol industry in 
this province. And members on the other side have attacked not 
only the program, they’ve attacked the people who brought 
millions and hundreds of millions of dollars here to invest. So, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s more than attacking a program. They also 
attack the people who are bringing investment dollars to this 
province. 
 
We’ve been reducing corporate taxes. We’ve been reducing 

small-business taxes along with personal income taxes over the 
last 10 years. And, Mr. Speaker, that too is part of our economic 
development plan. And part of the economic development plan 
too also includes the Wide Open Future campaign which is 
marketing this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a record of straight years of 
economic growth in this province for the last 10 years that we 
can all be proud of, not only the government. Because we can 
direct policy and we can put in place an overall plan, but 
ultimately it’s going to be the investment community, 
ultimately it’s going to be the investment community that 
creates jobs. And we’ve created the environment by which that 
can happen, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s one of the things that 
the people of this province are going to recognize when we go 
to the polls, whenever the Premier decides to call that election, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to point out some other differences that are going to 
be before the people of the province. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has been hiding their affiliation with the 
former Progressive Conservative operation. They put that rascal 
to bed some years ago, Mr. Speaker, because they could not 
sustain the political impact of what that Progressive 
Conservative Party delivered to this province for 10 years, Mr. 
Speaker. And people know. They remember it well, and they 
know all about it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you start to look at what’s surfacing in 
this province as the Saskatchewan Party, not the Progressive 
Conservatives — oh, no — they call themselves now the 
Saskatchewan Party. One of the former Social Services 
ministers from Melville in the Grant Devine administration has 
decided he wants to come back. He doesn’t want to talk about 
the past. He wants to talk about the future, and he’s seeking the 
nomination for those folks. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a nominating candidate in Regina South who 
was closely tied to the Grant Devine administration of the 
1980s by the name of Jim Roberts is now the candidate in 
Regina South. And I want to say to you — oh, and there’s 
cheers, Mr. Speaker — and there’s some very close ties to the 
Progressive Conservative Party in the 1980s in the government 
of the past. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are people in this legislature who also 
have some very close ties to that former administration. And I 
only need to look at Economic Development and Tourism in 
1990, Mr. Speaker. I see the minister . . . in the minister’s 
office, under a Mr. Eric Berntson, telephone number — 
whatever it is, 787 something — and there’s an associate 
minister, Mr. Speaker. And working for that associate minister 
is an executive director who’s a member of this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. And there couldn’t be any closer ties to the former 
Progressive Conservative Party than the three I’ve raised right 
here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that are hovering around them, 
the people that are looking for the political largesse of the 1980s 
have resurfaced and are part of that operation again. And let the 
people of Saskatchewan make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker, 
you don’t change the spots on a leopard. And the leopard of the 
1980s is the leopard of 2002 here in this province. It’s no longer 



2984 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

called the Saskatchewan . . . or the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan. They put that one to bed. They now call 
themselves the Saskatchewan Party. And Mr. Speaker, people 
will not forget that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when you try and promote this 
province, you try and promote this province . . . And the 
editorialists are saying we need to promote Saskatchewan as a 
good place to live and to do business and that we’ve made some 
advantages and we’ve created a circumstance here, in 
Saskatchewan, where people will invest. What does the 
members from the Saskatchewan Party say, Mr. Speaker? 
Straight partisan politics. It’s got nothing to do with supporting 
this province and supporting this economy. Mr. Speaker, they 
attack that. And they attack the people in the chamber of 
commerce who want to see a forward-looking way of 
presenting this province to the rest of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote just from an editorial recently. 
You know, it’s talking about . . . This is Regina Leader-Post, 
December 11 of this year and they’re talking about the Wide 
Open Future campaign. And I want to say . . . They go on to 
say: 
 

It’s too early to say if the campaigns are having (any) 
impact on migration. 

 
However, with new incentives for oil and gas companies and an 
expanding industry in ethanol, which they attack, the province 
and construction growth and robust retail sales, Mr. Speaker, all 
of the positive things that have been happening around 
members of the Saskatchewan Party who choose to ignore it 
and bury their heads in the sand, the old ostriches that they are, 
Mr. Speaker, editorialists of this province are saying that this is 
the right to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 

. . . the province seems to have recently shaken off some of 
its perceived lethargy. Taxes are falling and November saw 
24,400 more people (working) . . . than a year ago (Mr. 
Speaker). 
 
If these trends can be maintained and the ailing farm 
economy rebound from two straight years of drought 
(which they choose to ignore by the way, Mr. Speaker) . . . 
this province has a big enough future to reverse its 
population loss(es). Amid the gloom is hope. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk where the gloom is 
focused, it’s right over there. It’s right over there. It’s from one 
end to the other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I tell you in 2001 when we had difficult job numbers, the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party came out every month saying 
woe is me, gloom and doom. We lost 20-some—thousand jobs 
in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, at the same time but we 
compensated by creating 25,000 on the other side. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, when the job numbers turned in 
2002 and this economy moved, where was he? Where was he? 
Journalists would call the Saskatchewan Party caucus for a 
response — November, when we get 25,000 new jobs — and 
they’d say oh, we don’t want to talk about that. We don’t want 
to talk about a positive attitude. We don’t want to talk about 

building this economy. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we have a problem and one of the 
members from down in the south country is chirping about the 
young people. Ninety per cent of the people who come out of 
our SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) campuses are employed right here in this province. 
And 75 per cent of the young people who come out of these 
universities are employed right here in this province. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, we want to call an election. You’re 
going to see an election. It’s going to be fought on attitude and 
it’s going to be fought on an economic development game plan. 
So I ask members on that side of the House, if you want an 
election are you prepared to put forth details of an economic 
development plan? We want an election and we’ll have an 
election. And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government is going to be returned to power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — This government is going to be 
returned to power because the people of Saskatchewan have no 
troubles making the connection between Grant Schmidt, the 
former Social Services minister of Grant Devine, they have no 
troubles making that connection to the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And they have no troubles making the connection between Jim 
Roberts, their candidate for Regina South, and the largesse that 
he and his partners received under the Devine administration, 
untold dollars in terms of advertising money. They have no 
troubles making that connection. And, Mr. Speaker, those 
members opposite can try to hide who they are but the people of 
Saskatchewan are wiser than that, Mr. Speaker. They are much 
wiser than that. 
 
They know that this economy is strong. They know that the 
future of this province is truly wide open. They know that there 
are job opportunities for Saskatchewan’s young men and 
women right here at home. And they’re going to support people 
to come to this legislature to create a positive environment 
where that can continue to happen because no one — no one — 
is going to buy the gloom and doom of the men and women on 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to close by saying that I can’t support this motion. I 
won’t support the motion. I’ll be voting against it. 
 
But I’ll tell you what I will support. I will support continued 
work by Saskatchewan’s business community and the people 
who are coming to this province to invest millions of dollars — 
whether it’s to create intensive livestock, whether it’s to buy 
new . . . build new ranches in this province, or whether it’s to 
create manufacturing and processing opportunities, Mr. 
Speaker, or whether it’s the people who have brought a billion 
dollars to the forest industry in this province — Mr. Speaker, 
those are the people that I’m going to be supporting. Those are 
the people that the men and women on this side of the House 
are going to be supporting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I close by saying, I’m looking forward to the 
election because, Mr. Speaker, these people are going to walk 
into a 30-day campaign without a plan, without a vision for this 



December 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2985 

 

province — nothing but a slogan. And I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll put our economic development game plan ahead of 
the slogan of the Saskatchewan Party any old day. 
 
And I can’t tell the Premier when to call it. But I’ll tell you 
what — when he does call that election, we’ll be out of the 
chute. We’ll be putting forward our plan. We’ll be fighting 
nothing but a slogan. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, this 
government will be re-elected. Call the election, I’m ready. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
add one or two comments that I think are quite important when 
we’re talking about a motion such as this. We’re talking about 
calling an election in the next six months and for reasons that 
have been discussed already and I think that’s very important. 
 
The election is going to be called sooner or later and the 
election will be based certainly on platform. But it’s going to be 
based primarily on two things: confidence in the government, 
and the confidence that the people have in the ability for them 
to govern in a manner that they’ve shown us over the last while. 
What we can’t tolerate in this province is more confusion. We 
need more confidence. And the confidence is the thing that 
seems to be lacking here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Let’s talk about confusion to start with. If we’re looking at this 
by-election coming up in Battleford-Cut Knife — which will 
have to be done within the next six months — that is a very 
confusing situation when new boundaries have already been put 
in Act in this legislative sitting. 
 
That is going to affect a great deal of other constituencies 
around there, so the confusion will continue. It’s been referred 
to earlier but the confusion will certainly continue when we 
have candidates from either side or any of the parties, they may 
or may not be within the boundaries of the by-election — which 
will very soon after that become new boundaries — so which 
constituency will they be representing at that time. 
 
We’re looking at about six different constituencies that are 
going to be affected — certainly the Battleford-Cut Knife 
constituency, on the old boundaries, which transforms into the 
Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. The confusion then becomes 
who’s going to be representing and where they’re from. 
 
We have interested candidates that are in other constituencies 
on the new boundaries. It becomes a real puzzle for not only the 
people that are interested, it becomes a real puzzle for the 
people that want to know who their representative is going to 
be. 
 
For instance, when we’re looking at the Battleford-Cut Knife 
constituency, it comes fairly close to Lloydminster and 
bordering the Lloydminster . . . the old boundary of the 
Lloydminster constituency. But in fact when the new 
constituency comes into place, that is totally eliminated and if 
you live six miles out of Lloydminster, you’re in Cut 
Knife-Turtleford — completely different than what the 
by-election is going to be called on. 
 
So that element of confusion has to be considered and I think 

we want to do away with that confusion. And we can do that 
simply by calling an election in that appropriate period of time. 
 
Let me talk a little bit about the confidence that’s needed when 
we come to an election. People will certainly decide for 
themselves on the record of this particular government. And 
when we see the things that have been done by this government 
— and we’re talking about first of all, the financial position that 
this government has put this province into — you have to 
wonder is there any confidence left in our ability to be able to 
sustain the services that are expected of government. 
 
Let’s talk a little bit about the confidence that has been shaken 
when we found out that the Minister of Finance has been 
talking all along about the balanced budget in this province. The 
balanced budget in fact is on one portion of the budget and in 
fact it is balanced. When you look at the General Revenue 
Fund, you can keep it balanced by shifting money around. And 
when you shift the money in order to achieve that perception of 
balance, then confidence starts to be shaken. 
 
(12:45) 
 
And it’s not from my word or anyone else’s word other than the 
Provincial Auditor of this province has indicated that when you 
take the picture in total, the debt has increased and it’s increased 
fairly substantively. 
 
I can use an example from the Provincial Auditor’s 2002 Fall 
Report, a very recent edition where, and I quote from this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

The government’s accumulated deficit is a better indicator 
of the government’s financial condition. 

 
And when we look on that, when you look at the bonds, 
debentures, the unfunded pension liability and things called 
other, the debt has increased significantly and is in fact higher 
now than it was in 1997 and certainly higher than it was in 
1991. And when we talk about balanced budgets, that is not 
giving the people of the province confidence that any of the 
projections that we’re looking at in the future is in fact the true 
picture. 
 
And we’ve debated this issue over the last couple of days in 
terms of whether we should be putting the accounting forward 
in balanced summary budget form or not. And certainly that is 
the recommendation of the auditor and the recommendation of 
this particular party, and that will in fact happen. 
 
We talked about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and what an 
advantage it is. And if in fact it was a fund, it would have been 
a great asset for us in a time when we really needed that money. 
But the fund was in fact utilized in another fashion. And when 
you, quote, “draw down” from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
you are just in fact increasing your debt that the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund was addressing earlier. 
 
So it’s interesting. I guess if I was going to put it in context with 
the farming operation that I was involved with at one time, I 
would have to say that if I had an operating loan and I had a 
current account, to keep my current account in balance, I would 
have to utilize my operating loan, more or less, and try and get 



2986 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 2002 

 

it paid off so that I always had a current account that was on the 
balance or in the black. 
 
The Minister of Finance often counters with the fact that for 
several years the bond rating agencies have looked at the 
Saskatchewan finance and said that everything is fine and the 
province is doing well. 
 
It would be like me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would be like me 
going to the bank and saying to the banker, lookit, Mr. Banker, 
I’m a really good guy and I want you to make sure that I still 
have continuing credit and my credit line is still in place. And 
he said, yes, yes you are. And he looks at my current account 
and says, yes, you’ve kept it in the black and you’ve kept it 
going in the right direction and so you are a good guy. And 
therefore that gives me the opportunity to utilize even a higher 
debt than before. 
 
But the fact is that it is still a debt whether the banker gives me 
a higher rating or not. We are still operating at a debt and we’re 
increasing the debt. And that in fact is a real particular problem. 
 
Now we’ve talked earlier too about other things that really have 
shaken the confidence of people and we’re talking in the last 
few days about the SPUDCO and the misinformation that was 
passed along and decisions were made and information, 
inaccurate information, was presented at various levels. That is 
not an acceptable way for a government to be operating and I 
think it’s time that the people of Saskatchewan had an 
opportunity for them to decide whether that is an acceptable 
practice or not. 
 
If we quote the Provincial Auditor again, we find out that there 
is an article saying that that is not in fact the way it should be 
and the confidence that again is shaken when we’re talking 
about the things that have been brought forward in this House 
under SIGA and the controls that may or may not have been put 
in place. 
 
And the one quote that the auditor has said: 
 

If this came . . . 
 
And I quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

If this came out of the private sector and they had to report 
it, I think there would be a lot of trouble. 

 
And I would agree with that, because the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to find that very, very troublesome and 
are going to dictate to this government that their . . . the end of 
their term is very, very near. 
 
Other things that we are running into problems with in terms of 
confidence is the ISC, the overbudgeting on ISC for whatever 
reason. In fact it is a gross overbudgeting. That is not going to 
create the confidence needed. 
 
And the tendering of the EDS (Electronic Data Systems) 
agreement where there is no tendering. And it’s interesting to 
me as well that the Canadian representative for EDS has made 
comments that they will certainly be pleased to invest 
significantly into Saskatchewan if, if in fact they get the highest 

IT (information technology) deal that they’re asking for — 
unsolicited. 
 
And to me that is a pressure tactic that I would hope no 
corporation or government would submit to. And if they do, I’m 
sure that the confidence level is not going to be moving in the, 
certainly, the right direction. 
 
This really requires a general election to clear the air. We have 
to have the opportunity for the people to talk about and to vote 
on exactly the platform and the record. It’s time to clear the 
record, put the record forward, and to clear that air. 
 
What we have to do is to make sure that the Premier becomes 
mandated for being the Premier of the province and not 
carrying on any longer without the mandate of being an elected 
Premier. 
 
So I would very much support this motion calling for an 
election within the next six months and not a by-election in that 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55. 
 
 


