















































Hansard: May 02, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1123 
 May 2, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan whose wishes 
can best be summed up by the prayer which reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good citizens of Wadena, 
Rose Valley, and Naicam, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present a 
petition and I would like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your current petitioners humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And this is signed by the good people of Saskatoon, Kindersley, 
Biggar, Kenaston, all over the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens throughout this 
province who would like to see the government implement all 
49 recommendations of the final report as submitted by the 
special committee. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, from Sandy Bay, Saskatchewan, and from Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present 
today regarding the abuse and exploitation of children through 
the sex trade: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Naicam, 
Spalding, and St Brieux. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise on behalf of citizens concerned about the issue of helping 
children who are currently being exploited and abused in the 
sex trade. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Kelvington, Lintlaw, and Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of Rose 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from the community of Bruno. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from the 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. And the prayer is: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Wadena and 
Hendon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with abuse 
and exploitation of children through the sex trade. And the 
prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And. Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Clair, Wadena, Kuroki, Regina, Yorkton, 
and Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to prevent the abuse and 
exploitation of children through the sex trade. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the 
communities of Naicam and Annaheim. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition signed by citizens who have grave concerns 
about the abuse and exploitation of children through the sex 
trade. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Regina and Christopher Lake. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Wadena, 
Margo, Quill Lake, Watson, Choiceland, and Kuroki. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the people of Naicam, 
Saskatoon, North Battleford, and Spalding. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Naicam and Spalding. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to also rise on behalf 
of citizens in the province of Saskatchewan with a petition. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer of this petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Wadena and Buchanan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition dealing with 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

 

that issue: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Regina and Riverhurst. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the abuse and 
exploitation of children through the sex trade. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Borden, Vanscoy, Radisson, 
Cando, and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise today to read a petition of citizens about the abuse and 
exploitation of children through the sex trade. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Archerwill, Wadena, 
Fosston, and Melville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise also with a petition from citizens concerned about the 
exploitation of children in the sex trade. And the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Kuroki, Wadena, and Invermay. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning maintenance of K to 12 education in 
the community of Pangman; 
 
As well as petitions previously tabled, being addendums to 
sessional paper no. 7, 8, 18, and 31. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 39 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for CIC: how many SaskEnergy 
customers have cancelled their business with SaskEnergy 
and chosen another Saskatchewan natural gas supplier, 
from October 1, 2001 to April 30, 2002? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce to 
you, seated in your gallery, Mr. Art Hillson. Art visited this 
building in 1927 and he says that was so long ago there was a 
Liberal government at the time. This is his first time back since. 
 
Art was a pilot and technician with the RCAF (Royal Canadian 
Air Force) in the Second World War. He was with 10 Bomber 
Reconnaissance on convoy patrol and anti-submarine missions 
— the most successful anti-submarine squadron of World War 
II. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our family was saddened recently when Art’s wife 
of 57 years passed away. And I would ask all members to 
kindly join in welcoming him to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, if I 
may also ask you to welcome to the legislature this afternoon, a 
great citizen of this province, Mr. Bernie Collins, the former 
Member of Parliament for Souris-Moose Mountain. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the member 
from North Battleford in welcoming Bernie Collins to the 
legislature this afternoon. He’s seated in your gallery. Bernie is 
the former mayor of the city of Estevan and he was a former 
Member of Parliament for Souris-Moose Mountain. I was a 
constituent of his and now he’s a constituent of mine. 
 
So I ask you all to join me in welcoming Bernie. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 
Ms. Carol Skelton, sitting behind the bar on our side, the MP 
(Member of Parliament) for Saskatoon-Rosetown-Biggar and 
the opposition Deputy House Leader in the Parliament in 
Ottawa. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And members of the Assembly, it’s my 
pleasure to draw your attention to the Speaker’s gallery and to 
introduce a very fine looking group of ambassadors for this 
legislature. 
 
Today is a special day for Visitor Services because this is tour 
guide orientation day and there are six tour guides that are 
going to be working the summer schedule. Five of them were 
with us last year and one is joining us as a new employee. 
 
And I would ask them to stand as I introduce them. They are 
Sarah Bekker, Shawn Keough, Sonia Millette, Selema Forrest, 
Garret Oledzki, and for her first year in Visitor Services, 
Marissa Lepage. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And of course with them today are our 
full-timers, Arnold, Diane, and Theresa, and also the director of 
Visitor Services, Lorraine deMontigny, and her assistant, 
Marianne Morgan. So welcome again to the new personnel for 
summer . . . for the summer for our visitors services, and to the 
full-timers that are here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Wadena Composite School Receives National Recognition 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, school yearbooks contain a 
synopsis of a school year. Consequently students impatiently 
wait their arrival every year. 
 
After leaving school your yearbooks become dust collectors, 
but every once in a while a former student takes them out and 
travels down memory lane. 
 
Wadena Composite School has produced a top-notch yearbook 
over the years, winning the Saskatchewan Journalism Award 
twice in the last six years. 
 
Because of the high quality of work they were chosen to 
compete in a national competition to be one of 55 schools 
across Canada to be featured in a new book, A Day in the Life of 
High School, published by Friesen’s Yearbook. The book 
captures in photos what a typical high school day is like and 
delivers a positive message about the educational facilities 
across the country. Anthony Wilson-Smith, editor of Maclean’s 
magazine, was one of the judges. 

Wadena Composite School yearbook editor, Kristin Nakrayko, 
entered the contest last April by submitting three layouts 
complete with photos and outlines, depicting a day in the life of 
WCS students. She had one week to plan and present her 
layouts. 
 
The school received notification late last week that it was one of 
65 schools selected to submit entries for this new book. The 
finished copy of the book will feature three schools from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this exercise was not only one for showcasing 
high schools, it was an exercise in photojournalism. 
 
I would ask this Assembly to join with me in congratulating 
Kristin Nakrayko on her winning entry in this book, and the 
Wadena Composite School students and staff on the high 
quality of journalism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drop in Number of Welfare Caseloads 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s further 
evidence that this government’s social strategy, building 
independence, is working. Again welfare caseloads in March 
2002 dropped by 7 per cent compared to March 2001. Welfare 
caseloads from March 1994 to March 2002 have dropped 25 per 
cent. And the number of people living in households receiving 
welfare dropped by one-third. Mr. Speaker, this phenomenon, 
as some would think, is not just focused in one area, it has been 
experienced in every region of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting off welfare breaks the cycle of 
independent . . . of dependence. Parents become better role 
models for their children. And speaking of children, the 
Canadian Council on Social Development reports that child 
poverty in this province has fallen by nearly 30 per cent since 
1993. 
 
We must always remember that children do not live in poverty; 
they live in families that live in poverty. Our government 
strategy decreases the level for social assistance and diminishes 
the chance that people will return to social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, behind every number is the face of someone who 
is proud to be part of the Saskatchewan workforce. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Woman Celebrates 50 Years with Sorority 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Helen Czoba is a 
retired business woman in Estevan and she has received special 
recognition from the Beta Sigma Phi Sorority. On Tuesday 
night Helen was honoured on the occasion of her 50 years with 
Beta Sigma Phi. Helen was a founding member of this sorority 
in Estevan and is the current president of the Master’s chapter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Carrot River Valley, who is a 
former employee of Helen’s, has asked that I extend his 
congratulations as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

 

the legislature to join me in congratulating Helen Czoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Junior Golf Tournament 
Planned for Saskatoon 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as one of the few 
elected representatives in North America who does not sponsor 
a golf tournament, and as an individual who holds the business 
end of a golf club not like I should, I’m nevertheless pleased to 
announce a golfing event coming very soon to the city of 
Saskatoon in my constituency. 
 
Between August 6 and 9, the Saskatoon Golf and Country Club 
will be hosting the 2002 Canadian Junior Golf Championships. 
The Canadian Juniors features Canada’s best male golfers in the 
18 and under category. 
 
And while I may not be a great golfer, I do know that it’s a 
great spectator as well as participatory sport. And at this early 
date, I invite all those who can to come out and watch the next 
Mike Weir or Tiger Woods in action. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I might golf poorly, I do know the 
beneficial impact of 400-plus visitors to our city. Golfers, 
officials, spectators, family, and friends; it is estimated that 
combined they will bring $1.5 million to our city. For that 
reason alone, I’m happy to welcome this event. 
 
And of course, once they come for one reason, they’ll return for 
another. 
 
I congratulate the Saskatoon Golf and Country Club for 
attracting this major sporting event and I wish all participants a 
sub par performance. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women of the Year Luncheon in Weyburn 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, in Weyburn last week the Quota 
International held the Women of the Year luncheon to honour 
women in our community who have shown excellence in 
community service in the workplace and in business. 
 
The Community Service Award was presented to a most 
worthwhile recipient, April Sampson. April, a former 
schoolteacher and piano teacher, is well known for the 
dedication to the community of Weyburn and for her 
involvement as a volunteer in numerous organizations. 
 
Wendy Dammann, who became the first female sheriff in 
Canada, when she was appointed sheriff of Weyburn and 
district in 1977, received the Award for Excellence in the 
Workplace. Wendy is known for her directness when dealing 
with people as well as her unique sense of humour. Wendy will 
be retiring soon and will be greatly missed at the Weyburn 
courthouse. 
 
Leslie Smith, a successful real estate broker in Weyburn, 
received the Entrepreneurial Award of Excellence. In March of 
this year, Wendy also received another award, the Top 10 

Realtor Award for Saskatchewan. Leslie also volunteers with 
the Red Cross and was one of many who went to New York 
after the terrorist attack of September 11. 
 
A special congratulations and thank you to April, Wendy, and 
Leslie, for playing a major part in making Weyburn the best 
city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

One-Act Play Festival Finds a New Home 
at the University of Regina 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, over the years many 
members have made announcements about their local theatre 
group performing in the annual provincial One-Act Play 
Festival, sponsored by the Saskatchewan Drama Association. 
The festival is an important springtime event for our student 
thespians, and for our audiences who appreciate live theatre. 
Since 1979, 2,275 plays involving over 45,000 individuals have 
been performed at regional festivals across the province. 
 
One small drawback to the festival has been its lack of a 
permanent home. It has been a sort of orphan, moving from 
empty auditorium to vacant school gymnasium, wherever it 
could find a temporary spot — until now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am happy to announce that as of tonight, through the Faculty 
of Fine Arts and the theatre department, the University of 
Regina is the permanent home for this important annual event. 
Theatre groups participating in the festival will be able to utilize 
the state-of-the-art facilities of the university theatre in the new 
Riddell Centre, and take part in the professional development 
conference which is part of the festival. 
 
Tonight is opening night and plays will be performed from the 
various regions in Saskatchewan in this new venue for the 
remainder of the week. 
 
This is good news for the Saskatchewan Drama Association, for 
the university, and for all the participants in this festival. I urge 
all members, Mr. Speaker, to take in an evening’s 
entertainment, and the actors to break a leg. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Outlook Rodeo — A Success Once Again 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I rise in the House today to talk about the 
community of Outlook which recently hosted a very successful 
spring rodeo event. Over the weekend of April 13, the 10th 
Annual Outlook and District Spring Rodeo was held with 
attendance of between 1,100 and 1,200 rodeo fans during each 
day of the event. 
 
Brian Solnicka, rodeo committee chairperson, indicated all went 
well and attendance was up from the last few years. Spectators 
who packed the Outlook Rec Plex that weekend were treated to 
events such as bareback, saddle bronc, bull riding, calf roping, 
ladies’ barrel racing, and a new feature, junior steer riding, 
which will be back in 2003. 
 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

The community had a very well-organized event, including 
entertainment such as stock dog demonstrations, chariot and 
mini chuckwagon races, little giants racing, and mutton-busting. 
 
On Saturday night a crowd of between 400 and 600 people 
enjoyed the always-entertaining rodeo dance featuring the band, 
Blue Collar. Erin Ogilvie took home the title of Rodeo Queen 
beating out five other district contestants. All in all, this event 
was very successful, as most events usually are in the great 
community of Outlook. 
 
I would like to ask all the members to join in congratulating the 
organizers. The 10th annual Outlook and District Spring Rodeo 
for such a fine event. And also to wish well to Barry Quam who 
took a tumble as a pickup man, resulting in a broken collarbone 
and a couple of broken ribs and a concussion. But so far, he’s 
doing fine. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Microscope at University of Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan will be purchasing a 
powerful microscope to examine structures 6,000 times smaller 
than the width of a human hair. The university will receive 
$160,000 from the provincial government’s Strategic 
Investment Fund towards an X-ray photoelectron emission 
microscope facility. 
 
The microscope will be housed and installed at the Canadian 
Light Source synchrotron on the University of Saskatchewan 
campus and will be one of only a handful of such microscopes 
in the world utilizing the synchrotron light to probe 
microstructure materials. The microscope is currently set up at 
the Wisconsin synchrotron and it will be moved to Saskatoon 
after the Canadian light synchrotron becomes fully operational 
in 2004. 
 
Stephen Urquhart, an assistant chemistry professor at the 
University of Saskatchewan, leads a group of 12 researchers 
from across Canada who are performing experiments on the 
microscope. Their research will have a wide variety of uses, 
such as safer medical implants, better plastic materials, new 
sensors to detect toxins, and longer wearing engine oil 
additives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my congratulations to all those at 
the University of Saskatchewan who are involved in this 
project, including the work of Michael Corcoran, who is the 
vice-president of research on campus. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Response to United States Farm Subsidies 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

new US (United States) farm Bill threatens the future of 
agriculture in this province, and indeed, the province entirely. 
That’s why the Saskatchewan Party is extremely disappointed 
in the initial response from the federal Liberals to yesterday’s 
debate on agriculture. 
 
Lyle Vanclief says he has no intentions of coming to 
Saskatchewan and Ralph Goodale has made no commitment 
either. Yesterday, his assistant said he has to be in Ottawa 
because he’s the House Leader and he insinuated that we in 
Saskatchewan should have checked his schedule. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we did check his schedule and it turns out 
that the House of Commons doesn’t sit the week of May 13. So 
I’m not sure why they need a House Leader when there’s no 
House. And in fact, the Acting House Leader for the official 
opposition in Ottawa is here with us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the Premier received any commitment from 
any of the Liberal ministers and have they told him that they 
will come to Saskatchewan and discuss Ottawa’s position to the 
latest rounds of the US subsidies with us? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In direct answer to the member’s 
question, I have not heard . . . had any response from the 
ministers that have been invited by this legislature to come. I 
have had not a word of response other than the kind of 
responses that I too have seen in the media which, on first 
glance, are very disturbing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, the 
federal Liberals seem to be giving Saskatchewan the brush-off. 
 
When Bombardier needed a bailout in Quebec, they were there 
in an instant. But when Saskatchewan farmers are under attack 
from billions of dollars of US subsidies, they won’t even come 
to Saskatchewan and explain their response. 
 
At the very least, Mr. Speaker, you would think that Ralph 
Goodale would respond to this request. He’s Saskatchewan’s 
only federal minister. He’s a former leader of the Liberal Party 
and he’s a former member of this very Assembly. Yet it seems 
that he’s far too busy to come to this Assembly and address the 
major crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what further steps is the government considering 
to raise this issue with the federal Liberals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have communicated, of 
course, the motion that was passed here in the legislature in 
writing and communicated specific invitations to each of the 
above ministers of the federal government. 
 
I have today written the Prime Minister of Canada informing 
him of our resolution and of the request to his ministers. I have 
today invited the provincial Leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. 
David Karwacki, to join us; to join us as political leaders of this 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

 

province in calling upon the federal ministers and federal 
Liberal government to respond. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Protection of Children from Sexual Exploitation 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Bill No. 2, An Act respecting Emergency Protection for Victims 
of Child Sexual Abuse is before this Assembly today. The 
Saskatchewan Party intends to propose amendments to the Bill 
that would strengthen and clarify the legislation so that it will 
truly protect the child victims as its title indicates. 
 
Many of the amendments come directly from the final report of 
the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children Through the Sex Trade. Others come as recommended 
by police officers who work with youth at risk and who are in 
regular contact with victims of the sex trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we provided the ministers of Justice and Social 
Services with the proposed amendments earlier this week. Will 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) support the amendments 
proposed to this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as we go through Committee 
of the Whole this afternoon we’ll look forward to the 
amendments coming to the floor and we’ll respond at that time. 
 
The amendments were provided a short period of time ago and 
the officials have looked at them and we’ve reviewed them. 
And we’ll deal with them as we go through the committee, as is 
the normal process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 
government that will not take lightly the despicable acts of 
some in our society who would prey on some of the most 
vulnerable of children of our society. And the legislation that 
we find in Bill 2 is leading the nation, Mr. Speaker, in taking 
action to protect kids from perpetrators, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it is going to result, Mr. Speaker, when put into place and 
proclaimed and activated with the other strategies that we have, 
Mr. Speaker, in a shift. For too long when it’s been perpetrators 
against victims of sexual exploitation, it’s been advantage 
perpetrators. After this Act goes through, Mr. Speaker, it will be 
advantage cops in the interest of vulnerable kids in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that this Act needs 
some teeth in order to implement the very measures that are in 
it. Without that this Bill will be an empty shell of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first amendment to clause 3 in Bill No. 2 is 
taken directly from the draft legislation included in the special 

committee’s final report. It would provide detail and 
consistency in defining the factors a court must consider when 
determining the best interests of the child victim. Some of those 
factors are the child’s safety, their present and future 
well-being, their physical and emotional needs, and the 
importance of continuity in providing the child with protection, 
support, and assistance. 
 
This amendment is similar to a purposed section in The Child 
and Family Services Act and provides context for the legal 
framework for the Bill and reminds the court, when considering 
this legislation, of the core purpose of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Justice support the 
amendment to clause 3 of Bill No. 2? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as we all know and 
understand, the process of the House is that after having second 
reading passage of the Bill, which happened expeditiously in 
this House, then we proceed to clause by clause consideration in 
Committee of the Whole, and we’ll do that this day. 
 
I assure all hon. members, Mr. Speaker, but more importantly I 
assure the children, the victims of sexual exploitation and abuse 
in the province of Saskatchewan, that when we’re done we will 
have the strongest possible protection that is defensible against 
Charter challenge, that will provide the best possible protection 
and assurance of security and the opportunity to heal that will 
be available anywhere in Canada right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government opposite had indicated at the end of the last 
legislative session that they needed the time, appropriate time to 
make sure that this Bill, this legislation that we’re going to put 
in place, was effective and was a good Bill. 
 
The fact of the matter is there are amendments needed in order 
to make this Bill a strong Bill. And they had the time. We 
proposing the amendments today. The minister has had time to 
look over them. They should have acted by now and given us 
the answer to these questions by now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will propose an amendment to clause 16(1) 
and (2). The proposed change would allow the police to ask all 
occupants of a vehicle stopped on the suspicion of possible 
child sexual abuse for their identification and their age. That is 
not included in the present Bill. 
 
This would apply to a vehicle stopped anywhere or one stopped 
on the stroll. At present, Mr. Speaker, the police can only ask 
for the identification of the driver of the vehicle. Their 
investigative powers are limited to the driver. For the protection 
of child victims, the police need the authority to also question 
children at risk that are in a vehicle the police have stopped. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member go directly to the 
question, please. 
 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Justice and the 
NDP support this amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as we will debate in 
specificity when we get to Committee of the Whole later this 
afternoon, as we move the Bill forward and to proclamation and 
bring into force the Bill and the accompanying strategy, Mr. 
Speaker, it will become obvious that the amendment that the 
hon. member talks about in fact is an authority that already 
exists and does not need to be repeated in another piece of the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll look carefully at the amendments which 
were provided to us just a few short days ago. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll be responding in detail as we come before them. 
 
But once again let me make it very, very clear that when this 
legislation is through, then Saskatchewan will be leading the 
nation in providing for our vulnerable kids the protections we 
need to separate the perpetrators from the kids and to give those 
kids who . . . children, who are the children of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, to give those kids the best possible protection and 
the best possible opportunity to move forward with their lives in 
the future with a sense of hope and optimism right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — . . . Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party members on this side of the House want 
the best possible legislation also to protect those children. That 
is why it is imminently important that the government accept 
these amendments today. That is why it is important that that 
side of the House, that that minister would have looked at these 
amendments, saw how very reasonable they were — and 
necessary — and have his answer ready for us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to propose another amendment. And 
it would clearly state that peace officers who have stopped a 
vehicle and believe there are grounds to apply for an emergency 
protection order may continue to detain the vehicle, its driver, 
and any occupants in order to apply for and either obtain or be 
turned down for that order. 
 
The Act in its present form already allows for emergency 
protection order hearings to be conducted by 
telecommunications, but it doesn’t make it clear that peace 
officers can continue to detain a vehicle and its occupants while 
this is underway. This amendment makes sense to clarify when 
a suspect vehicle and its occupants may be detained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister and the NDP support this 
amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when you’re doing 
something that is leading the nation, you want to do it on a basis 
that is sound and that is constitutionally defensible. And in 
bringing forth this legislation . . . If the hon. member will listen 
to the answer, I’ll continue and provide it for her. 

What you do is you bring forward, Mr. Speaker, legislation that 
is sound and that you know what will work. And we are basing 
our legislation on the victims of domestic violence — 
legislation, by the way, that also was initiated in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You have to be very, very careful, Mr. Speaker, when getting in 
the balance of rights which is what is involved in the Bill that is 
before us here today, that you don’t go so far as to jeopardize 
the security of good, solid legislation because somebody wanted 
to push it a little farther than might be able to be confidently 
sustain a challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is committed to bring 
forth legislation that will work, that will be defensible against 
challenge, and that the victims of sexual exploitation in 
Saskatchewan can count on as they look forward to their futures 
safely here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s comments are the very 
reason for the need for these amendments, so I’m asking him to 
accept them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also calling for the amendment of clause 
24 of this legislation today. Right now clause 24 states the 
maximum fine for a person found guilty of an offence in 
contravention to this Act is $25,000 — that’s the maximum. My 
amendment will allow . . . or will follow the recommendation 
no. 4 of the special . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members will allow the 
member from Humboldt to complete her question, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment put forward will 
allow the recommendation of the special committee, 
recommendation no. 4, which was that the minimum fine be 
$25,000. Mr. Speaker, this fine would serve as a much greater 
deterrent to johns and pimps who prey on children. 
 
Will the Minister of Justice and the NDP support this 
amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is commonly understood 
that when you’re drafting legislation and you look at minimums 
and maximums, that you want to have something that will 
work. And it is understood very clearly by track record, Mr. 
Speaker, that when your maximums are too high you run the 
risk of police officers choosing not to proceed with charges at 
times or the courts, Mr. Speaker, being less inclined or much 
more hesitant to find guilty convictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is understood; that is part of history. And part 
of what you want to do when you put in place the penalties in 
legislation is to find that balance that will enable the courts to 
use their discretion to judge in the severity of the act and the 
appropriate punishment. And you do it in such a way that it 
would be applied consistently and will therefore sustain 
challenge, Mr. Speaker, and will be a reliable part of the 
protection for vulnerable kids here in the province of 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, that minister and his government are 
ignoring the recommendation put forward in the committee to 
prevent the sexual abuse and exploitation of children. And that 
recommendation was that there be a minimum mandatory fine 
of $25,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have to propose another amendment that 
will cause this Act to come into force six months from the day it 
receives Royal Assent rather than on proclamation. As we 
know, there are quite a few pieces of legislation that are passed 
by this Assembly but are never proclaimed. And we certainly 
don’t want that to happen in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t want this Act to sit on the shelf. Will the 
Minister of Justice and the NDP allow this legislation to come 
into effect on assent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has given 
to me notice that she intends to propose an amendment that will 
bring the Act into force six months from now — November 1, if 
it passes today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say to the House, I’m not prepared to wait 
that long. It is my objective to bring this Act into place and to 
have it proclaimed and in place with everyone properly trained 
so that we can ensure that for the young victims of sexual 
exploitation in Saskatchewan, they have the best possible 
protection. 
 
It is my objective, Mr. Speaker, to have it in place by October 1. 
I am not prepared to wait as long as the hon. member from the 
opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister knows very well that I asked for this Bill to come into 
legislation . . . into force on assent. So the tirade was not 
necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP refuse to approve this amendment, will 
the minister stand in this House today and assure the people of 
Saskatchewan that this Act will be proclaimed the same day it 
receives Royal Assent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has 
had a policy position for some time that designates that these 
victims of sexual exploitation, these children are victims. 
 
It is our intention, not only with this piece of legislation but 
with the priority provision of protection services for them, as 
well as the building of a new safe shelter here in the city of 
Regina, that we will move forward with properly trained police 

officers and other officials to put into place in a reliable way all 
of the expectations that are placed in the Bill that will be before 
us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not prepared to accept the hon. member’s 
suggestion, as she provided me her notice, that she wanted to 
see the amendment, to put it . . . to have it proclaimed in six 
months. I’m not prepared to wait that long, because I think we 
can be there sooner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our target is that by October 1 the training will be 
done, the system will be in place, that we can move forward and 
we can assure these victims of sexual exploitation in 
Saskatchewan that they will have the protection that they want 
and they deserve — our children here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, in order for there to be an effective 
and meaningful strategy to protect children from exploitation by 
perpetrators and to assist child victims and families with 
services needed for their recovery, it is necessary for all of the 
recommendations made by the special committee to be working 
in a synchronized, complementary fashion. The committee did 
not intend for legislation to be pieced together here and there. 
 
As Bill 2 stands right now, peace officers would have only 
limited powers of protection and investigation. Child sex 
offenders or anyone contributing to the exploitation of children 
would likely not be subject to any stiffer penalties than in the 
past if there is not a minimum mandatory fine. 
 
Bill No. 2 is officially titled, An Act respecting Emergency 
Protection for Victims of Child and Sexual Abuse, but in terms 
of emergency protection and follow-up services for children, 
this Bill is weak. Mr. Speaker, will the NDP support these 
amendments so Saskatchewan will have strong legislation that 
will actually protect our children and provide definitive 
measures to assist them on the road to healing and recovery? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the hon. 
member opposite to put down her written questions and to bring 
a sincere desire to do what will serve the children of 
Saskatchewan well, Mr. Speaker. Our commitment . . . our 
commitment is clear and it is simple. These are kids, Mr. 
Speaker, who have had enough messing with their lives, and 
what I encourage is that when we come to this Assembly that 
we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Once again I recognize the Minister of Social Services. Order, 
please. Once again I just . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that these are 
kids who don’t need people playing games with solutions that 
they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as a long-standing member 
of this House, I was proud of the decision of this House to pass, 
in a single day, the second reading of Bill 2, an Act which is 
intended to protect victims of sexual exploitation. 
 
I encourage all hon. members of this House on this day, when 
we come to consideration in Committee of the Whole, to put 
into place a Bill that will lead the nation in providing protection 
for these kids; that we will work together; that we will do it in 
the best interests of those for whom it is all intended — these 
children who are our children, Mr. Speaker, and who count on 
us to provide them the protection they need here in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Accuracy of Budgetary Projections 
 
Mr. Hillson: — On March 27 the Minister of Finance delivered 
a budget which, according to his figures, showed a surplus of 
$45,000. Now since that date, we have had a nurses’ contract 
which has added $70 million to the tab. We have had the 
government’s backing down on their disgraceful attempt to 
gouge $7 million out of nursing home residents, and we still 
don’t have the bill from the teachers’ contract. 
 
My question for the Minister of Finance: what does the surplus 
currently stand at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question itself is not 
accurate even on its face. The member gets up and says that 
we’re spending $70 million on a nursing contract in this coming 
fiscal year, when the member should know it’s over three years, 
Mr. Speaker. And I want to say to the member that this 
government in presenting the budget took into account that 
there would be a settlement — hopefully, which there has been 
— with the nurses, and we will plan accordingly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government will do what it has done for the last nine 
years, Mr. Speaker, which will be to keep a reasonable balance 
between taxation of the people on the one hand and provision of 
public services on the other, paying down the debt, reducing the 
debt as a percentage of GDP (gross domestic product), and 
doing things in a reasonable way as we have been doing over 
the opposition of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s our record and that’s what we’ll continue to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, rabbits are well known for their 
ability to reproduce. But recently, the Minister of Finance has 
been pulling them out of the hat so fast and furious that mommy 
and daddy rabbit can’t keep up. Now, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
raided the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) fund, they’ve raided the Victims’ Fund, they’ve 
raided the wildlife fund, they’ve raided everything that wasn’t 
nailed down. 
 
My question for the Premier: how can he possibly put together a 
budget next year, or is his plan not to have to put together a 
budget next year, but to call an election before he has to reveal 

to the people of Saskatchewan the drastic state of our 
province’s finances after only one year of his government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well talk about a hare-brained question, 
Mr. Speaker. But I want to say, as that member goes . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — . . . what I want to say is that member, as 
usual, goes hopping from non sequitur to non sequitur, Mr. 
Speaker. That to me he’s not like a rabbit; when he starts 
talking about an election, he’s like a turkey voting for an early 
Thanksgiving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to tell that member that when the opportunity 
comes, as it ultimately will, for the people to judge this budget, 
they’ll see that we’re continuing to fix the roads, which the 
people support even if that member and the opposition don’t; 
we’re continuing to reduce personal income taxes, which the 
people support even if that member and the opposition don’t; 
and we’re not bringing in increased provincial sales tax as their 
friends in British Columbia are; and we’re not bringing higher 
medicare premiums, as their friends in Alberta and BC (British 
Columbia) are. 
 
So ultimately the people will judge, and I predict they’ll support 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, 
The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Before orders of the day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member . . . would the House 
Leader repeat that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Leave to introduce a motion with 
. . . related to House hours. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington, that 
notwithstanding rule 3(4) of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan that when this Assembly 
adjourns on Thursday, May 16, 2002, it do stand adjourned 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

 

until Wednesday, May 22, at 1:30 p.m. I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand and respond on behalf of the government to 
written question no. 145. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 145 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 14 — The 
Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to talk about some of the points on The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Just going through some of the notes here, I see that this Bill 
deals with a variety of things, including issues from licensing to 
registration; also legislation dealing with penalties for impaired 
driving, and also, I believe, dealing with orders on . . . 
maintenance orders and enforcement of that. So there is a few 
questions we have about this Bill and a few points on this and 
there are probably many questions we will ask under 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
But some of the points today, since this is just a debate, I will 
touch on some of the points on the Bill. 
 
One of them — the first one I guess — dealing with the ignition 
interlock device that’s going in. According to this, I believe that 
it’s going to be a change that possibly extends the ignition 
interlock program to repeat offenders. 
 
I think previously only first time offenders were able to use this 
program, if I understand this Bill right. If I understand, the 
ignition interlock device itself works this way: the device is 
installed in a vehicle whereby the driver must provide a breath 
sample under the legal limit in order that the vehicle may start. 
 
And one of the things . . . I have been looking through the Bill. I 
see that they have to take a course and also lays out some 
consequences of people who try to get around the equipment, 
which is a good thing. In both the case of the driver in the 
program or by a third party. This would appear to be a good 
deterrent against tampering with the device itself. 
 
In cases where the judge authorizes an ignition interlock device, 
I guess the driver apparently sent a letter advising that they 

complete an addiction screening and education and also a 
recovery program to be eligible for an ignition interlock — 
which is good. After the successful completion of this course, 
drivers are advised to contact the installer of the equipment. 
 
And apparently they’re going to do it any through 
Saskatchewan . . . any through CAA (Canadian Automobile 
Association) to see . . . do computer check. The only problem 
that I would have with that is many of my garages out in the 
rural constituencies possibly don’t handle . . . aren’t CAA 
approved. But I think that they could very well install it after 
taking a course. So I would encourage the minister to possibly 
look at expanding this to other garages, which would help 
things out in the rural constituencies. 
 
And also a lot of . . . might have two, three garages in a certain 
town; and I know in the town of Davidson, there are only one or 
two that might be CAA approved even though they are all 
equally capable of doing it. So I hope they spread that around. 
 
Dealing with repeat offenders entering into this program, you 
know, that’s a little bit of a risk, because when you deal with 
the repeat offenders, you also . . . they also represent possibly 
the greatest risk to society as their very nature that they didn’t 
learn the first time. 
 
First time offenders, I mean, this is a good program for them, 
because I mean everybody does make mistakes here, Mr. 
Speaker. But once you deal with repeat offenders, you know, 
there can be . . . I think there’s probably, hopefully, a process 
that if this is their third, fourth, fifth time, they probably won’t 
be allowed into the program. And those are questions we will 
be asking the officials under Committee of the Whole. 
 
And I would . . . directly following, I believe its passage into 
law, would involve monitoring the program. Now going 
through the legislation I can only figure out that the installer is 
required to 30- to 60-day intervals now in place. Maybe you 
might be able to, on repeat offenders, you might have to 
recheck that. 
 
(14:30) 
 
I understand the ignition interlock devise has been used in 
several other provinces in Canada with a good deal of success, 
so far they say. While I know it would be difficult to keep stats 
on the success rates of other provincial programs, I think it 
would serve this Assembly well to have a report from the 
minister within the next year to determine if this program is 
working as well as it should. 
 
I believe there’s 134 devises out there now. I’ve talked to a 
couple of . . . in fact one person that was on the . . . through SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) which is on the 
committee. And they were informing that there were 134 
devises installed, which is a good thing because, like I say, 
people make mistakes the first time out, you know, and they 
still need a chance to go to work. Because when you take away 
their licence and their ability to work, then you’re just putting 
them back on either a welfare roll or unemployment roll and 
further hampering them. 
 
So we support this ignition interlock program as long as, like I 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

say, some of the rules that are set up are followed and 
monitored. It would be nice to follow the stats on it. 
 
Some of the questions we’ll have under the Committee of the 
Whole, I think we’ll be asking is who pays for the interlock 
system? Is it the taxpayer or the offender? And then also I 
guess, how would a person in a financial condition be able to 
afford this devise, you know, which would . . . if you only had 
maybe a minimum wage job? 
 
Now I think that the way it works, I would like to talk a little bit 
about . . . when I talked to the one person that was on the 
committee, they said that you would have to blow into the 
machine at certain intervals to make sure that you just didn’t get 
somebody to start it for you, you know, let’s say if you were at 
a bar or whatever. But she couldn’t answer me though how 
were they going to check this. Does the car automatically shut 
down every hour, half-hour and you have to blow it? Or is there 
kind of a warning system that will come on and say within a 
couple of minutes you have to pull over, your car is going to 
quit unless . . . like those are questions we’ll deal with 
Committee of Finance. 
 
But I’m a little curious about how that would be on the safety 
issue of it. And also the device itself, I’m kind of curious to talk 
to some of the officials to see how that would work because I 
know some of the concerns are raised, and we have talked to 
people of . . . you know, basically is there some kind of a . . . I 
think there’s a finger . . . a thumb imprint you also have to use 
or even a voice monitoring something, and then blow into it, so 
you’re just not getting your passenger or just somebody walking 
by in the street to start your car for you. Those are issues, you 
know, that doesn’t deal in here and also didn’t deal with the 
minister. 
 
And I know a lot of them questions will be answered under 
Committee of the Whole, but these are some of the points that if 
they are reading that they will hopefully be bringing that 
information when the Bill moves to the Committee of the 
Whole. And these are some of the questions I plan to ask. So 
those are the premises I guess I’m going to be laying out in the 
next few minutes of the questions I plan to ask under 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
They’re not addressed on that . . . What kind of device are they 
going to use? Is it a fingerprint? Is it a voice check? How 
basically will it be used in a correct manner so that the person 
that is actually driving the car is identified as the owner and 
operator of that vehicle, and that he is sober and able to operate 
a vehicle? 
 
Will it be just operated during the . . . One of the other options 
is, I think I’ve read about, is they can only be operated possibly 
during daylight hours. If you have . . . you take your job . . . if 
when you apply, your job is a daylight hour job, the device will 
only work maybe on a 12-hour period so that you can’t also use 
your vehicle at night for pleasure. You’re just using it basically 
to go to work. 
 
And those are good points that have been brought to us by 
different interest groups over the time on it. 
 
One of the other issues on it . . . Also I believe that changing the 

legislation in this, if I understand it right, will change the 
alcohol tolerance for new drivers which I presume means 
probation drivers — which I’m not even sure, I think is from 16 
to 18 or maybe 16 to 17. 
 
Zero alcohol tolerance for new drivers which is a good 
initiative. A 90-day immediate roadside suspension which is 
good because unfortunate I think everybody probably knows of, 
in their area, of a 16-year-old kid that has only had his licence 
for very short months. I’ve known a few over my lifetime in my 
area that were killed in a rollover, and unfortunately there was 
alcohol involved in it. And, you know, at 16 years of age, you 
know, that’s a very sad, sad thing. 
 
So the alcohol tolerance for new drivers is a good initiative at 
that end of it, I believe — anything that can save somebody’s 
life or get some more education on the drinking on it. 
 
Presumably also it’s going to deal with failure to stop measures 
and medical issues dealing with the certification process, I 
guess, with an odd . . . with odds towards . . . or leaning towards 
commercial drivers who may need to fast get medical 
certification, which is a good thing. 
 
I have a constituent of mine who had a class 1 licence and one 
day had a seizure. Went to the doctor and the doctor reported 
and his class 1 was suspended — he was given his class 5. They 
thought that he had dealt possibly with a stroke; they weren’t 
sure what kind of seizure it was. 
 
He never had another one since then, has gone for numerous 
tests, and the medical profession has yet to determine why that 
particular day he had a seizure. And it wasn’t behind the wheel 
or anything; it was just at home he passed out — you know, felt 
concerned and went to the doctor. And he didn’t mind his 
licence being suspended for six months. 
 
But apparently now there’s what you call a five-year . . . on his 
there was a five-year waiting process on it. So he applied and 
they looked at the medical report. Even though they had not 
determined what had caused his seizure or passing out at that 
particular time — they had no records or no indication of it; he 
was willing to do as many tests as they wanted — they still 
refused to grant him his class 1 licence back. 
 
So then from there he went to the appeal process and they 
turned him down. So he approached me and I took my case to 
the minister, but still we couldn’t get it turned around. 
 
So two and a half years so far, Mr. Speaker, he hasn’t had a 
class 1 licence. And in two and a half years, he hasn’t had . . . 
passed out, hasn’t had another seizure. The medical profession 
has yet to determine what happened. It just may be a freak 
thing. It could have been a little bit of stress at the time. He said 
he was under a little bit of stress that time due to some personal 
stuff; that stuff is resolved. 
 
I feel that he should have been granted his licence back under 
that so he could make a living as a truck driver. When you’re 
away from it for five years under that condition, it’s very hard 
to get back into it. 
 
Now this Bill some . . . mentions a little bit, and we’ll deal more 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

 

under Committee of the Whole in it. But I hope, and I would 
hope, that the minister would address this because I know that 
there is similar cases out there where a doctor will . . . And 
they’re required by law which is a good thing to report that on 
class 1 licences. 
 
But five years, specially if the driver has gone possibly a year 
without any complications, I think it should be re-granted or 
re-looked at, and looked at with an open mind instead of just the 
bureaucrat looking and saying, no, it’s a five-year rule when 
your licence is first revoked before we give it back to you again. 
As long as you go five years without another seizure or passing 
out. I feel that that should be looked at and I hope the minister 
will, will look at that. And that’s something that should be dealt 
with. 
 
Five years is a long time. I would say a year. If they haven’t had 
any medical complications within a year, they should be able to 
go back. And if a doctor says, I cannot find any medically 
wrong with you, I believe that they should be reinstated to drive 
again. 
 
Because it does affect, I believe . . . I haven’t got the stats on it 
but I know that one person. I also know another one that said he 
had his licence removed for five years. And same thing. He . . . 
his condition had drastically improved after two years and he’d 
gone a year basically being medical free, but still the board 
insisted that he wait the full five years. And that is wrong. And I 
hope that that addresses that under this end of it. 
 
Some of the other things is maintenance enforcement order. 
Now I’m not sure exactly how that works because same thing 
— the minister doesn’t address it very good in his opening 
remarks. And I also phoned his office to try and get some more 
information on it and it still hasn’t come back on it yet. 
 
I’m not sure if this follows in accordance with what’s 
happening in the rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker. I know that there 
is, and it’s been mentioned here in the House and mentioned to 
me from various groups, that they would like to see more of a 
national policy, a maintenance order spread right across the . . . 
Canada from one end and to the other, where it can make 
maintenance enforcement easier to get. 
 
On that end of it, especially now with people moving so much 
. . . I mean we talk constantly of Saskatchewan unfortunately; 
it’s a bad situation with people moving out of Saskatchewan. I 
mean it’s been raised in this House constantly. And it’s a fact. I 
mean you just have to deal with StatsCanada to deal the people 
that are moving. And jobs now are . . . it’s nothing to be, you 
know, in Alberta. 
 
I went back home last night. I ran into a guy from Bladworth I 
hadn’t seen. He . . . I thought he’d been working in Saskatoon. I 
said, I haven’t seen you for a few months. He said, well I 
moved to Calgary with my job eight months ago. And I said, 
well you know, I didn’t even realize it. But there’s more . . . a 
lot more of that going on. 
 
So with people going back and forth, working out of province, I 
think that we can . . . I know it’s been approached and I’ve had 
several cases I’ve handled where maintenance order, the wife or 
the person has tried to collect maintenance for the children and 

that person is working out of province. And basically there’s a 
board there you apply to, but they have kind of a separate set of 
rules and you kind of like start all over again. 
 
And you have to go kind of through the Saskatchewan board 
and then they apply to, let’s say if you’re using the BC board. 
And between the two of them, it’s like a two-year process. You 
have to reapply to the Saskatchewan board when it’s done out 
of province and then from there, they reapply and they’re put on 
the waiting list in BC. And that will last anywhere from six 
months to another year on that. 
 
So that’s one of the . . . That’s another issue on it. And I’m not 
sure exactly how this falls into it. I’m not sure whether they 
tack a penalty onto your licence or they suspend it if you don’t 
pay. 
 
And also there should be provisions done on it also to protect 
the person that is being charged with . . . or getting maintenance 
. . . (inaudible) . . . because sometimes he will be in the appeal 
process and it’ll be before the courts and he will be owing an 
outrageous amount, and maybe he felt that, unfairly, he is 
paying too much, and it’s before the courts. Will this 
automatically take away his licence and his ability to work 
while that appeal process is going on until it is finalized? 
Because unfortunately, as everyone knows, divorces aren’t . . . 
can be very bitter and people can be very spiteful, especially 
when they’re dealing with children in . . . involved into it. 
 
And so basically you want to protect both people in the parties 
because, I mean, to be fair to them. And I’m hoping at this end 
that it is fairly fair on it. So on that issue. 
 
One of the other ones on here, if I . . . going through here. I 
know I’d made some notes on it and as soon as I can find them 
on here. It also deals with . . . There is one question I had on 
this Bill which I didn’t quite understand, it’s in existing 
positions. It says, the administrator may, after a hearing of 
which reasonable notice has been given, refuse to issue, 
suspend for a stated period, cancel or revoke, or change the 
class of any endorsement on driver’s licence, or restrict the use 
of a driver’s licence. And that’s basically all it says. 
 
So my question is what do they mean by the administrator? Do 
they mean the SGI agent in town? Is that what they mean by it, 
Mr. Speaker? Because I mean, they just have administrator in it, 
at that end of it. And I also phoned over to his office — the 
minister’s office — and I didn’t get a reply back on this. 
 
Or does this mean a police officer, when they call administrator. 
Does that mean when he revokes a licence . . . at 90 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And there’s a member over there — 
check that — and we did. And it doesn’t state it. But if he wants 
to get up under Committee of Whole, we will address this. Or 
he can get up and also come over after, and we can answer 
some of these questions on it. 
 
But anyways that’s another question we’re dealing with on the 
administrator end of it. But what . . . does that mean the 
licensing, SGI has the authority up here or is an SGI agent out 
there in the local towns that . . . that have the . . . have to deal 
with that? So there, there is . . . there’s some questions and 
those questions will be asked and hopefully they will be 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

answered under Committee of the Whole. We move this . . . this 
Bill along. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Also I think it deals a little bit with failing to stop for a police 
officer and we’re . . . some questions on that; what are . . . 
exactly are the penalties, the consequences? I mean, naturally 
they have the minimum . . . they have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I ask members not to 
interfere with the member who’s speaking. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And those are 
different questions we’ll be asking under . . . under Committee 
of the Whole at that end of it. 
 
But going through some of them, like say getting back to the 
monitoring of medical conditions also, we’re not sure exactly 
how this is going to work interprovincial on the medical 
licensing end of it. 
 
When a driver comes out of the States, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
not sure but I think . . . I’m not sure on their medically 
restrictions, but I know that they do vary from state to state and 
there’s 50 states to go through and 50 Acts to read there. What 
are their . . . what are restrictions placed on them when they’re 
stopped and they’re asked for their medical certificates. And 
they have different classes of drivers’ licence down there, how 
will that basically affect a driver . . . out-of-province driver? 
 
Also, even interprovincial drivers, is this Act . . . has the 
minister checked on the medical restrictions? Is this fairly 
consistent with it across the board so that, you know, one driver 
won’t be restricted coming in out of province here? 
 
Because I mean, basically most drivers drive inter-province, 
most of them drive through the interstate, you know, through 
North America, even going, you know, into Mexico. I know 
several drivers that make a vegetable and fruit run there, you 
know, twice, three times a month. So any kind of restrictions 
you put on them and more paperwork is also . . . is also very, 
very hard on them, Mr. Speaker, at that end of it. 
 
But those are . . . we hope that the minister addresses them 
problems because I mean trucking industry is an industry that is 
growing throughout this country. There’s many truck drivers 
. . . in fact in the wintertime, most of . . . a lot of the farmers in 
my area, my constituents drive truck in the wintertime that . . . 
to supplement the income because, basically, there just isn’t 
enough money on the farm to do it. 
 
And trucking seems to be a growing industry back home. In 
fact, Kenaston — my hometown there — there it’s jokingly 
referred to as trucking capital of the world there. I think there’s 
probably more truck drivers per capita in that town of Kenaston 
than just about anywhere in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with that, those are some of the addresses . . . or some of 
the things we will be addressing on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, on it. 
But we did talk over it in caucus, and I did talk to some people 
on it and talked to one or two people that were actually on the 
committee that drafted this Bill. 

And, with that, we will probably in fact move this Bill onto 
committee, Mr. Speaker, with this particular Bill. And there . . . 
but there, I will have some of the questions that I brought up 
here and I hope that the minister will have his officials there to 
be ready to answer them at that particular time. 
 
With that, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 4 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 
today and make a few points about Bill No. 4, The SaskEnergy 
Amendment Act, 2002. The deputy critic for CIC . . . I enjoy 
working with the member from Swift Current as we take a close 
look at the details of this Bill. And also, I would like to echo my 
colleague’s comments when he spoke about, you know, the 
good aspects of the Bill and also some troubling aspects of the 
Bill. 
 
When you look at the commercial oilfield producers, this Act 
will benefit them. There’s every reason to believe that these 
oilfield producers will be satisfied with some of the provisions 
that will allow them to run their own natural gas line between 
their facilities. 
 
And up to this point, I thought that would have been automatic 
that they could even do that between their own oil derricks and 
all kind of facilities out there, but it sometimes, it’s . . . you 
don’t realize how restrictive this NDP government can be at 
certain times. 
 
Certainly we want to ensure — and I hope this government 
wants to ensure — that Saskatchewan oil producers get all the 
help they need to succeed. There are many families that are 
dependent on this industry and of course the communities and 
businesses that benefit from a growing oil and gas industry. But 
also I believe there is a lot more that this government can do to 
make this a more business-friendly climate for these oil and gas 
producers. They need the tools, Mr. Speaker, to expand and 
grow their present businesses. And this hopefully will help 
them also eliminate some of the red tape and also the waiting. 
 
I understand talking to one or two of them that some of them 
had to wait just due to restrictions on red tape and also had to 
wait before SaskEnergy could hook up. Sometimes there was a 
wait of months which holds up production. When they had the 
equipment and technology, they could have been doing it 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But one of the other things that did not enlighten us much on 
this, on this . . . going through it, some of the points I’ve written 
down here. There’s some critical provisions on Bill No. 42 that 
they could have . . . that could have a definite impact on 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

 

You know it appears that the people at SaskEnergy want the 
power to set up and maintain any committee of the board of 
directors that they would deem necessary to conduct the 
business affairs of the corporation. Now it’s completely unclear 
as to who would sit on these boards, whether they’d be elected, 
whether they would be a most likely appointed NDP. Ex-NDP 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) members I 
imagine will probably, a few of them after the next election, 
will, could be looking to sit on that board. But how much . . . 
Another thing is how much will they be paid in the event, at 
that end of it. 
 
It also looks like the government also likes to keep growing 
government by setting up more committees, more things to 
study things. 
 
Another aspect of this Bill that can be troubling and would 
trouble a taxpayer when I’ve mentioned to a few about this, is 
right now section 19 of this Bill would seek to eliminate the 
$200,000 cap for large-scale expenditures such as capital assets, 
capitals expenditures, and of course, the occasional investment 
outside the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, going through it, I know $200,000 is low. A 
lot of the other companies — SaskPower, SaskTel — have had 
theirs I believe raised or maybe even eliminated. 
 
But my concern is though there should be a cap on it. Because 
then again it’s the same thing that this Crown can basically go 
and spend any amount of money without going to cabinet for 
approval. And I think there should be a cap on it, whether it be 
$1 million, a million and a half. 
 
We’ve discussed . . . Different things have come up in CIC 
committees which have dealt with this, whether it be even in the 
old days . . . (inaudible) . . . Channel Lake was. And a 
corporation can run into trouble basically being unmonitored, 
and when you’re lifting the cap completely saying that they 
don’t need cabinet approval for any kind of expenditures, I 
think that’s wrong; and we may be looking at dealing with that 
in Committee of the Whole, but basically it’s . . . I think that 
was originally, when that was set up, that 200,000, it was set up 
as a watchdog. 
 
And that when it was that was many years ago and $200,000 is 
low now. So it needs to be . . . you know, we have no definitely 
arguments to it being raised, but there should be some kind of a 
cap on it because basically what you’re giving is SaskEnergy a 
free carte blanche to basically go and buy anything they want. 
And the only recourse again is to deal with them under CIC 
committee on their annual report which is a year behind all the 
time. 
 
And basically, they don’t have to answer to anything. And as 
members opposite being in cabinet, I think I would want to 
know any large expenditures that this company is out there 
making. You know, as minister responsible for them, you’d 
think he would be concerned that there would be a limit or that 
they would at least seek cabinet approval to be . . . when they 
start spending anywhere, when they start spending in excess of 
millions and millions of dollars. I think that’s a safety net that 
should be there and I would think that as a minister over there 
he would want that some kind of a cap put in place. 

So I’m hoping that he looks and that we’ll do that with 
committee, more Committee of Finance but — or Committee of 
the Whole, Mr. Speaker. And also some questions under 
Committee of Finance, if under . . . when the minister does 
come up on that, and also questions we’ll be dealing with under 
CIC committee on that. 
 
But you know, I feel that they could be more, more up in front 
of CIC committee if some of these Crowns have gone in the 
spending way that they have gone, and making large 
expenditures — and especially when these expenditures and 
these investments fail to return investment back to the taxpayer. 
 
And I believe, going with that, that’s about the two major things 
that this deals with. And the first one, Mr. Speaker, is very good 
at that end of it; allows the oil producers and energy producers, 
gives them a little more free way, gives them a little more 
latitude to do basically work on their own land, to work 
between their own facilities. But I don’t know why, with this 
Bill, they have to always have to put in something else that 
doesn’t even deal with this, add this to. 
 
This could have been a separate Bill, debated separately on it, 
why would they . . . why not wouldn’t they just leave the first 
part of the Bill, bring that in, dealing with the oil field sector, 
bring that in and with that . . . instead of always having to slide 
something in on the same Bill, you know, that actually has 
nothing . . . This part of the Bill has nothing to do with the oil 
field producers in that. It has to do basically with SaskEnergy 
and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and accountability. 
 
So my question always would be to the minister why do you 
have to put these two together? They’re not even tied together. 
They could come in two separate Bills, two separate Acts, 
something you can debate totally simple. 
 
But I know, Mr. Speaker, that right now I have other members 
of mine that on account of the $200,000 cap and lifting it 
completely, that wish to talk to this Bill. 
 
So with that, I move that we adjourn debate on this particular 
Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:00) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Emergency Protection for Victims 
of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act 

 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have three 
officials who are assisting in the deliberations in Committee of 
the Whole today. 
 
To my right is Shelley Hoover, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of the Department of Social Services. Seated directly 
behind me is Dorothea Warren, who is the associate executive 
director of child and family services within the department. And 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

joining us shortly will be Leanne Lang, who is Crown counsel 
with the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good afternoon to the 
minister and to his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, we went through quite a little debate in question 
period regarding the need for the amendments that we have 
proposed to the Bill called The Emergency Protection for 
Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would rather have not had to work with 
stakeholders and my caucus to forward these amendments. I 
would have hoped that the Bill that was put forward by your 
government would have been a very effective Bill that would 
have had some teeth to make sure that the measures that are 
outlined were able to be applied. And that is the crux of the 
matter, Mr. Minister. 
 
We recognized, and so did stakeholders, that unless there are 
some amendments that can assist police and give them really 
new powers of investigation, and unless those things are 
outlined in legislation, then in fact nothing has changed. If 
nothing has changed, then how can this Bill be effective? How 
can it in fact do what it is intended to do and protect children 
and in fact assist children out of a dangerous place and into a 
safe place where they can be assessed and move on into 
recovery? 
 
So I don’t think there needs to be any further logical 
explanation. The fact is that the Bill has been looked at, has 
been found to be inadequate and in need of amendments. If 
your government is serious about making sure that we have a 
strong and effective piece of legislation, then I would have 
hoped that these amendments would have been conscientiously 
and respectfully accepted by your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, the committee that put forward these 
recommendations in their final report intended that there be 
legislation in place, yes, to deter offenders and to punish 
offenders. The committee also wanted to see that in a 
complementary fashion there be services provided, that there be 
a continuity of support service and assistance to children to help 
them and their families so that they could exit the streets. 
 
And I know that in your presentation to the media some weeks 
ago, you put forward what the government’s intentions were. 
And really what those words were all about, Mr. Speaker, or 
Mr. Minister, is the fact that you were reiterating what the 
special committee said needed to be done in the 
recommendations. 
 
But I need to ask you today, and I will do that a little later on, 
about absolute commitment and immediate initiatives that you 
can prove to the people of Saskatchewan are now in place and 
are being implemented at this time to address all of the issues in 
the recommendations so that we can look at this whole situation 
and help children in a comprehensive fashion. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I was looking at the Bill put forward by 
your government I was very pleased that in fact a Bill had 

finally come forward after six years of bringing up this need. 
But as I looked into it, Mr. Minister, I saw that without any guts 
to the Bill, without any teeth to the Bill to actually have some of 
these measures implemented, we would be kind of having to see 
this as almost a brand new vehicle without any wheels, and it’s 
not going to go anywhere if we don’t have these amendments 
put in place. 
 
There are a lot of things that can be done, Mr. Minister, that are 
outside of legislation, and I think we have to do those in tandem 
with legislation. But we have to make sure at least that the 
legislation that we have put on the table is workable for those 
people out there in the field who are going to be responsible for 
making sure that they are applying the law and that they have 
the tools to apply the law. As it stands right now, police do not 
have the tools they need in order to make sure the application of 
this law is enforceable. And in fact the courts need to also have, 
I think, some explicit direction laid out before them so that 
when the courts look at what they may do, they’ve got this Bill 
and they have everything in this Bill that they need to have in 
order to apply the law. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, that is why the first amendment that we 
brought forward is from the draft Bill prepared for the special 
committee. When that Bill was drafted it seems like whoever 
drafted it was very able to recognize the many facets of that Bill 
that needed to be in there. It is beyond me why your 
government has brought a Bill to the table that did not include 
all the measures in the draft Bill that the special committee saw 
was brought into being. 
 
So I guess today, Mr. Minister, what’s important is that we look 
at the importance of these amendments. And I want to refer to 
new clause 3.1. The presence of the section with the statements 
that it contains: 
 

. . . that is the best interest(s) of the child. 
 
To have that put forward in your Bill will remind a court, 
considering the legislation, of the core purposes of the Act. It 
creates a context for the legal framework of that Bill, of the 
legislation. We need to have context in order for the courts to 
know what to do. 
 
Proposed section 3.1 also provides detail and consistency for 
existing clause: “7(2)(d) the best interests of the child victim.” 
 
And I did mention that just a moment ago. Each justice 
considering an application for an emergency protection order 
would be required to direct his or her mind to the same list of 
factors when considering the best interests of the child victim. 
 
So that is why we don’t want to make sure . . . or we want to 
make sure, rather, Mr. Minister, that the courts have got 
everything at their fingertips that they need to have in order to 
apply the law. 
 
And I think that’s . . . doing this is respectful of the courts and 
the justices that have to deal with this law. 
 
The second amendment that I proposed was clause 16(1) and 
(2) and they’re . . . the amendments are identical. The only 
difference is that the one . . . the first amendment allows police 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

 

officers stopping vehicles anywhere because of possible child 
sexual abuse: 
 

To request the driver and all occupants to provide 
identification to the peace officer. 

 
So the amendment in this wording clearly sets out what 
information the peace officer can request. He can request the 
identification and age of each person in the vehicle — not only 
the driver — and he can do that anywhere. 
 
The second amendment refers to a police . . . or a peace officer 
having the right to request specific information in a 
high-incidence area, the stroll. And that will allow a peace 
officer stopping vehicles on the stroll, because of possible child 
sexual abuse, to request the driver and all occupants to provide 
identification to the peace officer. 
 
Now, everywhere that I have looked, Mr. Minister, I have not 
seen anywhere in legislation where peace officers have the 
authority . . . authoritative right to ask occupants of a vehicle to 
produce identification unless they are contravening the Criminal 
Code in some way or form, which would be having liquor in a 
vehicle or not wearing a seat belt or something like that. 
 
So what the police need now, is they need to have the authority 
to identify everyone in that vehicle — all occupants, be they 
children or adults — in order to establish what is really going 
on and in order to be able to allow them to refer, for instance, if 
there is an offence being committed, to refer the child on to a 
child protection worker in order that that child protection 
worker has the services that they need at hand to provide the 
child with, and the child is just not left out on the street. 
 
I mean what happens to the children under your legislation? 
There is no provision that states what will happen to the child or 
further protection for the child or services for the child. 
 
Mr. Minister, the next amendment that I had put forward or 
proposed was clause 16(3). Although the entire subsection is 
being replaced, the only change is the addition of clause (b) that 
requires the driver to provide their driver’s licence, registration, 
and any other information that the peace officer may require to 
establish the driver’s identity and the age. 
 
And the next proposed amendment has the same effect as clause 
(3)(b) but it applies to occupants in the vehicle. 
 
The next proposed amendment, Mr. Minister, refers to clause 
16. And it has a new subsection (5) that clearly states that peace 
officers who have stopped a vehicle and believe there are 
grounds to apply for an emergency protection order against the 
john may continue to detain the vehicle and its driver and 
occupants in order to apply for and either obtain or be turned 
down for an emergency protection order. 
 
The Act allows for hearings via telecommunications but this 
amendment makes it clear that there is authority to continue to 
detain a vehicle and its occupants in certain circumstances in 
order for there to be time to do those things — to get an 
application and an order made. 
 
It also gives the peace officer the time that he may need to 

determine what the occupants in the vehicle . . . what their 
status is, who they are, their identification and the most likely 
and possible best thing to do for a child, if that child is 
apparently in danger of sexual abuse or has been abused. 
 
(15:15) 
 
If detention is necessary, Mr. Minister, and the clause about 
detentions is also another part of the final report that has been 
put forward by all members of the special committee. There 
was a necessity to have a detention clause there and that was 
given assent by all of the special committee, and in fact — I 
believe in a recommendation — it’s also in the draft Bill at the 
end of the final report. 
 
So again in respect and due respect to that report and those 
recommendations, I think it’s very necessary to put in that 
amendment also. 
 
Mr. Minister, clause 24 amendment: 
 

The fine changes from a maximum amount of 25,000 to a 
minimum fine of 25,000. 

 
This is also from the special committee report. It is a 
recommendation; it is in the draft Bill that was put forward, that 
is an appendage to that report. 
 
And I think again, in due respect to the people of this province 
as well as to all committee members who put forward those 
recommendations and agreed upon them, that this should have 
been incorporated into your Bill. And I think, Mr. Minister, that 
it is required in order to provide a zero tolerance message to all 
of those people that would continue to hurt our children and 
continue to be causing an offence against our children in the 
way of sexual abuse. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, at this time, I must say that your comment in 
question period about the police not wanting to apply this law 
because they didn’t think that it, in fact, would be something 
that would be upheld, or that the courts wouldn’t accept it or 
whatever, is really disrespectful of the kind of competence that 
the police have exhibited in the past — of their honesty and 
their integrity. 
 
And I think that it was implying that the police would 
manipulate situations out there on the streets so that they did not 
have to apply this law. And I take offence just listening to that. 
And I know that I’m going to have to be doing some 
apologizing on your behalf to the many police in Saskatchewan 
who are probably wondering about the kind of trust that has 
been bestowed upon them and what kind of government that we 
must have that would presume that they are not trustworthy. 
 
Mr. Minister, the last amendment that we will put forward . . . 
propose to put forward was on the Act coming into force six 
months from the date it receives Royal Assent rather than on 
proclamation and that was simply, Mr. Minister, because this is 
so important. We don’t want this Act and this Bill with the 
amendments to be shelved. It’s vitally important. 
 
The children in our province, their families, and the people of 
the province have waited too long. And it has been too long that 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

there have been men and women who have been destroying the 
lives of our children that have gotten away with this. We cannot 
delay this any longer. This is a perfectly reasonable and doable 
request on the part of your government and I can’t for the life of 
me see why you would deny that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have mentioned in your reply to me in 
question period that you would have this Bill brought forward 
and given Royal Assent and proclamation even sooner than the 
six months, so I’m really happy to hear that. And in that respect 
I have proposed another amendment that says that subject to . . . 
Clause 25 of the printed Bill is struck out and the following 
substituted: coming into force, clause 25(1), subject to 
subsection (2) of this Act, comes into force on assent, six 
months from the date on which this Act receives Royal Assent. 
 
And that’s not quite exactly the right one. But anyway, the other 
amendment, Mr. Minister, that I will be proposing is that the 
Act comes into force on assent. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I have further questions regarding this Bill. 
But I want to underline how important it is that the government 
accept these amendments to make this Bill workable by 
referring to the interim report in June of 2000 that has an 
excerpt here from Cst. Gay of the Regina police. And it tells of 
her frustration because the police cannot do the kind of 
investigations that they need to do, and they don’t have the law 
written right now to allow them to do that. 
 
And it starts out like this. The committee heard from police 
their frustration in investigating those who wish to purchase the 
sexual services of children. Regina police would like to see 
legislation that would help them to stop a potential abuse 
situation when they see it happening. 
 
And they can’t do that right now because they don’t have the 
legislative tools to do it. Thus for the need for the amendments I 
put forward — some of them. 
 
And this is a quote from Cst. Gay: 
 

If he tells me that it is his niece . . . doesn’t tell me why she 
was on the corner or refuses to answer those questions for 
me, I have no alternative but to let him proceed. Because as 
the law states at this particular time, I don’t have enough 
reasonable grounds to believe, based on the fact that child 
was standing on the corner, that that crime is going to be 
committed — as the law stands now. So I can’t explain to 
you how heart-wrenching it is for me as a police officer to 
let that john drive away. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, this applies also to children in a car, 
children in a car. He can’t be asking the child any questions 
about identification. If the, if the john or the perpetrator, 
whatever we want to call him or her, refuses to answer the 
questions of the police, then they have to let that person go and 
the child is also lost once again. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to give you the opportunity to comment 
and, hopefully, by now, I hope that you will acquiesce to the 
amendments that we have put forward because we don’t want to 
hold up this Bill any more than you, but we want to make sure 
it’s workable. 

Mr. Minister, your government, all of your financial and human 
resources that you have had over the past year to look at 
enacting a Bill that was substantial, that was going to be 
effective, a Bill with teeth, that was workable, you had those 
resources at hand. I’m sure that those people that were working 
on this legislation must have recognized that the Bill did not 
have teeth in all its aspects. However, they are in your 
department and they are working or should have been working 
very thoroughly on making sure this was in fact a substantial 
and good Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d ask you if you’d like to comment on this, 
and after that time, I and my colleagues will be furthering 
questions to you regarding the Bill and also some of the 
recommendations that were put forward by the Special 
Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the hon. 
member for her questions and we’ll attempt to respond to them. 
She touched on a large number of points and it’ll take some 
time to respond. 
 
I, first of all, I do want to provide just a brief preamble, Mr. 
Chair, to set a context for the Bill, of course, that it is part of a 
broader strategy to address the matter of the sexual exploitation 
and abuse of children on our streets. 
 
And what we are attempting to do through this Bill, Mr. Chair, 
through Bill 2, is to bring to Saskatchewan a new piece of 
legislation which is first in the nation, which will provide the 
authorities — to the police and child workers — the ability to 
have put in place on an emergency basis intervention orders 
which will separate the perpetrators from the kids who are the 
victims of this act. 
 
Mr. Chair, in putting together the legislation, it was drafted 
intended that we would be bringing legislation that is 
constitutionally defensible and would withstand any Charter 
challenge. It’s important to do that, Mr. Chair, when you’re 
bringing forth legislation that is the first in the nation because 
obviously if it was going to be challenged somewhere, it would 
be here and you want to ensure that what you’re doing is 
providing protections that don’t unravel because of successful 
Charter challenges to them, Mr. Chair. 
 
So that’s the context within which this Act was drafted and 
comes to the legislature today. And there are other things that 
. . . there are other pieces of legislation that it works in concert 
with in order to provide that kind of protections that we seek to 
make available to the kids here in Saskatchewan who are the 
victims of sexual exploitation. 
 
On the matter of the child’s best interest, it is in fact a 
protection that is already in place and applies, although it is not 
specifically referred to in this piece of legislation. It isn’t 
required to do that, Mr. Chair. It can be directed through 
regulation. And what has been referred to previously, I believe, 
but I would certainly put on record, is that this Act, Bill 2, The 
Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and 
Exploitation, works in concert with The Child and Family 
Services Act which currently does exist in the province of 
Saskatchewan and which does have a clause referring to child’s 
best interests. 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

 

(15:30) 
 
It’s section 4 of that Bill, Mr. Chair. And if I may read into the 
record for clarity then, the content, although it’s fairly lengthy, I 
think hon. members will appreciate its significance. Under the 
title of, “Child’s best interests”: 
 

Where a person or court is required by any provision of this 
Act other than subsection 49(2) to determine the best 
interests of a child, the person or court shall take into 
account (these things, Mr. Chair): 
 

(a) the quality of the relationships that the child has with 
any person who may have a close connection with the 
child; 
 
(b) the child’s physical, mental and emotional level of 
development; 
 
(c) the child’s emotional, cultural, physical, 
psychological and spiritual needs; 
 
(d) the home environment proposed to be provided for 
the child; 
 
(e) the plans for the care of the child of the person to 
whom it is proposed that the custody of the child be 
entrusted; 
 
(f) where practicable, the child’s wishes, having regard to 
the age and level of the child’s development; 
 
(g) the importance of continuity in the child’s care and 
the possible effect on the child of disruption of that 
continuity; and 
 
(h) the effect on the child of a delay in making a 
decision. 

 
So those child’s best interests, Mr. Chair, are in application and 
don’t need to be repeated in this piece of legislation. 
 
Regarding the requirement to provide identification when 
requested by a police officer, that is an authority also that 
doesn’t need to be repeated in this legislation because it 
currently exists in The Highway Traffic Act under section 96. 
And I’ll quote that section of that Act, Mr. Chair. Under The 
Highway Traffic Act, it says, and I quote regarding under the 
title of “Furnishing information”: 
 

Every holder of a certificate of registration, registration 
permit, operating authority certificate or temporary 
operating authority certificate and every driver and 
occupant of a vehicle (I underline that, and every driver and 
occupant of a vehicle) shall, on request, furnish any peace 
officer with any information that he requires in the 
fulfillment of his duties under this Act. 

 
So, Mr. Chair, we’re confident that that tool already does exist 
and doesn’t need to be repeated. 
 
On the matter of detention of children, the hon. member refers 
to that and I note that she did not provide an amendment, or has 

certainly not given me any notice of an amendment to require 
that in this legislation, and I applaud her for not doing that. 
 
It has been my experience, Mr. Chair, since coming to the 
portfolio of Social Services, and having spent a good amount of 
time over the past number of months working together with the 
government members on the advisory committee who were 
very, very helpful in bringing to my attention the 
recommendations . . . and of the committee as well as the 
advice that they heard from those who presented and also in 
consultation, then, with officials both within and outside the 
Department of Social Services, that the process of detention of 
children is not a procedure that is supported. 
 
And it is my judgment and I’m pleased to see, I think the 
judgment of the hon. member, that it’s best not to proceed in 
that direction and which is why she didn’t provide for me notice 
of an amendment to that regard. 
 
The penalty within this Bill is a maximum of two years in jail or 
a fine of up to $25,000 which is consistent with the penalty 
section of The Child and Family Services Act, and provides for 
the courts, Mr. Chair, the ability then with a substantial range to 
find — when someone is found guilty — to find the appropriate 
penalty that fits the crime. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it meets 
that criteria. 
 
On the matter of considering that the penalty . . . that should be 
the minimum rather than the maximum, I do take special note 
and interest in the advice provided to me which is provided 
after extensive research by Justice officials regarding the impact 
of penalties and particularly large minimum penalties that are 
put into legislation. 
 
The research that has been done suggests that the . . . that there 
is . . . you run the risk of undermining some of the effectiveness 
of your intent with legislation when you have large mandatory 
minimums. And upon reviewing the research, the Department 
of Justice has advised me that the minimum mandatory sentence 
is not . . . that the minimum mandatory sentence that we have 
here would serve as an effective deterrent. 
 
A penalty, Mr. Chair, does two things. One, it provides of 
course for the courts the range of penalties that can be selected 
but it also serves the purpose of outlining the deterrence to 
avoid the undesirable or the criminal acts — or in this case this 
is not a criminal legislation of course; we can’t provide criminal 
legislation in the province — but this is reprehensible behaviour 
that we’re working to, to deter. 
 
And there can sometimes then be the unintended side effects— 
is what the research tells us — that imposing mandatory 
minimum penalties, that in exercising their discretion to not 
charge or prosecute in borderline cases that you can have an 
unintended negative deterrent. And also that it . . . there is a 
reduction in the guilty pleas under those kind of circumstances 
and an increase in the legal arguments and the defences to 
defeat the charges. 
 
So one of the ways that you protect a legislation against the 
challenges that can undo the whole thing is by providing what 
you would consider to be prudent ranges of penalties in the 
legislation. And we would certainly not want to see anything 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

done that would result in the possibility of fewer charges or 
convictions than otherwise would be the case. 
 
The coming into force, the hon. member says, and I understand 
that she doesn’t want to see the legislation deterred or put off 
longer than necessary, and there are a number of things that are 
needed to be done before the . . . that will enable our system, 
Mr. Chair, to be ready to put the consequences of the Bill into 
place. 
 
They will take some time. The target I have identified is 
October 1. We are going to move as rapidly as we possibly can; 
and it is necessary that we have all of the operational pieces in 
place so that when the Act is proclaimed that we can be 
enforcing it confidently. 
 
Regulations need to be developed and approved through the 
Legislative Instruments Committee. There will need to be some 
consultations on the processes to make sure that they’re sound. 
There will also need to be training in readiness for the 
implementation of the legislation, including for the police. And 
Mr. Chair, I’m looking forward in the near future to 
participating in that training for police. 
 
And the system changes will also need to be made to 
accommodate new processes, and the appropriate 
communications plan will need to be put in place as well. 
 
So all of that takes time. I think people understand that. We’ll 
move as rapidly as we can, and I think October 1 is a realistic 
deadline for that. And so I think that having a target of six 
months is probably further than we would need to accept, and 
so we’ll simply leave the coming into force as it is. 
 
Regarding the burden of proof, the references there, I want to 
refer the hon. member to the legislation itself and remind the 
House, the committee, that the burden of proof that is required 
in order to gain an emergency intervention order by this 
legislation is substantially less than is required if you’re using 
the standards of Criminal Code offences. 
 
And I’ll refer the committee, Mr. Chair, to two sections of the 
Bill. Section 7(1) which refers to: 
 

7(1) A justice may grant an emergency protective 
intervention order on an application pursuant to section 6 
where the justice is satisfied, (and this is the key phrase) on 
a balance of probabilities, that: . . . 

 
And then there’s sexual abuse of a child by another person and 
so on, the things that we’re trying to defend. But it’s on that 
balance of probabilities as opposed to a higher level of certainty 
of probability that makes this tip the balance in the interest of 
the law enforcement officer. 
 
I also refer to section 6(4)(b) of the Bill which enables . . . 
sorry, section . . . yes, 6(4)(b), there we are, which enables for 
hearsay evidence to be used in order to get the emergency 
intervention order; 6(4)(b) says: 
 

(4) At the hearing of an application for an order, a justice: 
 
then 

(b) may admit hearsay evidence if, in the opinion of the 
justice, the evidence is credible and trustworthy. 

 
So it’s bringing into this legislation the ability to use hearsay 
evidence with a lower burden of proof than is normal for 
Criminal Code offences. That enables police officers, Mr. 
Chair, to much more readily meet the standards that are 
required to find the intervention orders put in place. 
 
I believe these are consistent with the victims of domestic 
violence . . . And these are standards of evidence, Mr. Chair, 
that are consistent with the victims of domestic violence and 
abuse Act that we’re basing this legislation on and that have not 
been . . . obviously have not been successfully challenged and 
give us the sense of confidence that what we have here is a 
piece of legislation that is workable. 
 
It’s defensible, and therefore it’s reliable as we put in 
Saskatchewan a level of protection that is very, very important 
to provide for victims of sexual exploitation and abuse to 
separate the perpetrator from the victim, and then enable the 
system to provide the necessary supports and protections for the 
victim that are so necessary to enable the healing process to 
allow the child to get on with her or his life. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to just make reference to a couple of your comments. 
 
And you keep insisting and saying that this legislation is 
somehow the hallmark of the greatest . . . all great legislations. I 
want to make it that, Mr. Minister. I want to make sure that we 
have everything in this legislation so that we can in fact boast of 
what we’ve done. But I’m telling you the way this legislation 
stands right now, it is no more than legislation that is on a 
parallel and quite similar to The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, it . . . as you well know, the focus and the most 
attention on this Bill comes from the fact that it is allowing for 
emergency intervention orders. But that’s against the suspected 
sex offender. 
 
What we need to have in place, Mr. Minister, is these 
amendments that will allow police further questioning in order 
to establish that the perpetrator or would-be perpetrator may be 
in the act of committing the offence or thinking about doing it. 
In order to do that, it is important for the police to be able to ask 
the occupants . . . to question and ask the occupants as well as 
the driver of the identification of those . . . of everyone in the 
vehicle. 
 
It is my understanding that unless occupants of a vehicle are 
committing an offence against the Criminal Code that — and 
that that’s visible to the officer, such as liquor in a vehicle, 
drugs, those kind of things — that under The Highway Traffic 
Act, police officers, peace officers at this time do not have the 
authoritative opportunity to in fact question an occupant that 
might be a child under 18 that does not appear to be in any 
trouble; nor do they have the opportunity to question the driver 
or other adult occupants of that vehicle. 
 
(15:45) 
 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, that is what has been brought forward to 
the special committee by Cst. Gay. That is what has been told to 
me by police officers in Saskatoon that are very familiar with 
the law and in fact have had to try to exercise the law knowing 
that they do not have the necessary tools to do a complete and 
thorough investigation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I question why, when the Bill was being formed, 
formulated, that your government saw it quite all right to entitle 
the Bill, An Act respecting Emergency Protection for Victims 
of Child Sexual Abuse. This is a little bit misleading. This title 
is not what’s contained in the Bill. 
 
The Bill is about emergency intervention orders to keep the 
john away. But the protection of victims of child sexual abuse 
involves much more than that. It involves that, yes. It’s 
important to have that happen. But it’s also important that the 
Bill contain some measures to assist victims out of the place of 
danger and on their way to recovery. That would imply then, if 
that would happen, that you would be able to give peace 
officers and outreach workers, or people like that, some tools to 
work with that they don’t presently have. 
 
The burden of proof that you talk about, Mr. Minister, in the 
existing Act, is a burden of proof, yes, for the driver of the 
vehicle and occupants of the vehicle. But to my knowledge, that 
proof would be coming forward if the police officer had reason 
to believe that there was a criminal act taking place. 
 
And in accordance with your and my desire to allow police to in 
fact do some investigation on reasonable grounds — that they 
have reasonable grounds to suspect that someone may be ready 
to sexually molest or abuse a child or they already have done it 
— we are in fact putting that in place so that the police can 
move in and do some questioning. 
 
But they have to be able to ask the question. They have to be 
able to ask the question, not only of the driver, but of the 
occupants, and especially if the occupants are young people 
under 18 that don’t appear to be committing any crime. 
 
So that has to be inserted in the legislation in order to give the 
police clear authority to do so. 
 
Mr. Minister, my colleague, the member from Cannington, has 
some comments and I guess questions that he would like to 
relay to you surrounding the whole issue of The Highway 
Traffic Act and what police officers can do under it and what 
they can’t. So I would just turn the questioning over to my 
colleague at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for her 
question and will refer her to Bill 40 introduced today, which is 
The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2001 — and refer her 
and members of the committee, Mr. Chair, to section 17 which 
recommends then an addition to section 94 of The Highway 
Traffic Act and will bring into place . . . And I would encourage 
all hon. members to support this as well because these Bills 
work in concert. They’re part of a total package. 
 
The hon. . . . I share with the hon. member her motives when 
she says she wants to see a strong Act; I think we both do. And 
what we’re looking at when we review the advice regarding 

specifically Bill 2 is what’s necessary in order to make it as 
strong as we believe it to be defensibly workable. 
 
And so I bring to the attention of the committee — and if you’ll 
permit me, Mr. Chair, because I know it’s not usually the . . . 
permitted by the rules of the House and the committee to bring 
reference to another Bill when . . . before the House when 
you’re debating the Bill before the floor — there is, I think, a 
helpful amendment. 
 
If the committee will provide leave, then I’d like to provide the 
information that connects these two Bills together and enables 
us to make it clear how the intent that I believe the hon. 
member is referring to is achieved when you put the two Bills 
in concert. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I would ask leave of the committee to bring, just 
briefly, to the debate, the reference to another Bill that was 
introduced in the House today. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has requested leave to make 
reference to another Bill, briefly, related to this Bill. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’ll then refer, as I said, to 
section 17 of the Bill introduced today which would add 
section: 
 

94.1(1) No person shall, without lawful excuse, repeatedly 
drive a motor vehicle through an area that is frequented by 
prostitutes. 

 
And then: 
 

(2) No person shall, without lawful excuse, repeatedly park 
a motor vehicle in an area that is frequented by prostitutes. 

 
So it is . . . this gives to law enforcement officers another 
couple of clauses there directly related to our point here. 
 
So it is, Mr. Chair, that amendment to The Highway Traffic Act 
in concert then with the currently existing section 96 — which I 
won’t repeat, that I referred to earlier — that enables police 
officers to require people within a vehicle, drivers or occupants, 
to identify themselves. 
 
Then it is simply being frequently stopping or going through 
what would be referred to informally as the stroll area that gives 
law enforcement officers the authorities then to stop a vehicle, 
to require people — everyone within that . . . within that vehicle 
— then to make identification that meets the satisfaction of the 
officer, and then enables the officer to judge from that point in 
time whether it’s appropriate to proceed to look at invoking the 
authorities provided under Bill 2 to proceed to an emergency 
intervention order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister. Indeed, I’ve looked over The Highway Traffic Act 
section 96 that you spoke of and it does give peace officers the 
authority to question people under The Highway Traffic Act 
dealing with passengers and occupants in vehicles. 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

The Bill we were discussing, though, was not The Highway 
Traffic Act, but Bill No. 2, the sexual exploitation of children. 
 
You now have had leave to bring forward another Bill that has 
just been presented to the House today. So you caused a great 
deal of consternation, Mr. Minister, by excluding that 
information from Bill No. 2. If . . . Had this Bill come forward 
for discussion yesterday, the Bill you referred to, the new Bill 
No. 40 would not have been available to members of the 
opposition or to the public, Mr. Minister, therefore causing a 
belief that your Bill had failed. 
 
Even so, Mr. Minister, under The Highway Traffic Act that 
you’re presenting . . . have just presented today, it talks of 
prostitutes. I looked carefully through Bill No. 2 and in no place 
in there does it give a definition for prostitute. I’m not sure if 
under The Highway Traffic Act there’s a definition for 
prostitute. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess I would ask you: does the new section 
of the Bill under The Highway Traffic Act — since you brought 
that up for discussion — does that apply to the sexual 
exploitation of these children? The children aren’t referred to in 
this Act as prostitutes, so who are you directing this . . . The 
Highway Traffic Act Bill towards and how does that relate to 
Bill No. 2, the Bill that we’re under discussion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In response to the 
hon. member’s question, we do believe the Bills to effectively 
relate to one another and to give that authority. 
 
I am advised that there are two things that will apply here: one 
is the common-law definition of prostitution; but secondly, I’ll 
refer the hon. member to, in Bill 2 to section 3, which also does 
give a connecting reference that brings together the Bills in 
order to enable them to act in concert together. 
 
Sexual, child sexual abuse because the . . . what this Bill does is 
set out the offence of sexual abuse. And it’s in that context that 
we also include then sexual exploitation. And the definition of 
child sexual abuse, and I’ll read into the record — I know the 
hon. member has a copy: 
 

For the purposes of this Act, a child has been subjected to 
sexual abuse if the child has been, or is likely to be, 
exposed to harmful interaction for a sexual purpose, 
including involvement in prostitution and involvement in 
conduct that may amount to an offence pursuant to the 
Criminal Code. 

 
So it is my belief, Mr. Chair, that it is these Acts in concert that 
provide the authorities that are necessary for a police officer to 
require a vehicle to stop — for example, if it’s not stopped — 
and then to require identification of everyone within that 
vehicle, and then also the need to satisfy that their being 
together meets the test of being there for . . . with a lawful 
excuse. 
 
So that, for example, it would ensure that if someone was, say, 
frequently in an area because they lived in that area, for 
example, and so they were frequently there, stopping their 
vehicle, driving through an area, that’s a lawful excuse and 
would make it very clear that someone would not be . . . this 

Bill would not be used to proceed against them when they are 
there with a way that is verifiable as a lawful excuse. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, The Highway 
Traffic Act that you are proposing to bring forward — not you 
personally but the minister — says frequented by prostitutes. 
Now how do you determine then, Mr. Minister, under this Act, 
who and what is a prostitute? 
 
In checking with the Law Clerk, it’s not illegal, Mr. Minister, to 
be a prostitute. It’s illegal to solicit for prostitution, it’s illegal 
to live off the avails of a prostitute, but prostitution is in and of 
itself, I believe, is not illegal. And the fact is you can file your 
income tax claiming the revenues from it if you want. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what is the definition then of a prostitute that 
allows you to designate the area as a stroll area that is 
frequented by prostitutes? How do you define . . . bring that 
designation then over to abused children and allow a police 
officer then to question who is in that vehicle, Mr. Minister? 
 
(16:00) 
 
If you’re dealing with prostitution under the Criminal Code, a 
person who is being questioned for a Criminal Code offence 
does not have to answer any of your questions. Even dealing 
with a .08 charge for drinking and driving, a police officer 
requests your registration and licence, you slip them through the 
crack in the window and you give them to him. And you don’t 
have to answer any questions. He cannot force you to answer 
any questions nor can he force anyone else in the vehicle to 
answer any questions. Because you’re dealing with the Criminal 
Code there. 
 
So how do you get from prostitution to child abuse to answering 
questions of the police officer when he stops that vehicle and 
requests information of passengers under The Highway Traffic 
Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, again, I thank the hon. member 
for his question. First of all, I don’t agree with the hon. 
member’s basic premise. 
 
The Highway Traffic Act, by common law as well as the Act 
itself, does permit the authority to be asking of questions. And 
the . . . We really have to look at, when we’re looking at the 
effect of this legislation, the experience and the ability of the 
police to, in this case, define what is in area frequented by 
prostitutes specifically. Police do that all the time in seeking 
orders, probation orders, and do have experience. 
 
And there will be through the, I think as well, through the use of 
the DISC (deter identify sex-trade consumers), the 
identification system that will be introduced as well . . . not by 
authority of the Act, but as part of the whole sexual exploitation 
response that is part of the total package. We will be 
introducing the DISC system and that will enable again . . . 
that’ll be another vehicle by which, Mr. Chair, the police will 
be making use of the knowledge and the procedures that they 
currently use to identify stroll areas and enable them to identify 
vehicles or individuals who are frequenting stroll areas. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it would have been I 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

 

believe much simpler, much clearer if that portion of Bill No. 2 
specifically said the police . . . the peace officer who stops the 
vehicle has the right to question the occupants as to their 
identifications and purposes. You’re taking a very much 
circuitous route to try and achieve that and not necessarily a 
route that’s going to be successful. 
 
Think back to the adoption of the .08 laws, the drinking and 
driving, and the difficulties that police officers went through in 
trying to implement a stop/check program. It took time and time 
and time again of both court cases and legislation to achieve 
that point because it wasn’t clear in the legislation — the 
particular Bill dealing with drinking and driving — what the 
intent was. 
 
And that, Mr. Minister, was even before the Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms came in. That was back in the 1970s. That 
Charter will now add a whole new series of complications. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that it would be much clearer 
to the law enforcement authorities, to the prosecutors, and to the 
people involved exactly what the law is, what it means, what its 
intent is, and what its application will be if it clearly states in 
the Bill, in the statute, what those powers are. And those powers 
to question occupants of vehicles need to be in there — clearly. 
And what you’re presenting us with today is not clear. It 
muddies the waters. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we ask you: will you please make the 
legislation clear? Make the intent clear to anyone who wants to 
question the Act so they know exactly what is intended, what 
the purposes are. Allow peace officers to question the occupants 
of vehicles found in those stroll areas as to what their purposes 
are, what their intent is, why they are there, and who they are 
there . . . who they are. 
 
That makes it clear, Mr. Minister. Then when it goes to court, 
it’s clear to everyone — to the defendant, to the prosecutor, to 
the judge, and most of all, Mr. Minister, it’s clear to that police 
officer on the beat that has to make that decision initially, that 
needs that information initially. 
 
So make it clear to them so they can do their jobs as this House 
is intending them to do, as both sides of this House know and 
demand it be done, Mr. Minister. Will you please do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
question. I do take the position that the authorities are clear in 
their legislations. I do advise the members of the committee that 
we have had extensive consultation so far, including with the 
police, and the police have not raised this concern with us. 
 
Training will begin shortly — in fact I think as early as next 
week — with the police. And the thing that will happen in the 
training is that the authorities of the Acts, as they relate and 
enable them to acquire the information that is necessary in order 
to make a judgment about the appropriateness of an intervention 
order, are available to them. And that will be clearly 
understood, I believe, by police and their authorities as a result 
of the training. 
 
That’s why we do need some time after the legislation is passed 
before it’s proclaimed so that the proper training can be done 

and that the whole justice system, including the police and 
starting with the police, is familiar with the authorities that they 
do have. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’re getting 
off on a different track here, on another Bill. But perhaps I can 
make a suggestion related to The Highway Traffic Act Bill 
that’s coming forward that it says under clause 18 of that Act, 
the terms of this Act in its application. 
 
I wonder if it would be beneficial to the committee if part of 
Bill — The Highway Traffic Act amendment — if we included 
the words in there that it apply to The Emergency Protection of 
Victims of Children of Sexual Abuse and Exploitation. So that 
clearly that section of the Act also applies to this Act that we’re 
dealing with today. 
 
That, I think, would help clarify the situation that that rule 
dealing with the stroll, the definitions of the term . . . the use of 
the term prostitution in that Act deals also with this Act that 
we’re debating today, that we’re talking — Bill No. 2. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, if that would be acceptable to you and to 
the government, I think that would help clarify the situation. 
While it wouldn’t put in the amendment that we’re requesting 
today, it would clarify through an amendment what The 
Highway Traffic Act then applies to and that ability to question 
occupants of a vehicle applies to this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for his 
attempt to provide a helpful suggestion. I appreciate that. I think 
it’s indicative of the fact that we’re all wanting the same thing, 
which is good, effective legislation. 
 
I won’t comment . . . We’re already stretching the rules of 
debate and I know we both understand that and I won’t stretch 
it even further by commenting on a possible . . . another section 
of that Act. But I would simply note that by making the 
comment on the record now, I think the hon. member has 
formally made the suggestion — given notice of the possibility 
of an amendment. 
 
He may want to follow that up with a direct communication 
with the minister responsible for The Highway Traffic Act. And 
I’m sure that as a result of this comment made, that in fact that 
will be considered. And if it’s deemed to be a helpful item that 
provides clarity where there isn’t clarity, I’m simply not in a 
position to comment on that as to whether that’s the case or not. 
But I know that the minister will appreciate the suggestion and 
will consider it carefully. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, through 
the Chair, I wanted to correct you. I don’t know whether or not 
I was remiss in not putting . . . bringing to your attention one of 
the proposed amendments. But one of them does have in fact to 
do with detaining all occupants of a vehicle until the peace 
officer can apply for and obtain an emergency intervention 
order. So I just wanted to clarify that because that’s something 
that we feel is important. 
 
Mr. Minister, my colleagues and I have, have really been 
wondering why in fact your government did not elect to look at 
this report, take recognition of the Bill at the back of this report 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

that is a very good comprehensive Bill that would not only have 
dealt with prevention intervention . . . or protection intervention 
orders, but it would have provided for the protection, support, 
and assistance of sexually exploited children. 
 
This draft Bill, Mr. Minister, was agreed to by all members of 
the committee. There was a lot of time and very good thought 
put into this to make sure that at once we would have 
everything in place that was necessary to really attack this 
whole situation to help children, and to do everything in a 
comprehensive and synchronistic manner. It was such a good 
Bill that I look at it now and I think what a shame that you 
didn’t use this. 
 
And I would like an answer to the question I’m going to pose to 
you if you can give me the answer. And it is, why did your 
government not elect to use the draft Bill when it would have 
provided for protection? It had a section here in part II available 
services, looking at programs and safe houses, follow-up 
services, which we don’t have any guarantee of right now. It 
talked about apprehension orders where a child could be 
apprehended if they were, if they were in imminent danger — 
life and death situations. 
 
There was so much detail in here, too. It would have provided 
great guidance for law authorities as well as all other 
stakeholders that are concerned about children at risk. We had a 
coordinator here with services that would have been appointed. 
I think that you had mentioned in your presentation to the media 
that you were thinking about doing that, but as of yet, we have 
no absolute proof that you’re doing that. 
 
So there was a whole section on enforcement that would have 
included the minimum mandatory fine of 25,000. On different 
offences, there were different fines. A lot of miscellaneous 
sections here in part V that would have given direction to 
presiding Justices of the Peace. Immunity — an immunity 
section. The Act comes into force on assent, instead of on 
proclamation. There was so much here. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, could you explain to the Assembly today why 
you did not use this very comprehensive and excellent piece of 
work that was forwarded to the Assembly by the special 
committee? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the question by 
the member. In preparing Bill 2 to come to the legislature here, 
one of the steps that was taken was, in fact, a complete review 
of the proposed Bill, which I note was not endorsed by all of the 
members of the committee. But regardless of that, the proposed 
Bill the hon. member refers to was considered. 
 
Some things . . . many, many parts of that Bill and 
recommendations of the committee, of course, are here in this 
Bill. And of course, many of the recommendations of the 
committee do not relate to legislative action. They’re outside of 
the legislative response which is what we’re dealing with here. 
 
But just in general terms, there were parts of the proposed 
legislation which I think was written with good intent — I don’t 
doubt that for a second. But when bringing legislation to the . . . 

to the legislation to be enacted into law, then you want to be 
certain that what you’re providing is solid in the context of 
consistency with other legislation and also its ability to 
withstand constitutional challenge. 
 
Because what we’re doing, in essence, in this Bill is intervening 
on rights. That’s what legislation does. In order to protect the 
rights to security for victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, 
we are putting into law then the authority to find emergency 
intervention orders; in other words, to restrict some of the 
mobility rights of citizens. And what you want to do then in 
making good legislation is to design it so that it will withstand a 
challenge. 
 
And the reason you want to do that is because if a challenge of 
legislation is successful, then it simply unwinds everything that 
you’ve got there. 
 
And so sometimes I think it’s prudent to make the judgment on 
the side of prudence to ensure that what you’re proceeding with 
as part of the total package is reliable, defensible, and workable. 
That doesn’t mean it’s cast in marble forever, of course, and 
we’re aware in this Assembly that, in fact, the large majority of 
pieces of legislation that come before the Legislative Assembly 
are not new Acts — as this one is — but are, in fact, 
amendments of currently existing Acts. 
 
And why does that happen? It happens because experience in 
our jurisdictions and others suggests that legislative authorities 
may be more appropriate and, of course, that this Act will fall 
potentially into that category down the road as well. 
 
But when we looked at the recommended legislation, there were 
areas — parts of it that did contradict the current Child and 
Family Services Act — that were not consistent with it. There 
were some areas, as well, that suggested moving into the area of 
Criminal Code offence which, of course, is beyond the authority 
of our provincial House to do. 
 
There were also some suggestions that . . . which ultimately in 
my judgment, at the advise of officials after careful scrutiny, 
that suggested that to implement them would run the risk of 
successful Charter challenge, and therefore, the risk of 
undermining or undoing the legislation that we have here. 
 
So it’s a combination I think of those things, Mr. Chair. If we 
want, we can go through a list of suggestions, of course, that are 
here. I don’t know if the hon. member will want to 
acknowledge the things that were included in that, that are, in 
fact, in this legislation or not. I’ll leave that to her to determine. 
But in a nutshell, Mr. Chair, that’s why we didn’t go with . . . 
carte blanche with a recommended piece of legislation. 
 
We gave it very careful and close scrutiny with much 
discussion provided with the government members on the 
committee of review, and bring forth what I believe to be the 
best piece of legislation to provide the protection for these 
victims of sexual exploitation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the draft Bill 
was looked at very carefully to ensure that there were no 
Charter challenges. That was looked at . . . As far as I know and 
remember that Bill was carefully drafted to ensure that it could 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

 

in fact be a one-of-a-kind Bill; that it was in fact going to be a 
groundbreaking Bill. And I believe it could have been. 
 
As I mentioned before, we can’t be boasting about having a 
piece of legislation here that is a first in Canada and the best of 
its kind when in fact we know that it’s not. There’s nothing 
different about this than the domestic violence Act. 
 
And there’s a couple of other provisions in the Bill that talk 
about what the fine will be against people who would breach an 
offence. But those fines are no different than they were before 
either. So, Mr. Minister, there’s, there’s some work to be done 
here. 
 
And I guess what’s going to have to happen is, you know, if in 
fact you will not accept the amendments to make this Bill have 
teeth and enact . . . and to get it to be an Act that we can enforce 
immediately, we’re going to have to then present another Bill 
yet from this side of the House into this legislature to take care 
of the items that you were remiss in incorporating into this Bill. 
And that’s too bad because once again that’s a delay and it’s not 
helpful to the children as it should be. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have a number of other questions regarding 
the contents of the Bill as it is written right now without 
amendment, and I’m going to be asking you some of those 
questions but my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No? All right. She has given me the 
time. 
 
So I’d like to refer to the Bill and for clarification I’d ask you if 
you could please explain why you have not under the 
interpretation portion of the Act — I think it’s clause 2, not sure 
but it’s under the interpretation portion of the Act — included 
or defined an offender? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, for the purposes of consistency, 
and also then effectiveness of application, the same terminology 
was used in this piece of legislation as in The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act, which is under the definition section: 
 

(o) “respondent” (respondent) means a person against 
whom an order is sought or has been granted. 

 
And then if you go to the emergency protection, protective 
intervention order, section 7, which then refers to the order 
itself and to whom it applies, you’ll see referred there 
specifically under section 3(a) then, the reference to the 
respondent. 
 
So in order to understand the definition, again, this makes it 
consistent with what is currently understood and accepted and 
applied, and we believe then although it . . . what the hon. 
member may be raising is that it’s not clear from the point of 
view of a layperson who just picks up the Act and only the Act, 
but we believe that for those who will be applying the Act the 
use of the term respondent, because it’s one that already exists 
and is understood, in fact assists in the clarification of 
understanding this application. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. To the 
minister: Mr. Minister, I’m really, really very happy that I am 
not a court judge or a prosecutor or anything of the sort because 

there is such a lack of clarity and I see no reason for it. 
 
I cannot understand for the life of me why anyone would have 
to refer to 15 different sections in order to understand what 
they’re talking about or what they should be referring to. That’s 
not necessary. 
 
We know very clearly for the purposes of this Bill that a person 
who has committed an offence against a child is an offender. 
Why would it not be stated that way? It just makes good sense 
to do so. 
 
Mr. Minister, regarding an emergency protective intervention 
order, will the same principle that applies to victims of domestic 
violence apply here? Specifically, when a peace officer is acting 
on an individual’s fear of assault — under the domestic 
violence Act it’s stated that way — could a peace officer act in 
the same manner regarding child sexual abuse? Or does the 
peace officer have to wait until after the abuse has taken place, 
at which point the Criminal Code of Canada would then apply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of all, going 
back to the reference to the term offender, I’m advised that the 
term offender actually is never, ever used. And the reason for 
that is that in our system of justice in Canada, that citizens are 
innocent until proven guilty. So that legislation which provides 
authorities to bring evidence doesn’t presume guilt in advance. 
And that’s why the term offender is not only not used here — 
it’s not used anywhere else. 
 
(16:30) 
 
In response to the second question about whether an offence 
will have to have occurred, I refer the hon. member to section 5 
of the Bill, the application for order. And just to . . . probably 
simplest is just to read into the record here: 
 

A child protection officer, or peace officer or (any) . . . 
prescribed person may, on behalf of a director, make an . . . 
application to a justice for an emergency protective 
intervention order with respect to a child where the 
applicant has reasonable grounds to believe that: 
 

And then (b)(ii): 
 

contact between the child and another person has occurred, 
and the applicant has reasonable grounds to believe that 
further contact between the child and the other person will 
result in sexual abuse of the child. 

 
So that makes it clear that it doesn’t . . . section (i) refers to 
sexual abuse has occurred, but section (ii) then references that 
there’s a belief that the other . . . that contact will result in 
sexual abuse of the child. 
 
So it protects under both, where there’s evidence that there has 
been sexual abuse already, or may be sexual abuse about to 
occur. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in 
reference to that portion of the Bill that you just spoke of, as I 
read that and took it to some legal advice, it was advised of me 
that that portion of the Bill — that clause — refers to, and only 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

to, any action that would be put in place in order to serve the 
protection intervention order to the offender/respondent — 
whatever they are. And that in fact there is nothing there . . . 
even though they refer to where a child is . . . to where a child is 
there, it does not provide anything for the child to be able to ask 
for help. 
 
So because of that, I wanted to know, under the Bill, for 
instance if a youth under the age of 18 would be afraid of 
assault for instance, of someone assaulting them, or . . . on the 
street, if they were afraid of that, or that they might be 
entrapped by pimps or people like that in the trade, could they 
then apply for . . . apply for I guess you’d call assistance or a 
stay-away order against the person they’re afraid of because of 
their fear of assault? 
 
Or could a peace officer do that, if the peace officer is 
presuming that that . . . or presuming or has some evidence that 
that child has indicated to them that they were afraid of being 
abused or assaulted? 
 
So I ask you that because we have to do something here in order 
to give the child some leeway, some help in asking for 
assistance and making sure that those adults who are there to 
protect them also have the tools to do that. 
 
So if this whole Act applies to assistance . . . or it’s a parallel to 
The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, which Act does 
actually focus on giving assistance to the person who is afraid 
of assault, then the same thing should be granted to children. 
And I don’t know whether or not under this Act there is any 
provision, for instance, for a police officer to know that they 
have the leeway to ask a child or to hear from a child and then 
pass on that information to a child protection worker. Is there 
provision for assistance for children in this manner in this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, because of the ability to use 
hearsay evidence, the answer to the question is yes. It permits 
the . . . but not just a police officer. It would also include a child 
protection officer or an outreach worker to, on the basis of 
statement of a child to the officer, to obtain an intervention 
order. And it’s the reference here that makes it admissible or 
makes use . . . available the use of hearsay evidence, that 
authorizes the ability to do that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
I have a whole slug of other questions that I wanted to ask you 
and I will be doing some of my questioning possibly during 
estimates because they pertain to this Bill once it’s enacted, and 
I think it would be acceptable. 
 
But I have one more question before we go on with the rest of 
the Bill. And that question is, what is the definition of credible 
hearsay, specifically as it will be understood and applied in the 
Bill? I mean, we have to . . . we should have sort of fleshed that 
out also so that . . . and had it clearly understood in this Bill so 
that there’s no question. Because again this is very, very 
difficult for police or social workers or anyone else to actually 
know what they can accept from a child and how they would 
determine that it’s a credible statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the answer to the question that 
the hon. member asked is found in section 6(4)(b) which refers 

to: 
 

(4) At the hearing of an application for an order, a justice 
(then): 

 
Or judge. A justice of the peace or a judge, then: 

 
(b) may admit hearsay evidence if, (and this is the key 
part) in the opinion of the justice, the evidence is credible 
and trustworthy. 

 
It’s a standard that’s been used for quite some time in the child 
and family services protections and is based then upon the 
experience of the justice and the pool of previous practice. And 
so that’s the standard; I’m advised it works well and effectively 
in The Child and Family Services Act and it’s the same 
standard that would apply here. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just have 
to ask this question before we go on. Once an emergency 
protective intervention order has been put in place and issued 
against a perpetrator, what happens to the child victims? 
 
Sorry, Mr. Minister, if I could just add to that. What kind of 
support services are available to them? Can they be removed 
from the street? If so, what happens to them from there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, the answer to that isn’t found within the 
Act, and I think . . . I don’t think she was of the view it’s found 
within the Act. 
 
It’s part of the total response to the sexual exploitation. And 
what will happen then, is under the currently existing authority 
of The Child and Family Services Act the child, if it’s deemed 
appropriate, can be removed from the street. That authority 
currently exists. 
 
And then the resources of the department come into play. They 
will be a variety of different kinds of intervention and support 
systems; that they will be in residential kinds of systems. There 
will be, as we have . . . as I have earlier indicated some time ago 
— not in the debate on this Bill but some weeks ago — there 
will be 31 spaces in the province that would be designated as 
top priority availability for victims of sexual exploitation. 
 
There will be intervention committees in place. And these 
intervention committees will ensure that for each child there 
will be a specific case plan that is put in place and will follow 
that child, which may also quite possibly — quite probably, I 
think is in many cases — include attention services brought to 
the family of the child. So it would be a combination of things. 
 
But it certainly . . . by no means does the intervention orders 
come . . . be the end of the process. It’s the . . . hopefully it’s the 
end of the contact between the perpetrator and the child, but 
what it then . . . but what that does also then activates the 
Department of Social Services’ contact and care with that child 
in a whole host of ways that we believe to be helpful and 
healthy. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I wish that 
I knew that there was activity happening right now by your 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

 

government that was moving towards those very measures that 
you just talked about. 
 
Because what comes to mind quickly to me is that even though 
there are 31 spaces that you have . . . say you have designated, I 
would like to ask very . . . a more detailed question. Where are 
those spaces going to be? I’m not going to ask you that now 
because there is a time constraint. 
 
But I want to know whether or not there’s going to be addiction 
services treatment. I mean, foster homes, if that’s what you are 
referring to as these spaces, foster parents, I don’t know if they 
should be responsible for addictions treatment. And all of those 
things are needed by a great number . . . a large number of 
children that have been on the streets because they have been 
subject to drugs in order to deal with their pain. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to take the opportunity to thank you, 
and I hope that you will take some of our recommendations into 
consideration. We will be moving forward with this Bill now 
and voting it . . . voting it . . . on it. And, Mr. Minister, if you’re 
prepared to go past the hour in order to get this completed, we 
would be agreeable to doing that also. So I will just leave . . . 
leave it at that then, and to your discretion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just briefly in response to the 
questions raised by the hon. member, much is currently in 
place. The intervention committees are in place in Saskatoon, 
Regina, Prince Albert already. Twenty-six of the . . . of the 
places that I referred to, the 31, are already in place now in the 
. . . in those cities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as the hon. member will be aware, in this year’s budget, 
which we talk about in the estimates, there are funds for the 
introduction of a new safe shelter here in Regina, which will 
provide an additional five spaces, bringing it to 31. And there 
will be . . . as part of the strategy to respond to the needs of 
these kids, there will be . . . that will include training to deal 
with the . . . with addictions as part of that plan. 
 
So I assure the hon. member that this is a strategy which has 
been acted upon for some time. It will continue. We’re building 
on strengths. That’s our intention. We’re providing, through this 
Bill, additional tools for the police or child protection officers 
and outreach workers, the ability to bring a separation of 
contact between the perpetrators and the kids as a part of that 
tool, to enable them, the kids, to be then . . . to engage in 
healthy recovery and hopefully to get on with happy and 
healthy lives, as part of our objective to enable them to see their 
futures in a positive sort of way. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Clause 3 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, in reference to 
clause 3 there is a new clause after clause 3 of the printed Bill, 
that this be amended to read . . . We would like to: 
 

Amend the printed Bill by adding the following Clause 
after Clause 3: 

 
Best interests of the child 

3.1 In the enforcement and administration of this Act, the 
best interests of a child must be taken into account and 
the following relevant factors must be considered in 
determining each child’s best interests: 

 
(a) the child’s safety; 
 
(b) the child’s present and future well-being; 
 
(c) the child’s physical and emotional needs and level 
of development; 
 
(d) the child’s cultural, racial, linguistic and religious 
heritage; 
 
(e) the child’s views; 
 
(f) the effect on the child if there is delay in making a 
decision; (and) 
 
(g) the importance of continuity in providing the child 
with protection, support and assistance. 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’m not sure we . . . I think we, 
in many ways, we have discussed the proposals and responses. 
I’m not sure — I don’t want to take more time than is necessary 
— whether in the interest of clarity, the committee desires me 
to respond to the . . . Maybe I should just very, very quickly and 
specifically, although none of this will be new information. 
 
I don’t support the House amendment, Mr. Chair. It’s my view 
that the regulations that are being drafted for the 
implementation of the Act should include the current definition 
of the best interests of the child as contained in The Child and 
Family Services Act that we discussed previously. And it’s 
these two pieces of legislation that are intended to be used 
together, and the same definition will ensure a consistent 
application of the definition. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 16 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, Mr. Chair, we would like to amend clause 16 
of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend Clause 16(1) of the printed Bill by adding the 
following after clause (a): 
 

“(a.1) request that the operator and every occupant in the 
vehicle identify themselves to the peace officer in order 
to establish each individual’s identity and age;” 

 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2002 

 

I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just to put again on the record, 
as we previously discussed, I believe this objective to be 
already met through The Highway Traffic Act and the practice 
of common law, and therefore it not necessary to include in the 
Bill. 
 
The division bells rang from 16:50 until 16:59. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 18 
 

Kwiatkowski Julé Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Brkich 
Weekes Harpauer Huyghebaert 
 

Nays — 29 
 

Calvert Atkinson Hagel 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Osika 
Lorjé Kasperski Goulet 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Crofford Axworthy Nilson 
Junor Hamilton Harper 
Forbes Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Thomson 
Yates McCall  
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
make an amendment to clause 16 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend Clause 16(2) of the printed Bill by adding the 
following after clause (a): 

 
“(a.1) request that the operator and every occupant in 
the vehicle identify themselves to the peace officer in 
order to establish each individual’s identity and age;” 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I don’t support the amendment 
because as I previously explained, I believe the authority 
already exists and it’s not necessary. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
amend clause 16 of the printed Bill: 
 

Strike out Clause 16(3) of the printed Bill and substitute the 
following: 
 

“(3) The person in charge of or operating a vehicle shall, 
when requested or signaled by a peace officer pursuant to 
subsection (1) or (2): 

 
(a) immediately bring the vehicle to a safe stop; 

(b) provide his or her driver’s licence, vehicle 
registration and any other information or identification 
that the peace officer may require in order to establish 
the individual’s identity and age; and 
 
(c) permit the peace officer to search the vehicle.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as previously explained, this 
isn’t a necessary amendment because the legal authority already 
exists. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to move 
an amendment to clause 16 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend Clause 16 of the printed Bill by adding the 
following subsections after subsection (3) of Clause 16: 
 

“(4) Every occupant in a vehicle that has been requested 
or signalled by a peace officer to stop pursuant to 
subsection (1) or (2) shall identify themselves 
sufficiently to the peace officer in order for the peace 
officer to establish each individual’s identity and age. 

 
“(5) Where a peace officer has reasonable grounds to 
believe that any occupant in a vehicle that has been 
stopped pursuant to this section has been or is likely to be 
subjected to sexual abuse, the peace officer may detain 
the vehicle and all of its occupants in order to apply for 
and obtain an emergency intervention order pursuant to 
Part II.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as previously explained, this 
amendment is not necessary because I believe the legal 
authority already exists. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 16 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 17 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 24 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to move 
an amendment to clause 24 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend Clause 24(3) of the printed Bill by striking out “not 
more than $25,000” and substituting “not less than 
$25,000”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as previously explained, I 
believe this is not necessary in order to protect the possible . . . 
the largest possible strength of the enforcement and application 
of the Bill as intended. 
 



May 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 24 agreed to. 
 
Clause 25 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I wish to move 
an amendment to clause 25 of the printed Bill. 
 

Clause 25 of the printed Bill is struck out and the following 
substituted: 
 

“Coming into force 
25(1) Subject to subsection (2), this Act comes into 
force on October 1, 2002. 

 
(2) Sections 16 and 22 come into force on assent.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as I previously explained, the 
intentions of the government are to implement the 
consequences of the Bill as soon as possible. And the current 
. . . currently stated target is October 1 and the amendment is 
not necessary. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 25 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Would the committee please come to 
order. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Emergency Protection for Victims 
of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, an 
Act respecting emergency protection for victims of child sexual 
abuse be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:09. 
 


	Best interests of the child

