















































Hansard: May 16, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1467 
 May 16, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise again 
on behalf of citizens of the province who are concerned about 
the high cost of prescription drugs. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities across Saskatchewan — Tisdale, Star City, 
Arborfield, Moose Jaw, Rosthern, Prince Albert. 
 
I so present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present to do with the overfishing at Lake of the 
Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Bredenbury, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
signed by citizens concerned with this government’s tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence will be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals in the 
communities of St. Denis and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again, today, I rise to present a petition concerning crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 

insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers in the 
communities of Abbey and Lancer. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this 
province that are concerned about the deductible on 
prescription drugs. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people from my constituency — Estevan, 
Lampman, as well as from Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by citizens of the good city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the tobacco legislation in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And the prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Waldeck, Success, and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to improve Highway 42. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Marquis, Keeler, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I have 
a petition by citizens who are outraged by the changes to the 
crop insurance program in Saskatchewan and the petition reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by good people 
from Duck Lake, Macdowall, and Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the condition of the Highway 
No. 15. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon, Simpson, Regina, 
Imperial, and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today of citizens concerned about Highway No. 
15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Simpson, Watrous, 
Imperial, Allan, and Manitou Beach. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, Medstead, and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province concerned about the 
government’s tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Spiritwood 
and Hepburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise with a petition from citizens in southern 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the lack of cellular 
phone coverage. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service to all 
communities throughout the Wood River constituency. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Glentworth and Fir Mountain. 
 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby received. 
 

A petition concerning the provision of reliable cellular 
service in the Wood River constituency; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 7, 11, 18, 22, 23, 24, 32, and 59. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 49 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: have the following two 
sections of land, NW quarter and SW quarter section 
1-22-27 W2nd in the RM of Craik No. 222; South 
half-section 5-22-26 West of second RM of Sarnia, ever 
been open for grazing in the past? 
 
And further to that: will these two sections be open for 
grazing in the year 2002; and if not, why? 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 49 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Premier: how many people of visible minority are 
employed in managerial positions in Executive Council? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food; Industry and Resources; Culture, Youth 
and Recreation; Finance; Health; Social Services; Northern 
Affairs; Justice; Learning; Environment; as well as the Minister 
of Government Relations; Highways and Transportation; and 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 49 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: which firms are currently listed among the 
qualified suppliers registered in the communications 
services supplier database per the Executive Council policy 
on communications procurement? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and to all the members of the 
House, five very special guests who are sitting up in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll ask them to stand as I name them. First, the Archbishop 
Nathaniel Popp, the Archbishop of Detroit and the Romanian 
Orthodox Church of North America; accompanying the 
Archbishop here today is the Very Reverend Father Daniel 
Nenson, the Dean of the Romanian parishes in Canada; 

Reverend Father Constantin Turcoane, the parish priest for the 
St. Nicholas Church here in Regina. Father Constantin 
Turcoane has been the parish priest here for the last 30 years. 
 
Also Reverend Father John Mancantelli of St. George’s 
Cathedral here in Regina, and Mr. Gordon Crossman, president 
of St. Nicholas Church. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our guests are here in Saskatchewan and Regina to 
take part in the 100th anniversary celebration of St. Nicholas 
Church which takes place this weekend — St. Nicholas Church 
is the oldest Romanian Orthodox Church in North America — 
with numerous celebrations planned for this weekend, not the 
least of which is a banquet on Sunday which I’m going to have 
the pleasure of attending. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome our guests here to 
Saskatchewan, to Regina, to our Assembly. I want to 
congratulate St. Nicholas Church on their 100th anniversary and 
wish them the best of success in the future. 
 
Thank you very much and I ask all of the members to offer 
them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with my colleague on the other side in welcoming the 
esteemed guests from the Romanian Orthodox Church to the 
gallery today in recognition of the celebration of St. Nicholas 
Church 100th anniversary. That’s an outstanding 
accomplishment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my wife’s family originates from the country of 
Romania and a few years ago she had the opportunity to go to 
the country of Romania and trace back her family roots. And 
one of her grandfather’s brothers was a very senior member of 
the Romanian Orthodox Church. And she had a wonderful visit 
with some of those relatives and viewed some of the churches 
in Romania and found it to be a particularly rewarding 
experience. 
 
So we’re glad that you’re here and we extend our 
congratulations to you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, further, I would like to 
introduce a grade 6 class that’s sitting in the east gallery from 
the Eston School. There are 19 students sitting in that gallery 
and they are accompanied by their teacher, Heather Piett. And 
there are a number of chaperones: Theresa Japp, Carrie Runall, 
Lilliane Hill, Shirley Japp, Susanne Schweitzer, Jenann 
Thomson, Scott MacKeracher, Jack Piett, and Lynne Warren. 
So it sounds like quite a crew, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there are some connections of the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus to the group from Eston. One of the teachers in the 
Eston School, who’s not accompanying the group, is the niece 
of the hon. member for Saltcoats. Her name . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Daughter, daughter. 
 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Daughter, daughter. I’m wrong — the 
daughter. So for the students there, when you see Ms. 
Bjornerud, you can tell her that you saw her dad. He’s the guy 
that’s kind of losing his hair sitting just two chairs over. And 
I’m sure he’d like you to return greetings to his daughter. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, secondly, there’s a young fellow sitting in 
the gallery who happens to be my nephew, and I would like 
Brett Howe to stand. There he is. Brett is my nephew, lives in 
Eston. He’s a great hockey player, and if all of the kids from 
Eston are as talented as my nephew, they’ve got just an 
amazing class. 
 
And I’d ask all of the members in the legislature to welcome 
him to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce a 
good friend of mine sitting in your gallery, Mr. Wayne McCord. 
And Mr. McCord is from Markham, Ontario where he operates 
a very, very successful business. Wayne and I went to school 
together and Wayne comes out for occasional visits. 
 
And I keep asking him to have his business moved out to 
southern Saskatchewan. And of course we know the answer — 
as long as there’s an NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
he won’t do it. So, Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, 
would you please join me in welcoming Wayne to the session 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly my father, 
Darwin Lackey, who is visiting us today. He’s sitting in your 
gallery. 
 
My father’s been long . . . for many years concerned with the 
farm ownership Act that we have in Saskatchewan and he’s 
here today to meet with our Agriculture critic, the member from 
Watrous. So I’d like the Assembly to help me in welcoming 
him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to welcome to the Assembly and introduce to you and 
through you a group of students that are here from the Parkland 
community college in Yorkton. There are 14 students who are 
here along with their instructors, Kathy Daze, Sandy Persick, 
and Gerry Yacishyn. 
 
The students are here today to not only take in the proceedings 
of the question period but are also going to be touring the 
building. I had an earlier opportunity to show them into my 
office, and they’ve said to me now that they’re going to be 
working closely with the member from Yorkton because two or 
three of them are interested in serving as members down the 
road as New Democrats. 

So I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to introduce the members to 
the Assembly, and I look forward to seeing them back in my 
constituency and that they enjoy their day here today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I too 
recognize in your gallery Isabelle Muscychuk, who is from our 
area of the province. Isabelle lives in the Buchanan area, has 
served as an instructor for many years when the licensed 
practical nursing program was delivered in our community. 
Today she works as a farmer in our area and pays a great deal of 
attention to the environmental stewardship in our province. 
 
So I welcome Isabelle to the Assembly and ask all members to 
join with me in recognizing her presence. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to the hon. members of the Assembly, it’s a pleasure to 
introduce some distinguished guests in your gallery this 
afternoon. Joining us, Mr. Speaker, are two constituents of mine 
from Swift Current. John and Myra Leyshon are in your gallery. 
And they’re accompanied by John’s brother, Glynn Leyshon, 
and his wife Jackie, from Cambridge in the United Kingdom. 
 
Now not only is John a constituent of mine in the city of Swift 
Current, but as a member of the Swift Current Kiwanis Club, 
I’d like to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that John is also the lieutenant 
governor for district 4 for Kiwanis International, which involves 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and parts of Ontario. 
 
And we certainly appreciate his work and leadership in 
Kiwanis, as well as his volunteer activities in terms of soccer in 
Swift Current. 
 
So I’d just ask all my colleagues in the legislature to welcome 
John. And our next meeting is Friday. This Friday is our regular 
meeting. The member for Rosthern wanted to know. It will be 
at noon at the Modern restaurant. 
 
But I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 
John and Myra, and Glynn and Jackie all the way from United 
Kingdom, here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, two young people that are currently seated in the 
east gallery. They’re grade 12 students at Thom Collegiate and 
they’re doing a school project in terms of governance here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I’ll have the chance to meet 
with them a little bit later for them to interview me. And I hope 
their questions aren’t too difficult. 
 
Their names are James Fick and Miranda Trail. And they’re in 
the east gallery. 
 
And again, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them 
to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, today in the east 
gallery we have 18 students from the Medstead Central School 
under the teachership of Mr. Rod Enns. 
 
I’d like to welcome Rod here. Rod’s a very, very good teacher 
in the Medstead school system and Medstead School. The 
chaperones accompanying him today is Deena Haubold, Josiah 
Rise, Jean Pauls, and Jen Dunsen. 
 
Now the students have come from a long way to get here. I 
hope they’ve had no difficulty getting here and I hope that the 
proceedings today which they are going to be viewing will be 
informational and won’t be as loud as they may think it will be. 
 
So I ask all members to welcome you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and to members of this House, seated in the 
west gallery, Mr. Monty Poitras and Rod Gopher from 
Saulteaux First Nation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And members of the Assembly, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, Amy Kaczkowski who is seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery. Amy has come here all the way from 
Penticton, BC (British Columbia) especially to visit her 
favourite son, Viktor Kaczkowski, who is our Clerk Assistant of 
committees. 
 
I’m advised that this is her first time . . . this is her first time to 
actually view our proceedings in person and we certainly want 
to extend a welcome to Amy to this session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Historical Model Legislature 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday, May 11, I had the distinct pleasure and privilege of 
assuming the Speaker’s role for the 2002 historical model 
legislature sponsored by the Saskatchewan Elocution and 
Debate Association. 
 
Forty-two high school students from throughout Saskatchewan 
took part in a re-enactment of a 1917 legislature on the floor of 
this Assembly, the purpose of which was to gain experience in 
parliamentary debate while learning more about the political 
history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, awards were presented to both senior and junior 
students. The F.W. Johnson Trophy awarded to the top 
parliamentarian and best speaker went to Tanner Morrison from 
Archbishop O’Neill School in Regina. This was the second year 
in a row that Tanner won this award. 
 
And the award for best junior parliamentarian and debater went 
to Carlena Variyan from Yorkton Regional High School. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Colleen Yanush, 
executive director of the Elocution and Debate Association and 
Darren Steffen, program assistant. They did a great job of 
planning and organizing the model legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, after two hours of acting as Speaker, I have a 
greater appreciation and respect for the great responsibility all 
Speakers of this Assembly have carried throughout the 
legislature . . . the legislative history of the province. 
 
If I may make one suggestion to the Assembly, to aid the 
Speaker, it would be to have large labels of constituency names 
on each member’s desk. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyerhaeuser Gift to Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we had some visitors to 
the Assembly yesterday who had come to town with some very 
good new for the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, 
which means good news for the University of Regina, which 
means good news for the future of our province. 
 
Wayne Roznowski and Steve Smith of Weyerhaeuser were here 
to make a special presentation to the SIFC (Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College). The presentation was a big gift in a 
small package — a cheque for $500,000 towards the 
completion of the new SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College) building on campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this building will be a showpiece of architectural 
design as well as a seat of learning for Canada’s only college 
owned and operated by First Nations people. It is designed by 
renowned Canadian and First Nations architect, Douglas 
Cardinal, with special features to identify and highlight its 
purpose. 
 
Primarily of course, the building will provide a permanent 
home for SIFC’s 1,300 students when it is opened next spring. 
Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser’s contribution along with donations 
from several other public and private sponsors, dramatically 
illustrates the close ties between industry, community, 
government, and our educational institutions in creating 
opportunities today for Saskatchewan’s leaders of tomorrow. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Council of Educational 
Administration Leadership Award 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Walter Garchinski has been a principal in the Melfort School 
Division since 1980. Twenty-two years of working in our 
community, in his words: “To provide the best possible 
opportunity for our youth.” 
 
Mr. Garchinski is retiring at the end of this year and was 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

especially appreciative when he was one of three provincial 
recipients of the Saskatchewan Council of Educational 
Administration Leadership Award. 
 
The criteria for this award requires the nominees to promote the 
educational administration profession by creating a greater 
understanding and recognition of the profession and through 
significant contributions. The nominees must also conduct 
themselves on a professional level and be willing to provide 
assistance to their colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, please join me in 
recognizing Mr. Walter Garchinski for his administrative 
leadership and thanking him for his contributions to our 
community. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kinsmen International Band and Choral Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Moose Jaw will be alive with the sound of music this weekend. 
Bands and choral groups from across the prairies are 
converging on Moose Jaw to help jazz up the city for a few 
days. 
 
The 53rd annual Kinsmen International Band and Choral 
Festival starts today and runs until Saturday. The festival is a 
non-competitive venue that lets bands and choirs perform for 
one another, then benefit from a one-hour session with a 
clinician. 
 
If I may further chime in, Mr. Speaker, concert choirs will also 
be heard and there will be special performances at Peacock 
Auditorium. Festival participants will have several 
opportunities to show off their talent as the festival wraps up on 
Saturday with “Moosic Day” in Crescent Park from 10 a.m. till 
4:30. Pipers and drummers will be performing. Over 226 pipers 
and 72 drummer entries have been entered, or scheduled, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Moose Jaw has hosted this festival since 1949. The festival has 
provided musical training for thousands of musicians, many 
who have gone on to very distinguished careers. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to all the volunteers and 
organizers in Moose Jaw. I know we’re going to have a 
wonderful weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Elaine Hanson Wins Arbos Award 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to inform the 
House about an outstanding resident from Outlook. Elaine 
Hanson has excelled in the field of teaching throughout her life. 
 
On April 4 her career was recognized by being presented the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation annual Arbos Award for 
outstanding service to the teaching profession. 
 

Colleagues who nominated Mrs. Hanson last November 
described her as a teacher’s teacher. Her long and distinguished 
teaching career has included teaching at St. Pat’s School in 
Swift Current as well as teaching stops in Cabri, Shaunavon, 
and Lanigan. 
 
She’s had to serve in multiple roles throughout her career 
including vice-principal, teacher, and even librarian. 
 
Mrs. Hanson came to the Outlook School Division as a program 
consultant in 1998 and has remained in that position ever since. 
For a time she held the position of a director of education, has 
been actively involved in the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation at the local level. 
 
Mrs. Hanson has consistently shown dedication to the teaching 
profession in Saskatchewan, which is one of the many reasons 
in being awarded this year’s award that recognizes the best of 
what the teaching profession stands for in Saskatchewan. 
 
The award also recognizes her outstanding contributions and 
the honour she has brought to the teaching level. 
 
I would like to congratulate Mrs. Elaine Hanson of Outlook on 
her remarkable accomplishment for her life’s work as a teacher. 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in offering 
Mrs. Hanson all the best in the years ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Internet Access Funding for Saskatchewan Libraries 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased that in conjunction with the federal government, our 
government is providing more than $4.4 million to install 
high-speed Internet access in 162 libraries across our province. 
I believe it’s very fitting that this announcement is made in the 
middle of our first ever Saskatchewan Opportunities Week. 
 
This funding will lead to the completion of phase 2 of the 
CommunityNet initiative and will provide increased 
opportunities for citizens of our province to access information. 
 
CommunityNet is connecting Saskatchewan residents, 
especially those in rural and remote areas, to the tools that they 
need to participate fully in our economy, tools that will spark 
innovation and growth. 
 
This project is especially important in providing citizen access 
to the Internet for more than 50 per cent of Saskatchewan 
residents who do not have computers in their homes. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Saskatchewan Libraries President Isabelle Butters is excited 
about this project, and I quote: 
 

High speed access is essential to the effective delivery of 
library programs and services in the 21st century. 

 
CommunityNet is a $71 million initiative of our government 
which extends high-speed Internet access to 834 educational 
facilities, 310 health facilities, 86 First Nations schools, and 256 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

 

government offices in 366 communities. 
 
And with every new connection made in our communities 
across the province it opens more doors and creates more 
opportunities to our province’s citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prairie Diamond Credit Union 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to report 
on good news from the Prairie Diamond Credit Union. This 
diamond of Saskatchewan credit unions has had a very good 
year last year. In fact they’ve seen good growth and profitability 
in all areas of the financial statement. 
 
Assets of the credit union grew in excess of $1.5 million to 
reach almost $20 million by year end. They’ve also enjoyed 
excellent growth in loans and deposits. Loans to members rose 
by almost $2 million to $15 million while member deposits are 
up over $1 million to over $17 million. The membership also 
carries close to $200,000 in Ethical mutual funds. 
 
The board once again approved a patronage allocation for 2001. 
A 5 per cent return totalling nearly $75,000 will be paid as an 
interest bonus on all deposit interest earned and an interest 
rebate on all interest paid. In the last three years the credit union 
had paid approximately $217,000 back to its membership. 
 
One of the many reasons, Mr. Speaker, for the success of the 
credit unions in Saskatchewan is the loyalty they install by 
becoming involved in the community. 
 
Some of the organizations that Prairie Diamond Credit Union 
has provided donations for and sponsorships for, include the 
4-H, Kinsmen and Kinettes, libraries, the Legion, Lions, First 
Responders, Telemiracle, Knights of Columbus, Meals on 
Wheels, and many church groups. 
 
I’m sure all members will want to congratulate Prairie Diamond 
Credit Union for another successful year. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Disclosure of Personal and Confidential Information 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
people are shocked at the newest allegations about this NDP 
government. It now appears that government employees have 
been disclosing personal and confidential information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely serious matter. This morning 
people all over Saskatchewan are wondering, how could this 
happen? What information was disclosed? Was my information 
disclosed? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could the NDP allow this to happen? It 
appears that people within the NDP government may have been 
disclosing personal and confidential information. Mr. Speaker, 
this is not acceptable and it should not have happened. How can 

Saskatchewan people have any confidence in this government if 
their personal and confidential information is not being 
protected by the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m responding today as minister of the Public Service 
Commission. And first of all, I would like to affirm that the 
government of course takes matters of personal privacy very 
seriously, and has in place a number of policies and procedures 
to assure that they are protected. 
 
Now it has come to our attention that the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) are investigating some employees. 
And what we can’t do, Mr. Speaker, is interfere with that 
investigation. 
 
But what we can do, we have done. We’ve sent the individuals 
home as soon as we determined who they were from the 
RCMP. We’ve co-operated fully with the RCMP. And we are at 
this time in the process of undertaking steps for an independent 
review to make sure that the many policies and procedures are 
in place, are sufficient, and that they are the right ones. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do that because it is the right 
thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s bad enough 
if the police are under investigation for disclosing information. 
But when you think about it, the police only have information 
on people who have probably had a run-in with the law 
somewhere along their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government though has confidential and 
personal information on everyone, about everything. They have 
health information, they have financial information. Mr. 
Speaker, they have all kinds of personal and confidential 
information. 
 
Saskatchewan people have a right to know that their personal 
information is being protected, and the government has the 
responsibility of ensuring that that information is protected. Mr. 
Speaker, in this responsibility, it appears that the government 
has failed — and failed terribly — the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
How can Saskatchewan people trust this government to protect 
their confidential information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be generous 
and ignore for a moment the totally irresponsible 
fearmongering. I would have hated to see any of these people in 
charge on September 11 when the job of leadership was to deal 
with issues, not to further inflame any insecurity that people 
may have. 
 
Now I will continue by indicating some of the measures that 
currently exist. There is an employee oath, an employee oath of 
office — the same kind of oath that members take when they 
become members of this legislature. In that, they affirm that 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

they will not, without due authority in that behalf, disclose or 
make known any matter or thing which comes to their 
knowledge by reason of their employment. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have conflict of interest guidelines 
where people will not personally benefit or take advantage of 
the fact that they have access to information. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, we have the freedom of information and 
privacy Act. In case anyone is uncertain about whether it’s 
legitimate to access information, there’s a process by which you 
can clear it up. 
 
And fourth, an information technology policy. 
 
I think that’s a fair bit of policy and process to safeguard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Access of Government Employees to 
Canadian Police Information Centre 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice, a question that has 
nothing to do with the investigation, so we hope he’ll take a 
chance and answer it. 
 
A government official told the media yesterday, and I quote: 
 

No provincial agencies have access to CPIC. 
 
But we don’t believe that to be true. In fact, we do have a 
document from the Department of Justice appointing employees 
of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority as special 
constables. It says: 

 
WHEREAS this requires access to criminal intelligence 
information that is only available to peace officers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, can these investigators with SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) access CPIC (Canadian Police 
Information Centre) because they have been appointed special 
constables? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, in the context of the 
oaths of allegiance and so on that the member . . . the 
confidentiality that the minister for Public Service Commission 
talked about, there are situations, Mr. Speaker, in which 
government employees have access to CPIC files. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would have been 
fine if that information would have . . . given to the media and 
the other interviews that took place yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the SLGA has special constables that 
can access CPIC. But how about SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance)? What about SaskTel? Do SaskPower 
and SaskEnergy have that same access? What about other 
government departments? 

Mr. Speaker, what other government agencies, departments or 
Crown corporations have employees who have been made 
special constables and can therefore access CPIC? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take the member’s 
question under advisement and provide him with exact details 
after question period. But he is — and I’ll do that today — but 
he is right that there are a number of departments with a number 
of employees who have access to CPIC files. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we just had a comment about 
fearmongering. I think there’s a lot of fear to be mongered. 
 
When the minister, after seeing what happened on the media 
yesterday, read the front page of the paper today and he can’t 
come prepared to answer a question as simple as who has 
access to CPIC in his government organization, that’s a shame, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Disclosure of Personal and Confidential Information 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the deputy minister to 
the Premier told the media that the type of information that was 
being released by the government employees was personal 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain what kind of personal 
information about Saskatchewan people is being released by the 
Department of Social Services, SGI, and SaskPower? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I’ll 
reiterate that people have every right to expect that their private 
information is secure, and we will do everything in our power 
to make sure that that happens along with all the policies and 
procedures I outlined previously. 
 
But I will say, Mr. Speaker, and this is a very direct quote from 
the directions we were given, the RCMP officials asked the 
government not to pursue and discuss this matter in any way 
until the police advised it was all right to do so. And we would 
appreciate the opposition’s co-operation in this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of this 
province would very much appreciate having the ministers 
disclose to them what of their information has been pedalled 
around the province by six of their employees — six of them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So far. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister to the Premier also told the 
media that he could not confirm that no other government 
departments, agencies, or Crown corporations were included in 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

 

the investigation to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier tell this House if other 
government departments, agencies, and Crowns are now or 
could be, in coming days, included in this investigation for the 
improper release of information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll reiterate again that 
people do have every right to expect that their private 
information is secure. I will reiterate that the RCMP have asked 
us, politely, to not discuss this information in a way that might 
jeopardize the investigation. 
 
But I will say that, unlike the opposition, Mr. Speaker, we will 
not be convicting people until an investigation has taken place 
and if it’s warranted. And if the member opposite believes in 
kangaroo courts he should get up and say so right now. 
 
But we have a system in place that’s called the RCMP. And we 
have a responsibility to do our work thoroughly, to follow the 
procedures which have been put in place by government to 
protect people. And if these procedures aren’t enough, then we 
will strengthen them. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess one of the 
questions we would have is, how come is the minister of the 
Public Service Commission answering questions involving 
Crown corporations? Who’s hiding behind which desk today? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy — that’s where the next question goes to. 
Employees of these Crown corporations are alleged to have 
disclosed information to unauthorized sources. Mr. Speaker, 
will the minister explain how this could possibly happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It may suit the opposition’s purposes to 
portray that executive government and the Crowns are separate, 
but we are all part of one government and as a government we 
have an overarching commitment to public security and to 
good, sound personnel practice. So the very good and sound 
personnel practices that exist in one part of government exist in 
the other. 
 
And I would like to remind the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
as well as the people at home, that we’re talking about six 
individuals in question at the moment, out of 10,000 employees. 
And if the member opposite is under some illusion that he will 
have time to follow all 10,000 government employees around 
on any given day then I guess that’s his notion of governing. 
 
We have a body of policies and procedures in place. We have 
six people who right now are a matter of concern. The RCMP is 
dealing with it under their investigation and we will certainly be 
co-operating and taking action as soon as any facts are known. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer included the 
fact that they’re sticking together. They’d better stick together. 
 
But the answers we’re getting — we may have to go to Frank 
Hart to get the real answer because we’re not getting many 
answers from over there. 
 
Again to the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan): will the Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation tell us how many other Crown departments and 
agencies are under investigation for the improper disclosure of 
information? 
 
(14:15) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, on May 3 we were 
informed that an investigation was underway. This is the only 
investigation we have been informed of, and so the member can 
speculate and speculate and fearmonger and whip up things and 
have kangaroo courts, but that is not the way we do things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have policies, we have procedures, we have trusted 
employees — trusted employees — and we are fully 
co-operating. And I will assure the members opposite and the 
public that as soon as facts are known, if people have broken 
the law or behaved inappropriately, they will be dealt with 
strictly and swiftly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question is not 
so much about the 10,000 public employees. The question is 
about those ministers, those NDP individuals who’ve been 
given responsibility to protect the private information of every 
citizen in this province and they have failed, Mr. Speaker. They 
have failed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, again to the Minister of CIC. 
Tell us if it is possible that other Crown corporations or 
agencies could be included in the investigation for this improper 
disclosure of information. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of faith 
in our RCMP and I have a great deal of faith that they will 
conduct a proper investigation, that they will come up with 
facts, and that those facts will be able to be acted on. 
 
And I just say to the member opposite, maybe you should get in 
the real world. People . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I would 
ask the member to continue all her remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. Maybe he 
should get in the real world. 
 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

The fact of the matter is that we try to have a society where we 
bring our children up as well as we can, where we have oaths 
that employees take where we expect certain behaviours. But at 
the end of the day, humans do have some discretion. And when 
they use that discretion they will be held accountable for 
whether they use that discretion appropriately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are in the real 
world. We’re in the real world of Saskatchewan where almost 1 
million people have all sorts of personal information in the 
hands of these government people. That trust has been broken. 
That trust has been broken. And the people of Saskatchewan 
need to know which one of those individuals at the end of the 
day is going to pay for it with their jobs, with their jobs. 
 
Again, to the Minister of CIC. Will he explain what kind of 
personal information . . . what kind of personal information was 
being disclosed by the employees of SaskPower and SGI? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just 
for a moment mention that in an age of technology the same 
information that allows people to serve people well, is 
obviously the same information that is potentially subject to 
abuse. 
 
Now I say again we have an employee oath of office; we have 
conflict of interest guidelines; we have Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Act; we have conditions of 
employment; we have information technology acceptable use 
policy. I think that is a fair range of measures. 
 
There will be a review to determine if that’s a sufficient range 
of measures, but the fact of the matter is 99 per cent of the time 
employees honour these conditions of employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answers 
today have been sadly lacking. The front page of the daily 
papers indicate that this government is completely out of 
control. Government employees may have been disclosing 
personal and confidential information, and the NDP claim they 
have no idea at all what’s going on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what information, we ask. They don’t know. 
Whose information? They won’t say. How it happened — 
they’re pretending that they don’t have a responsibility to 
answer, Mr. Speaker. And now they can’t even get their stories 
straight when they’re talking about what they’re going to do 
about it. 
 
The deputy minister to the Premier says they have a plan to 
launch their own investigation right away. But the Premier says 
he’s going to wait until the police investigation is done. Mr. 
Speaker, they can’t get their stories straight. They’re out of 
control. 
 
Instead of coming to this House to answer the questions, the 
Premier runs away and hides. Mr. Speaker, the Premier is 

ultimately responsible to protect Saskatchewan people from this 
government’s disclosing the private and confidential 
information of the people of this province. 
 
Yes he doesn’t seem to know what’s going on, and the deputy 
admits that it may be even more widespread than we already 
know. 
 
My question is, why has the Premier lost control of this 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I could just as well ask the 
member opposite why that leader has lost control of his entire 
party but I’m not going to go there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to instead answer the question. And I will reiterate 
that people have every right to expect that their private 
information is secure. And every single one of my colleagues is 
equally concerned because our information is in there just like 
everybody else’s. So there would be no reason why we 
wouldn’t take this completely seriously. 
 
What we will not do is run around having kangaroo courts and 
fearmongering. What we will do is support the RCMP in their 
investigation. The employees in question were sent home. 
We’re co-operating with the investigation and there will be an 
independent review of the policies and procedures. The RCMP 
are dealing with the individuals in question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, with good reason the people 
of Saskatchewan do not trust the NDP government and they 
aren’t going to trust an internal investigation. They don’t want 
to see another round of the NDP hiring the NDP to investigate 
the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a Privacy 
Commissioner. And he doesn’t work for the government, he 
works for the legislature and all the people of Saskatchewan. 
And he is here to protect all of our privacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the Saskatchewan Party is calling for the 
Privacy Commissioner to conduct a truly independent 
investigation. We want him to investigate the current 
allegations and we want him to review every government 
department and every Crown corporation to determine what 
safeguards are in place to protect confidential information. 
 
Today, immediately after question period, I will move an 
emergency motion calling for this investigation. Will the 
government do the right thing and support the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
reiterate how our legal system works in Canada. If there is 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

 

something which is reported and thereby followed up with an 
investigation, the RCMP, who have the independence to be 
involved in this, investigate. If there are sufficient grounds, the 
prosecution process takes over and people have their day in 
court. 
 
And I have to say that for the member opposite to suggest that it 
should happen in a different way . . . I’m not sure why he would 
do that. I have great confidence in the RCMP and in our 
prosecutors and court systems. 
 
Now I will say that the Privacy and Information Commissioner 
is an independent officer. I know he’s paying close attention to 
this. And certainly if there are matters that he feels he wishes to 
look at, he has the independent authority to do that. 
 
Meanwhile, we will engage with an appropriate firm to 
undertake a review of policies and procedures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sounds like 
another opportunity for Points West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 29 of the protection of privacy Act is put 
in place to protect Saskatchewan people from the government 
abusing its power by disclosing personal and confidential 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nobody trusts the NDP to fix this mess. Will the 
government support the Saskatchewan Party’s call for an 
independent investigation by the Privacy Commissioner into all 
government departments and Crown corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I can hardly believe what 
I’m hearing. We have the Leader . . . the Leader of the 
Opposition in this legislature suggesting that every single 
employee of the government should be investigated. 
 
I can hardly believe what I’m hearing. Because in the normal 
course of the day, there are 10,000 employees. They all have 
supervisors and managers. We do not directly interfere with the 
work of those managers and supervisors. They have a duty, 
employees . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The minister for 
PSC (Public Service Commission). 
 
Order, once again. Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. I 
recognize the minister responsible for the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, there 
are conditions of employment — an employee oath of office, 
conflict of interest guidelines, freedom of information and 
privacy Act, and information technology acceptable use policy. 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there’s a huge 
amount of integrity in the public service. 
 
And for that very, very, very small percentage of people who 
may or may not fully comply with their conditions of 

employment, those situations are obviously under investigation 
and when any facts are known, they will be dealt with strictly 
and swiftly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Ethanol Industry 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, approximately 40 ethanol 
committees were set up around this province in response to the 
government’s invitation to begin the work on ethanol and the 
commitment by the government that they would not be picking 
winners and losers and that investment would be driven by 
private and not public . . . and public dollars would not go into 
this. 
 
Now my question for the government is simply this: will they 
be, will they be compensating those 40 communities that 
invested in ethanol committees and pursued ethanol strategies 
when, in point of fact, CIC was close to closing a deal that went 
in the exact opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Every member in the Assembly has the right to ask a question. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — In view of this statement that they would not 
be picking winners and losers — when in point of fact that had 
already happened — will they be compensating those 
communities that pursued a strategy that had already been 
pulled out from under them unbeknown to them and apparently 
unbeknown to the minister; and did the minister know when he 
gave those commitments to those 40 communities that in point 
of fact the rug was going to be pulled out from under him and 
he was going to be overruled by his boss at CIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to be 
very clear and reiterate what I’ve been saying for the last six 
weeks. Any investor that wants to come to Saskatchewan today 
and build an ethanol plant is welcome to do so. Any investor 
that wants to have an opportunity to meet with local 
communities, we’re willing to help hook them up. Any 
proponents that want to come and build plants, we are quite 
willing to do that. 
 
The plan remains the same as it was six weeks ago. We are 
going to continue to work with investors, proponents, 
communities to get an ethanol industry — an ethanol industry 
built in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I would ask is that that Liberal member ask the 
Liberal government in Ottawa to do the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Yorkton on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, to move a series of 
motions of condolences. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(14:30) 
 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would move, 
seconded by the member from Rosetown-Biggar, by leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to his community, to his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Robert Andrew Heggie, who passed away on July 23 of 
2000, was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1967 until 1971, representing the constituency of Hanley 
for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Heggie was born on May 13, 1915 in Strasbourg. He 
spent his childhood in Kelliher, and it was here that Mr. 
Heggie received his primary and high school education. He 
continued his studies at the Regina Normal School and 
graduated with his teaching certificate. And on July 26, 
1938, he married Evelyn Rutherford and they had two 
daughters and one son. Mr. Heggie is survived by his wife, 
his children, six grandchildren, and one great-grandchild. 
 
Mr. Heggie began his career as a teacher in the towns of 
Punnichy and Raymore. Then like many men of his 
generation, he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force during 
World War II. He spent four and a half years as a radar 
technician, mostly in Africa. 

 
Upon returning to Canada, Mr. Heggie attended the 
University of Saskatchewan and graduated in 1949 with his 
degree in Arts and Law. The following year he was 
admitted to the Saskatchewan bar and began practising law 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Heggie donated his time to his community in other 
capacities as well. He was an alderman in the city of 
Saskatoon from 1954 to 1963. Later he served as a judge in 
the Magistrate Court. And in 1969, Mr. Heggie was 
honoured with the distinction of Queen’s Counsel for his 
service to the legal profession. 
 
Mr. Heggie held a lifelong interest in politics that was 
evident in his efforts to seek election to this Assembly on 
two occasions before being successful in the 1967 general 
election. 
 
Later, after he retired to British Columbia in 1979, both he 
and his wife were active members of the Liberal 
Association in Chilliwack and Abbotsford. It was also in 
British Columbia that Mr. Heggie resumed his judicial 
career. He became a judge for the disciplinary court in the 
federal penitentiary system on a part-time basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded again by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

To record our deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly express its most sincere sympathy to the 
members of the bereaved family. 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say a few 
words about Mr. Robert Heggie. He was in my constituency. He 
served the constituency of Hanley in the Legislative Assembly 
from 1967 until 1971. And I never even . . . forgot that there 
really was a constituency of Hanley till this was brought to me. 
And I unfortunately never had the pleasure of meeting Mr. 
Heggie, but I’ve heard people talk about him when I was in the 
Hanley-Dundurn area when I was door knocking. 
 
And I know that talking to them, that he had served his 
constituents and the town, and the surrounding towns and 
communities, very well. They were very happy with the job he 
did and they said . . . I remember one older person in Hanley 
had said that if I could do as good a job . . . if I promised to do 
as good a job as Mr. Heggie did when I was here, he would 
gladly vote for me. So I try and do that, and I think of past 
members when I’m here. 
 
I just want to mention a few words on the Hanley constituency. 
I guess it was formed in the general election of 1908, running 
east to west. The boundaries of Hanley I guess changed in 1934, 
surrounding the city of Saskatoon. And the last time there was a 
Hanley constituency was the election of ’71, so Mr. Heggie had 
the honour of serving as last sitting member under the name of 
Hanley. 
 
I just want to say a few quick words about Mr. Robert Heggie. 
He was born on May 13, 1915 in the town of Strasbourg but 
grew up in the town of Kelliher. He received his primary and 
high school education in the rural area and continued studies at 
the Regina Normal School, thereby graduating with a certificate 
on teaching. 
 
Mr. Heggie held a lifelong interest in politics, beginning with 
his service as alderman for the city of Saskatoon from 1954 to 
1963. Later on he served as judge of the Magistrate’s Court, and 
in 1969 he was honoured with the distinction of Queen’s 
Counsel for service to the profession of law. 
 
Mr. Heggie sought election to the Assembly on two occasions, 
and of course he was successful in 1967. Mr. Heggie and his 
wife retired to British Columbia in 1979, and he and his wife 
were active members of the Liberal associations of Chilliwack 
and Abbotsford. He also served as judge for the disciplinary 
court in the federal penitentiary system on a part-time basis, 
while also living in British Columbia. So he was a very busy 
person even in his retiring years. 
 
With that I just want to, being as the member for Arm River, 
want to wish my condolences to the family in the passing of Mr. 
Robert Andrew Heggie. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to his community, to his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

 

Paul Emile Rousseau, who passed away on October 8, 
2001, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1978 till 1986, representing the constituency Regina South 
for the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Rousseau was born on December 20, 1929 in Fort 
Frances, Ontario. He spent the majority of his childhood in 
Fort Frances before the family moved to Winnipeg and 
then to Montreal. Mr. Rousseau married Janine Ducharme 
on April 5 of 1952 and they had six daughters. Mr. 
Rousseau is survived by his wife, five daughters, and six 
grandchildren. 
 
In 1958 Mr. Rousseau and his family moved to 
Saskatchewan, settling first in Melville and then later in 
Regina. It was there that he began his successful career in 
the automotive industry. He rose from the position of sales 
manager of Neil Motors in 1960 to later buying the 
company. He renamed it Crestview Chrysler and took the 
role of president and then general manager. 
 
Mr. Rousseau also participated in his community. He 
dedicated his time to organizations ranging from the French 
Knights of Columbus and the Kinsmen to the United Way 
and then on to the Globe Theatre. 
 
Mr. Rousseau was first elected to this Assembly in 1978 
and served as a member of the official opposition. After 
being re-elected in 1982, he began a new chapter in his 
political career as a cabinet minister. From 1983 until 1985 
he held the portfolios of Economic Development and Trade 
as well as the portfolio of Revenue and Financial Services. 
 
During this time Mr. Rousseau was also the minister 
responsible for Crown Investments Corporation, 
Saskatchewan Development Fund, and Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance. It was his work with the SGI that 
resulted in what was being called his political legacy, and 
introduced the Lights On for Life program — was 
acknowledged as the forerunner to the inclusion of the 
mandatory daytime running lights on cars in order to 
reduce accidents. 

 
Mr. Rousseau left this Assembly in 1986 to assume the 
position of the Saskatchewan Agent General of the United 
Kingdom. 
 
In expressing its deepest sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere and deep 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to stand this afternoon and say a few words 
about Mr. Paul Rousseau, the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Mr. Rousseau was leaving this Legislative 
Assembly, completing his chapter as an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) in this Assembly representing the 
constituency of Regina South, I was entering the Assembly as 
the MLA for Moosomin. So, Mr. Speaker, while I didn’t have 
the privilege of actually sitting with Mr. Rousseau, I did have 
the privilege of getting to know the man — an individual who 
was a man of integrity. He was a very pleasant individual with a 

very outgoing personality. 
 
And I think from what I experienced and what I saw in this city, 
and having run a car dealership for a number of years, you can 
see why he did so well in business just from his bubbly 
personality and the fact that he treated everyone as a very 
special person. 
 
When I came into this Assembly I came in as a young 
individual just nicely getting involved in the political realm. 
And I really appreciated that there were people like Mr. 
Rousseau around that you could go and talk to, that you could 
make some inquiries about, that you could discuss the process 
of being a member of this Assembly and how this Assembly 
functioned and operated, and certainly the wisdom that he had 
and the advice that he was able to pass on, and the fact that he 
gave it to you as a person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing when . . . in talking to people. 
Sometimes you can sit down, you can talk to people. But as 
you’re talking to that individual you can almost see that their 
mind is someplace else — that they’re just showing some 
respect by listening but in reality they were hoping you’d move 
on. 
 
Mr. Rousseau was not that type of a person. He was the type of 
person that, if you went up to him or if he saw you, he would 
more than, more than delighted to just come over and say hi. 
And in fact just, it was a little over a year ago, I just happened 
to run into Mr. Rousseau at the Hotel Saskatchewan. 
 
I walked in and Mr. Rousseau happened to be there at the time. 
And again just to see the man, as soon as he saw you he said 
hello and asked how things were going and asked how you were 
enjoying the political sphere and politics in general. 
 
And that’s what I remember of Mr. Rousseau, Mr. Speaker, was 
an individual who really gave to his community, to his family, 
to his constituency, and to this province in his role not only as 
MLA but in the diplomatic position that he assumed in 1986 
and I believe did a very fine job, an excellent job for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I 
wish to extend to Mrs. Janine Rousseau and her family, our 
deepest sympathy on the passing of a dear husband, a father, 
and a great Saskatchewan citizen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 
for an opportunity to be able to remember Paul Rousseau and to 
also share my condolences with his family. 
 
I first met Paul back about 1968. In that time there was a choir 
in this city called the Gwalia Singers. My sister and Paul’s 
daughter were in the same choir and our parents got to . . . my 
parents got to know Paul and Mrs. Rousseau at that time. 
 
And also my dad, being an avid buyer of Chrysler products, 
also got to know Paul through the dealership where he 
purchased a number of cars. And I was happy in 1970 to be able 
to convince him to buy a Dodge Charger from Paul. And Paul 
figured that was the right thing to do; it was the good car to get. 
And so we really enjoyed that part of the relationship with Paul. 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

When he ran politically, of course, it was not the party that I 
would choose to support but I always respected Paul’s integrity 
and the work that he did. And I think it’s already been 
mentioned that his legacy was found in the Lights on For Life. 
And as I renewed acquaintance with him following my election, 
he talked about how important that was for him in 
accomplishing that and that being the forerunner to the 
mandatory daytime running lights, and how much that 
contributed to the well-being of the province and to the people 
of North America really, to have those mandatory running 
lights. 
 
So he was very appreciative of the opportunity that he had to 
serve as a cabinet minister and to contribute that to the 
well-being of our province. 
 
(14:45) 
 
It was a disappointment for him to some extent, as he spoke to 
me about his life in politics, the direction that things were 
going. In ’86, he just felt he did not want to run again. And yet, 
he still wanted to serve the community. He went to Britain and 
served there in Canada House, where again my parents met Paul 
and had a very good visit with him over in Britain. 
 
He was very gracious always, as has been mentioned, 
welcomed people warmly when he encountered them. He just 
had that kind of bearing that people felt special or unique in his 
presence. 
 
But I want to say as well, as a new member of this legislature, 
having Paul come in and talk and work with me, and even 
though we represented different political parties, that he was 
very supportive. And I had the privilege of working with him 
on a couple of projects — economic development projects and 
other projects that would help build the community — in the 
last couple of years and found him always to be supportive, 
committed to this province, committed to the city, and to the 
community. 
 
So it is with sorrow that I recall his passing and I offer my 
condolences to Mrs. Rousseau and to their family. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
honour to stand here today to pay tribute to Paul Rousseau. As 
the member, current member for Regina South, I find that, 
although I did not know Mr. Rousseau personally, it’s always 
interesting to hear stories as you go out campaigning and 
talking to your constituents of former members and the contact 
that they had with the constituents. 
 
Mr. Rousseau was a dedicated constituency man. He had a great 
affection and respect for his constituents, for the issues that they 
were faced with, and served our city well. 
 
There are two ways, I guess, that we are remembered in this 
Assembly: certainly from the constituents that we have dealt 
with and the comments that they pass along to the successors 
who replace us in this Assembly; the second, of course, are the 
words that we speak in here that are recorded and transcribed 
for all time. 
 
What has not been talked about today, thus far in terms of Mr. 

Rousseau’s time in this Assembly, is that he was a man of great 
passion and strong conviction, and certainly a fierce partisan. I 
think that this is an individual who very much enjoyed political 
life, who enjoyed the debate in this Assembly, and I think had a 
very high respect and regard for this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of Regina South that 
I represent today, I certainly want to join with other members, 
with the Deputy Premier, and the Leader of the Opposition in 
expressing our condolences to his family on the unfortunate and 
early passing of Mr. Paul Rousseau. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to very briefly 
enter into the debate and extend my own condolences to Mr. 
Rousseau’s family, and to acknowledge the importance to many 
of us who were affected by his decisions while serving in this 
Chamber and in his capacity as minister responsible for SGI. 
 
It was at that time in my own career that I was involved, largely 
on a volunteer basis, in the world of traffic safety. And I was so 
pleased to hear reference in the motion today to the legacy of 
Mr. Rousseau in establishing the Lights on for Life program. I 
think it is the desire of all of us when we come to serve in these 
Chambers, through the course of our careers, to be involved in 
doing something that leaves our mark and contributes to a better 
world. 
 
And as one who was involved at that time not in the political 
toing and froing of the province, but in the matters of traffic 
safety, the decision to proceed with the Lights on for Life 
program was seen as, in some ways, revolutionary. Obviously 
as time has passed since then, what was a new idea under Mr. 
Rousseau’s leadership has become commonplace and in fact it 
would be I think seen as absurd if anyone were to suggest that 
we should ever go back to where we were before. 
 
And for someone to have been part of taking an action which 
literally — literally — saved lives, I think is among the highest 
of legacies that any elected member could have when they’re 
reflecting on a career. 
 
So I would simply want to say, from the perspective of the 
layperson involved in a world touched by Mr. Rousseau’s 
political leadership at that time, that his legacy lives on and is 
deeply appreciated. And I want to join with others here in 
extending sympathies to the family. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records its sorrow and regrets the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation for the public 
contributions he made to his community, his constituency, 
and to the province. 
 
William S. Howes, who passed away on July 12, 2000, 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1964 
until 1971, representing the constituency of 
Kerrobert-Kindersley for the Liberal Party. 
 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

 

Mr. Howes was born to William and Hazel May Howes on 
June 23, 1926 in Kindersley. One of two children, Mr. 
Howes was educated at elementary and high schools in 
Kindersley. He married his wife, Carrie Lou Naffziger, 
during the summer of 1947. Mr. Howes was predeceased 
by his parents and is survived by his wife, their two sons, 
and several grandchildren. 
 
In his private life Mr. Howes followed in his father’s 
footsteps and undertook a career as a municipal secretary. 
He augmented this career by becoming a farmer as well. 
Mr. Howes also inherited his father’s sense of duty towards 
the community. He was a member of his local Lions Club 
and the Royal Canadian Legion and a Mason. 
 
He entered into politics and was elected to this Assembly 
on April 22, 1964. The following year he assumed the 
position of Deputy Speaker and served in that capacity for 
two years. Mr. Howes went on to serve a second term when 
he was re-elected in 1967. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I would like to join with the Deputy Premier 
in expressing our regret at the passing of William S. Howes, 
who passed away on July 12, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Howes was a member for the 
Kerrobert-Kindersley constituency back in the mid- and 
late-1960s until 1971, representing a constituency that 
obviously benefited from his leadership, because during that 
period the area saw significant economic progress. It was an 
area of . . . it was a good farming area, an area that expanded in 
the oil and gas industry. And much of the expansion happened 
during the period that Mr. Howes represented that constituency. 
 
So I’m sure that his family is indeed proud of his 
accomplishments. All of those who serve in public life are to be 
commended, and certainly Mr. Howes is no exception. He has 
made his mark on the province of Saskatchewan in a very 
positive and constructive way. 
 
I didn’t have the privilege of knowing Mr. Howes, but I had the 
privilege of representing some of the same area that he 
represented only I did it at the federal level. And I respect the 
fact that his life was diversified. He was involved as a 
municipal secretary but then did the unusual thing of becoming 
a farmer as well. And that’s not the normal course of action for 
a Saskatchewan person to start in one career and then move into 
agriculture. And certainly that showed vision and confidence in 
the agriculture sector and I’m . . . and he is to be commended 
for that. 
 
Mr. Howes was a member in good standing of his community, 
involved in many organizations. And therefore, on behalf of the 
official opposition, we recognize the accomplishment of Mr. 
Howes and we too offer our sympathies and our sense of loss 
and bereavement to his family at his passing just recently. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and express 
its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to the province. 
 
Eldon Arthur Johnson, who passed away on December 
29, 2001, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1956 until 1964, representing the constituency of 
Kerrobert-Kindersley for the Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation. 
 
Mr. Johnson was born on October 18, 1919 in Kindersley. 
He spent his childhood on the family farm and attended the 
Beadle elementary school. Mr. Johnson went on to attend 
the McKenzie High School in Kindersley. Following his 
completion of Grade 12 in 1939, he attended the University 
of Saskatchewan, where he received a bachelor’s degree in 
agricultural engineering in 1943. On July 11, 1950 he 
married Charlotte Heinrichs. Together they had a daughter 
and a son. Mr. Johnson is survived by his wife, their two 
children, and three grandchildren. 
 
After graduating from the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Johnson enlisted with the Royal Canadian Electrical and 
Mechanical Engineers. During World War II, he served as 
a Lieutenant in Britain, Holland, Belgium, and Occupied 
Germany. 
 
In the post-war years, Mr. Johnson found his time divided 
between the farm at Beadle and the University of 
Saskatchewan where he taught agricultural engineering in 
the fall and winter. 
 
Mr. Johnson also devoted time to various groups in his 
community such as the Beadle Wheat Pool, Kindersley 
District Credit Union and Co-op, as well as the Kindersley 
branch of the Saskatchewan Farmers Union. 
 
However, much of Mr. Johnson’s life was defined by his 
passions for archaeology and playing the bagpipes. His 
love of archaeology would lead to his co-founding the 
Saskatchewan Archaeological Society and developing his 
skill as a flint-knapper. 
 
Mr. Johnson was first elected to this Legislative Assembly 
in 1956 and re-elected in 1960. He served as the Deputy 
Speaker from 1963 until 1964. Mr. Johnson also served as 
the Chair for the Public Accounts Enquiry Committee, and 
in that capacity helped to initiate substantial revision to the 
structure and role of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts. 
 
In addition to this, Mr. Johnson used the political arena to 
further the cause of preserving artefacts. He developed 
legislation to protect Saskatchewan heritage and established 
a department of Archaeology. 
 
In the wake of his political and farming careers, Mr. 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

Johnson returned to the University of Saskatchewan to 
further pursue his love for learning and archaeology. 
 
In 1983, he received a Bachelor of Anthropology. This was 
followed, in 1986 by a Masters in Anthropology and 
Archaeology and the creation of his own archaeological 
consulting practice called Lithic Laboratories. 
 
Mr. Johnson’s tireless work in the field of preservation was 
recognized in 1988, when he was awarded the Parks 
Heritage Award by the Government of Canada. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to stand on behalf of the official opposition in 
condolences for Eldon Arthur Johnson. 
 
Now Mr. Johnson served this House capably, Mr. Speaker, just 
as he served his community and his country. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Johnson served in the Royal Canadian Electrical and 
Mechanical Engineers in World War II serving in Britain, 
Holland, Belgium, and Occupied Germany. And, Mr. Speaker, 
having talked to my uncles about that war and the passages 
through Holland and Belgium, I know that that was not an easy 
experience, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we as politicians tend to think that service in 
this Assembly is perhaps the greatest feat that we can perform 
for the people of Saskatchewan. I think that Mr. Johnson 
performed a feat that was equal if not more so than that in his 
interest of archaeology, and protecting the archaeological sites 
across this province and bringing forward legislation that would 
establish the Department of Archaeology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I note that Mr. Johnson had a passion for archaeology and the 
bagpipes. Now I’m not exactly sure, Mr. Speaker, how you tie 
those two together. But having visited some of the 
archaeological sites around this province, I can certainly see 
how playing the bagpipes in those locations would perhaps be 
fitting, as the bagpipes need an open and expansive space, Mr. 
Speaker, to really appreciate the music that those wonderful 
instruments provide. And Mr. Johnson would have had that 
opportunity in visiting the many archaeological sites that we 
have across this province and to play the bagpipes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, we would 
like to include our condolences to the families of Mr. Johnson. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the opportunity to extend my condolences, as well, to the family 
of Eldon Johnson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Eldon was my MLA serving Kerrobert-Kindersley 
when I was rather young. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, my 
hometown is Alsask and our farm was 13 miles south of Alsask. 
And so as my parents were very involved in the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and the NDP and I 
had an opportunity, on many occasions, to attend political 

gatherings with my parents and with Eldon in attendance. 
 
And I had occasion to visit he and his family in his home in 
Kindersley. And I had a great learning from a very great man, I 
believe. 
 
One of my favourite memories — I believe it was about 1959 or 
1960 — I accompanied Eldon Johnson to my very first CCYM 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Youth Movement) convention in 
Saskatoon. And it was there that I had an opportunity to have a 
good conversation with Tommy Douglas and with many other 
very committed individuals. 
 
We were heading into the whole medicare issue at that time and 
it was very enlightening and very invigorating for me. I think it 
goes without saying that he had a very direct influence on my 
political development, and in many ways may even be 
responsible for my presence in this House today. 
 
He was a good friend and a great advocate for the people of this 
province. He served his constituents and all the province well, 
and he will be sadly missed by all who knew him. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there were many who knew him. As has been stated 
before, from archaeology to bagpipes, from an interest in the 
Public Accounts Committee and its reform, all the way to the 
Great Sand Hills of Saskatchewan, which again is a very current 
topic of discussion and was in his time and is today. 
 
He will be sadly missed but I’m grateful for his life. I’m 
grateful for the benefit of his experience and for his service to 
this province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 
to add my condolences to the Johnson family. I had a chance to 
know Mr. Johnson because his son, Kim, was one of my law 
partners. And Kim developed the interest in archaeology and in 
the anthropology of Saskatchewan, which he spent many hours 
telling me about the things that he had learned from his father. 
 
And I know that Kim’s love for Saskatchewan and for the 
history of Saskatchewan was something that he had learned 
from his father. So hearing the members today talk about Mr. 
Johnson reminded me of what legacy there is for Kim and 
Melanie and for the grandchildren of Mr. Johnson. So I wanted 
to add my comments as well. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Cannington, by leave of this Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Robert Kohaly, who passed away on October 24, 2001, 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1953 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

 

until 1956, representing the constituency of Souris-Estevan 
for the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Kohaly was born on July 9, 1921 in Fredericton, New 
Brunswick. In the course of his 80 years, he married 
Dorothy and they had two sons and two daughters. Mr. 
Kohaly is survived by his wife, their children, several 
grandchildren, and two great-grandchildren. 
 
With the start of World War II, Mr. Kohaly joined the 2nd 
Division of the South Saskatchewan Regiment. He served 
overseas and was wounded during the raid on the French 
town of Dieppe, in August of 1942. 
 
Mr. Kohaly took advantage of the overseas education 
service of the Royal Canadian Legion to pursue his 
education at the University of Saskatchewan. He completed 
his law degree in 1948 and settled in Estevan where he 
would practise law for the next four decades. 
 
Recognizing all that the Royal Canadian Legion had done 
for him, Mr. Kohaly joined the ranks in 1947. He would 
remain with them for many years. During his tenure he 
would serve as the head of the Royal Canadian Legion’s 
Saskatchewan Command in 1961 and later became the 
national president in 1968. 
 
Mr. Kohaly demonstrated the same sort of dedication to his 
political career. He was first elected to this Assembly by 
the by-election on October 28, 1953, becoming the first 
Conservative to be elected in the province since 1930. Mr. 
Kohaly firmly believed that his public and political service 
was a means to him to repay the people of Saskatchewan 
for the support he had received through veterans’ benefits. 
 
In recording its deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of family and the bereaved members. 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise to speak on the condolence motion for Robert 
Kohaly. 
 
Mr. Kohaly was born on July 9, 1921 in Fredericton, New 
Brunswick. He was a veteran of World War II, serving with the 
second unit of the South Saskatchewan Regiment, wounded at 
Dieppe. 
 
After the war Mr. Kohaly obtained his law degree and practised 
law in Estevan at the firm of Lynd Kohaly and Associates, a 
career that would span 40 years. During this period, Mr. Kohaly 
was elected as a Progressive Conservative member of the 
Saskatchewan legislature for the constituency of 
Souris-Estevan. He held this position from October 1953 until 
1956. 
 
Mr. Kohaly was also very involved with the Southeast 
Saskatchewan Surface Rights Association and the Royal 
Canadian Legion, branch No. 60 in Estevan. He was elected 
national president for the Royal Canadian Legion in 1968. 
 
Mr. Kohaly passed away on October 24, 2001. He is survived 
by his wife Dorothy, two sons, two daughters, grandchildren, 

and great-grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition and 
the constituents of Estevan, we thank Mr. Kohaly for his 
services to the people of this province and offer our deepest 
condolences to his family. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Cannington, by leave of this Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Harry David Link, who passed away on February 4, 2002, 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1964 
until 1967 representing the constituency of Saskatoon City 
for the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. 
 
Mr. Link was born on January 28, 1918 on a homestead in 
what is now Hodgeville. The youngest of eight children, 
Mr. Link was educated at Beechy. He met and married his 
wife Joan in the fall of 1944 in England. Mr. Link is 
predeceased by his wife Joan and survived by their four 
sons and eight grandchildren. 
 
In his private life, Mr. Link began his career in commercial 
sales before becoming a flight lieutenant gunner for the 
Royal Canadian Air Force during World War II. In this 
capacity, Mr. Link displayed a flair for leadership that 
would earn him the George Medal and a Mention in 
Dispatches for rescues where he rescued his crews from 
burning wreckages. This sense of leadership would 
continue to show throughout the following years. 

 
After returning to Saskatchewan, he embarked once again 
on a career in commercial sales. This eventually led to the 
purchase of Capital Real Estate in Saskatoon in 1954. From 
here, Mr. Link became the president of the Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Association. 

 
Mr. Link devoted his time and energy to other 
organizations as well. He served on the executive of the 
Saskatoon Co-Op, his local branch of the Canadian Legion, 
and the Canadian Institute of International Affairs and 
Canadian Travellers. 

 
Mr. Link became involved in the Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation during its early years. He 
served as the president of his local constituency association 
and as a member of the CCF provincial council. 
 
He became president of the Saskatchewan CCF-NDP in 
1961 during the transitionary stages that was marked by the 
resignation of T.C. Douglas, the assumption of party 
leadership of Woodrow Lloyd, and the new affiliation of 
the NDP. Mr. Link completed his service to the province 
with his election to this Assembly in the 1964 general 
election. 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, it’s my privilege to offer condolences to 
the family of Mr. Link on his passing. 
 
Mr. Link certainly showed his leadership abilities early. I note 
that Mr. Link was a flight lieutenant governor . . . gunner, 
excuse me, in the Royal Canadian Air Force during Second 
World War. Normally, Mr. Speaker, gunners were not officers. 
Therefore, obviously, Mr. Link demonstrated more than normal 
abilities and leadership in achieving that very distinct position, 
also earning two medals, Mr. Speaker, during the Second World 
War. 
 
I know that the leadership of the Canadian Armed Forces did 
not pass out medals willy-nilly to anyone, that you had to 
perform exceptionally, above and beyond the call of normal 
duty to receive any sort of recognition from the leadership of 
the Canadian Armed Forces. Even to be mentioned in 
dispatches, Mr. Speaker, was unusual, and to receive a medal 
was a most rare thing. So Mr. Link certainly demonstrated his 
courage and his leadership abilities in winning those awards, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And clearly, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Link had an interest both in the 
province and in politics. Serving at the local level with his party 
affiliation, serving provincially within the party, and finally 
serving as a member of this legislature, clearly demonstrate that 
Mr. Link had an interest in progress in Saskatchewan, that 
Saskatchewan should be able to realize its destiny and its future. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to offer 
condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Link at this time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my privilege this afternoon to get up and say a few 
words about a good friend of mine, Harry Link, who I shall 
miss very much. 
 
Harry Link served the people of this province in an exceptional 
way, Mr. Speaker. But before I talk about his record, which is 
an extremely distinguished one, as the Deputy Premier and the 
member from Cannington have already recognized, I want to 
speak about Mr. Link as a person and a friend. 
 
Harry Link, Mr. Speaker, was a loving father and he was a very 
loving husband. He was very devoted to his wife, Joan, who he 
married in 1944. And when he lost his wife Joan with cancer 
some years before his own passing, it was a great blow to him, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Harry Link always had a sparkle in his eye and he had a special 
warmth about him, Mr. Speaker, which I think led to him being 
trusted at a very deep level by all who knew him, and he had 
many, many friends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He was a man of enormous compassion and tremendous 
honesty. And he spoke his mind in a frank and forthright 

manner, which I think made him a very effective member of 
this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Link was a man who wanted to see change 
that would truly benefit the people of this province in a very 
substantial way, and he was impatient to see that change. It 
didn’t move quickly enough for him. And I think that was one 
of his special qualities which also made him a very, not only a 
very effective member of the community but a very effective 
member of this Assembly. 
 
And he was a private man who was exceptionally modest. He 
was always very slow to talk about his own accomplishments 
and anxious to recognize the accomplishments of others. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I look back with a lot of fondness on some of the 
times that I’ve spent with Mr. Link, particularly in the last 20 
years which is the time that I knew him best. 
 
As the Deputy Premier has noted, Mr. Link was born in 1918. 
And I want to quote from some comments that were made by a 
former premier of this Assembly, Allan Blakeney, who served 
with Mr. Link and in a political sense knew him better than I. 
 
And one of the things that Allan told me was that Harry Link 
knew M.J. Coldwell, the member of parliament for 
Rosetown-Biggar very well, even before he became federal 
leader of the CCF, and that Mr. Link sometimes drove M.J. 
Coldwell around his huge rural federal constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. So Harry Link’s involvement in the CCF started very 
early. 
 
I know that one of Mr. Link’s great passions was his belief in 
the need for a publicly funded medicare system in this province. 
He was very committed to the principle behind publicly funded 
hospitalization and publicly funded medicare. And his belief in 
this grew out of his own personal experience and the experience 
of his own family and others that he knew in the community, 
that he saw suffering as a result of the absence of a publicly 
funded medicare system when he first became involved in 
politics. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Link had the misfortune as a teenager 
to urgently need medical care himself and be refused that 
medical care by a physician because he was unable to pay for it. 
Fortunately another medical practitioner provided the medical 
help that he needed at no cost. 
 
And I think Mr. Link never forgot this experience, Mr. Speaker, 
and it made him deeply, deeply committed to the notion that a 
publicly funded medical care system should be established in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from some of the comments 
that former premier Allan Blakeney made at the funeral service 
for Mr. Link, which I had the privilege to attend. And Mr. 
Blakeney says, and I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I knew him best as a candidate for election and as a 
member for the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 
And if I might just stop for a minute, Mr. Speaker, I should say 
that Mr. Link, as our Deputy Premier has mentioned, was 
elected as president of the CCF in this province in 1961. So of 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

 

course Mr. Link was . . . He served on the provincial executive 
for the CCF and he then became its president at a very pivotal 
time. 
 
This was a key transition time as the New Democratic Party 
was being formed in Canada, and it was also of course a pivotal 
moment in terms of the establishment of medicare in this 
province. So Mr. Link came into this leadership position at a 
time of great importance not only for the CCF and NDP, but for 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because of course the 
years to follow would be the years of the great medicare debate 
and the establishment of medicare in this province. 
 
And then in 1964 Mr. Link ran for election, and this is what Mr. 
Blakeney had to say about him. And I’m quoting now, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Harry stood for nomination, was nominated and then 
elected as one of the members for Saskatoon City in the 
provincial election of 1964. While Harry was elected, as 
were three of his fellow CCFers in Saskatoon, the Lloyd 
government was defeated. (And Mr. Blakeney goes on to 
say) I had been re-elected in Regina, and so Harry and I sat 
together in opposition. 
 
Harry was in some respects not cut out to be a 
garden-variety politician. Changing society is a slow 
process. Many of us share a vision of a better society. We 
know that the progress will be slow. We know that the 
steps forward will be small and that sometimes there will 
be steps backward. We are disappointed and impatient but 
we accept that people change their mind slowly, so that 
progress will be slow. 
 
Harry was sometimes less accepting of the pace of change 
(says Mr. Blakeney). (On occasion) . . . patience was not 
his strongest suit. He tended to speak his mind and . . . 
speak . . . (it) in a forthright way . . . 
 

And Mr. Blakeney goes on to say: 
 

I remember one memorable incident. The Governor of 
Montana had come to visit the new Premier, Ross Thatcher. 
The Governor had come complete with an entourage of 
large cars, bodyguards in uniform and with sidearms (the 
full nine yards). The Governor and the new Premier talked. 
Harry was less than impressed and made some comments 
(about the Governor) which some regarded as disparaging. 
Mr. Thatcher’s government reacted by introducing a 
motion to censure the Member for Saskatoon on the 
grounds that he was undermining relations between Canada 
and the United States. 
 

Mr. Blakeney goes on to say: 
 

His colleagues in the Opposition reacted with vigour. We 
mounted a spirited attack on the government move. (We 
based our attack) on our belief that members should be free 
to express their views in the legislature (without curbing 
their tongue because some people may be sensitive). We 
quoted Voltaire: “I may disagree (with what you say), but I 
will defend to the death your right to say it.” And we went 
on to say that if there was ever a member who had sat in 

. . . (this Assembly) who had earned the right to express his 
views in a democratic legislature (in a forthright way) it 
was the Member for Saskatoon, (Mr. Link). The only 
member in the history of our Legislature up to . . . (that 
time) and up to now who had, in the course of serving his 
country in wartime, been awarded the . . . George Medal. 

 
Mr. Blakeney goes on to say: 
 

The (Thatcher) government was not aware of 
(Flight-Lieutenant) . . . (Harry Link’s) war record. Harry 
was so modest . . . he simply would not permit his workers 
during (the) election campaign, to talk about his war 
record. Once the facts about . . . (Mr. Link) came out the 
government reconsidered their position. They adjourned the 
debate and the next day they withdrew the motion. 
 
I have rarely seen a more rapid 180 degree turn in our 
legislature. 
 
By the time of the election of 1967, (Mr. Blakeney says) 
constituency boundaries had been (had been) redrawn. 
Harry decided to run in Rosetown, where he was narrowly 
defeated. 

 
And Mr. Blakeney goes on to say: 
 

I was always sorry that Harry did not have the opportunity 
to serve with us in Government (after 1971). He would 
have been a restless colleague, always wanting us to do 
more and more quickly. But the pace of change between 
1971 and 1975 would . . . (at least) have partly met his 
standards. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think those words from our former premier 
give us all in this Assembly, and members of the public who are 
listening, some sense of the man who was Harry Link. This is a 
man, Mr. Speaker, who as Premier Blakeney noted at his 
funeral took his full part in the world’s work and in the world’s 
struggles and served his constituents in an exceptional manner, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a great privilege for me to know Harry 
Link. And whenever I had the privilege of visiting with him, of 
course, we always, at one time or another, Mr. Speaker, during 
the visits would talk about politics. And the conversation would 
inevitably turn to medicare and what more we could do as a 
province to enhance medicare and the need for me and for other 
members of the Assembly to press hard to make sure that 
medicare is protected and enhanced. And Mr. Link devoted an 
enormous effort on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to 
helping make medicare a reality in this province, as of course 
did our former premier, Allan Blakeney, who served as Health 
minister just prior to Harry Link’s election to this Assembly and 
then served with him in opposition. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this point, I want to express on behalf of my 
own constituents of Saskatoon Greystone and on behalf of 
myself personally, sincere sympathies to the Link family. Harry 
Link was a very wonderful person who I will miss a great deal 
and who I think will be missed by all who knew him. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join in my 
. . . with my colleagues in expressing sincere condolences and 
sympathy to the Link family on the passing of their father, 
Harry Link. 
 
Like the member from Greystone, I came to know Harry 
through my work as a member of the NDP on a constituency 
basis and then as an elected member of the NDP. What I will 
most about Harry is driving up to his Elliott Street home, 
particularly in the summertime, and seeing him on the front step 
sitting enjoying the weather with his cup of coffee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last time I had the opportunity to do that I was 
the Minister of Health for the province of Saskatchewan, and I 
had received a delegation of Harry’s friends who were worried 
about Harry’s health and thought that it was now time for Harry 
to go to the Saskatoon Veterans’ Home as a long-term care 
patient. And they did not understand why, as Minister of Health 
to the province, that I couldn’t use my position to make sure 
that Harry got into the nursing home. 
 
And I have to tell you that I had a delegation of his friends that 
represented all political perspectives in the province and they 
thought that Harry, who had been a member of the RAF (Royal 
Air Force), that had been a rear gunner, who had been awarded 
the George Medal for assisting members of his crew who were 
trapped in a blazing wreckage, that he needed above all else to 
go to the Saskatoon Veterans’ Home because he had earned the 
right to be there. 
 
And a lot of these friends, Mr. Speaker, were older people. And 
as you know, in the province of Saskatchewan we have this 
assessment process that people need to go through. Well I was 
pleased when Harry went through the assessment process and 
was in a state where he needed to go to the nursing home, and 
in fact that’s where Harry spent the last bit of time of his life. 
 
As the member from Greystone said, Harry was a bit of an 
impatient person and he wanted progress to be made and made 
quickly. And he wasn’t at all afraid to share his opinions and he 
did share his opinions with those of us who he thought could 
make a difference in the lives of the citizens in our province. 
 
I think Harry was extremely pleased that his four sons were 
contributing members of Saskatchewan. And I think he was 
particularly pleased that his son, Dale Link, who was a teacher 
up until his recent retirement in Melfort, was the Chair of the 
North Central Health District, contributing another generation’s 
input into health care in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that when Harry’s wife, 
Joan, passed away, Harry really did lose a great person in his 
life and it created a huge sadness for him. At his funeral, which 
I also attended, there was lots of references to his wife and how 
Harry missed her and how Harry would now be able to be with 
her. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to just say something about 
Harry’s friends. Oftentimes in political life we have . . . we 
come to know people in politics and we have political friends. 
Well Harry had lifelong friends. Friends that he knew from his 
days in the Beechy area, the Rosetown area, friends that he 
knew in real estate, friends that he knew through farming, 

friends who he knew through the CCF, friends who he got to 
know through other political parties. And his friends were his 
inspiration and his entertainment, and he had very, very good 
friends who loved him very much. 
 
So to his family and to his friends, I want to say how sorry I am 
that Harry’s passed away, but Harry made a huge contribution 
to this province through his work in real estate, through his 
work in the CCF and later the NDP, and through his work as a 
member of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Cannington, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Martin Pederson, who passed away on September 1, 
2001, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1964 until 1967 representing the constituency of Arm River 
for the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Pederson was born on the family farm of Hawarden on 
December 5, 1921. He received his schooling in Sunrise, 
Avonlea, and Hawarden schools. While serving overseas, 
he met and married Kathleen (Kay) Dawson of Lancaster, 
England on November 3, 1943. Together they had a 
daughter and a son. Mr. Pederson is survived by his wife, 
their children, six grandchildren, and three 
great-grandchildren. 
 
Shortly after graduating from high school, Mr. Pederson 
joined the Royal Canadian Air Force in 1941. He received 
his pilot wings and the rank of Flying Officer, and was 
posted in Britain in 1942. Once there, he was assigned to 
the Royal Air Force 137 Typhoon Squadron with whom he 
would complete 92 operational missions from bases in 
France, Belgium, and Holland. 
 
Mr. Pederson returned to Canada in 1945 and embarked on 
a variety of careers. He first took up farming near his 
birthplace of Hawarden. Later he owned and operated a 
trucking business and worked for the Bank of Montreal. 
And in 1968, he established his own insurance business, 
Pederson Insurance in Saskatoon, after selling real estate 
and insurance for Koyl Agencies. 
 
In 1969 he added the Manpower and Temporary Services 
franchises to his insurance business. Mr. Pederson rounded 
out his career by acting as the chairman of the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board from 1983 until 1987. 
 
Throughout his life Mr. Pederson maintained an interest in 
politics. He had a lengthy affiliation with the Progressive 
Conservative Party and served in a variety of capacities at 
the local, provincial, and national levels. His involvement 
began with the position of president of the Saskatchewan 
Young Conservatives in 1950. Later he served as the 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

 

vice-president of the National Young Conservative 
Association and as president of the Saskatoon Progressive 
Conservative Association. 
 
In October of 1958, Mr. Pederson was elected Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative Party and he 
remained in that role for 10 years. A defining moment 
arose in April of 1964 when he was elected to this 
Assembly. 
 
In recording our own deep sense of loss and bereavement 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition and as member for Arm River I offer my 
sympathy and condolences to the family. I’d give a few words 
about the passing of a great Saskatchewan man who served as 
an MLA in my constituency of Arm River from ’64 to ’67. 
 
Mr. Pederson was active in politics for many years, including 
service as leader of the provincial Tories from ’58 . . . 1958 to 
1968 — plus the numerous other ones that the previous member 
had mentioned — basically single-handedly working the 
Progressive Conservative Party for many, many years and 
giving it of great service. 
 
Being leader of that party for 10 years, a lot of people had said 
that he single-handedly kept that party going through some very 
difficult times and should be . . . give a lot of his time and a lot 
of his devotion to the party. 
 
The former MLA was born on a farm near Hawarden not very 
far — I’d say 20, 30 miles — from our present farm. And I also 
notice that he was born on the same day I was, although not the 
same year. 
 
He was enlisted with the Royal Canadian Air Force shortly after 
he graduated from grade 12. And he was posted to Great Britain 
in 1942 and he served as a member of the Royal Air Force 
Typhoon Squadron where he flew 92 combat missions from the 
bases in England and France, Belgium and Holland. There were 
many instances where only good luck brought him home intact. 
 
In a 1995 interview Mr. Pederson said: 
 

One time I had finished my mission and one of the ground 
crew came over and told me there were 319 holes in my 
machine. 

 
His only comment was that, well that’s a bullet going in one 
side and coming out the other. But clearly, this man was a great 
Canadian veteran and patriot. 
 
Upon his return to Canada, Mr. Pederson farmed and operated a 
trucking company, as well as selling real estate and insurance. 
All the while he was active in politics. 
 
Indeed, he also ran federally for the Tories in ’58. This 
remarkable business person almost single-handedly — I’ve 
mentioned before — kept the Progressive Conservative Party 
alive during the 1960s. 
 

When he was elected MLA for Arm River in ’64, he was the 
only PC to win a seat in Saskatchewan since 1929. Mr. 
Pederson formed a one-man caucus in opposition to the Liberal 
government. He showed a tremendous amount of grit and was a 
fiery voice in his opposition to government policy. 
 
And I can imagine being here, with the support I’ve had with 
many members, coming in here and being only one on the 
opposition. That takes, I would say, a great lot of courage and 
great fortitude on his part trying to keep the Liberals and the 
party that was in power at that time in check, and plus still 
working in his constituency. He did a great service to the 
province and to his constituency at the time. 
 
Hugh Arscott, a Saskatchewan insurance broker and political 
friend of Mr. Pederson, remembered him as a hardworking 
humorous man who was always willing to share his views with 
people. As Mr. Pederson I think once said if . . . one time, if we 
weren’t protected by the game laws, we wouldn’t have 
survived. 
 
Former federal cabinet minister, Bill McKnight, said of Mr. 
Pederson: 
 

He carried the banner. He hung in there when the party had 
difficulties. 

 
Mr. Martin Pederson is survived by his wife, Kay, two children, 
six grandchildren, two brothers, and four sisters. And I would 
ask all members of this House to join me in offering tribute to 
this great man. 
 
So on behalf of Her Majesty’s Official Opposition and Arm 
River, I would offer my sympathy and condolences to the 
families of Mr. Martin Pederson. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
James Ripley, who passed away on February 1, 2002, was 
a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1952 until 
1956, representing the constituency of Athabasca for the 
Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Ripley was born on December 28, 1913 in Redcliffe, 
Alberta. He later moved with his family to Manitoba where 
his family settled first in Brandon and then to Winnipeg. 
Mr. Ripley attended elementary and secondary school there 
and then continued his studies at the University of 
Manitoba. On October 16, 1948 he married Eve Kozier. 
Mr. Ripley was predeceased by his wife Eve, and is 
survived by their two daughters. 
 
When World War II broke out, Mr. Ripley contributed to 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

the war efforts by working as an aircraft engineer in an 
aircraft maintenance plant repairing and overhauling 
engines. Later in 1945, he joined the army but did not see 
service overseas. After the war he returned to his studies 
but found that his interests had turned to the wilds of the 
North. 
 
He trained to become a commercial pilot and flew for 
Central Northern Airways out of Flin Flon. As time went 
on he developed a reputation as one of the province’s best 
bush pilots. He was a man who wore many hats: he worked 
as a prospector, a contractor, a fur trader, and as a general 
merchant. He also tried his hand in mink ranching and 
commercial fishing. In the 1950’s he purchased his own fur 
trading post in Sandy Bay and operated it until he retired in 
Flin Flon in 1975. 
 
Faced with the isolation that is often faced in living in the 
North, community became even more important to Mr. 
Ripley. He devoted his time to a variety of community 
organizations such as the Benevolent and Protective Order 
of Elks and the Canadian Legion. He was often called upon 
to fly the sick and injured to Flin Flon for medical 
treatment. And as a member of the Sandy Bay council in 
1968, he fought for a winter road to be constructed from 
Pelican Narrows to Sandy Bay. 
 
Mr. Ripley’s love for the North was translated into his 
political career in 1952. In 1951 the family had moved to 
Island Falls in northern Saskatchewan. The following year 
he was elected in a general election to represent the 
Athabasca region that had become his home. During his 
time in the Assembly he advocated for the development of 
northern natural resources. 
 
In recording its deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my privilege to speak to the condolence motion on Mr. 
James Ripley on behalf of the Official Opposition. 
 
Mr. Ripley obviously made an impact wherever he went, Mr. 
Speaker. He arrives at Island Falls and one year later is elected 
to this Assembly as the MLA for the Athabasca area after only 
having been in the community for one year. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, one has to assume that Mr. Ripley had a good rapport 
with people of the area that he was seeking to represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people may look in amazement at the fact 
that Mr. Ripley, even as late as 1945, wanted to join the army 
when he was in a career that would have declared him as 
essential to the war effort as an aircraft engineer in maintaining 
and building engines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that was not unusual for the time, Mr. Speaker. People at 
that time believed that it was their duty, that they served King 
and country in defence of their beliefs and their ideals. So while 
we would look at it, perhaps as somewhat unusual, at that day 
and time, Mr. Speaker, indeed it was a general consensus that it 

was everyone’s duty to do their maximum in support of the war 
effort. 
 
Mr. Ripley lived a life, Mr. Speaker, that I think has been 
portrayed many times in a rare romanticized nature dealing with 
the Canadian North. When you look at Mr. Ripley’s history, 
Mr. Speaker, as a bush pilot, as a prospector, as a fur trader and 
trapper, Mr. Speaker, he was even an ad hoc air ambulance, 
flying people from the North to Flin Flon for medical services, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think he lived and portrayed a time that we look back on, Mr. 
Speaker, with a sense of romance to the building of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I think his accomplishments, both 
in the Assembly and throughout his whole life, is something 
that his family indeed, Mr. Speaker, can be very proud of. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add our words and our 
condolences to the families of Mr. James Ripley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is indeed my honour to rise today and speak to the condolence 
motion of Mr. James Ripley. 
 
As a member for Athabasca it gives me extreme pleasure to 
stand here today and to express sympathy to the family, and to 
thank his family and his friends and his community for his fine 
service to the constituency of Athabasca. 
 
And although I did not know Mr. Ripley, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s very important to talk about some of the things that he 
certainly stood for. And to basically tell the family that his 
North is sincerely thankful for his service, that his North is a 
stronger and better North because of his work and his ethics, 
and certainly his North is a stronger place for many young 
people to be at. 
 
And the whole issue of some of the resource industry 
development that he often spoke about in some of his history 
talks about the need to have northern people involved with 
some of the northern resource industry and the opportunities 
associated with that industry. 
 
And I notice, Mr. Speaker, that he was involved with piloting. 
He was also involved in trapping, he was involved as a 
commercial fisherman, and these industries are very near and 
dear to the hearts of many northern people. 
 
And as a tribute to him I want to express of course my 
sympathy to the family, but to also point out to them that some 
of his earlier visions, some of his earlier work is certainly 
prevalent in the North today. As we see that many northern 
communities are actively involved with forestry, many northern 
communities have a very solid commercial fishing industry. 
The trapping industry itself is certainly strengthening as we 
speak. 
 
So there’s no question that Mr. Ripley seen that this was a very 
important resource and industry for the northern people. And 
today we see that his vision, his work is certainly paying off, 
albeit decades later. It is still something that we are proceeding 
to work, and certainly it’s something that we should admire and 
thank him for. 



May 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

 

I want to point out as well to the family that during this era 
there’s many great men that served northern Saskatchewan. 
And as one particular time frame in the history of Athabasca 
constituency, I can tell you that the travel of eight hours from 
my home to here is probably not much of a challenge when we 
look at some of the challenge that Mr. Ripley had to face to 
represent Athabasca. 
 
And I believe Athabasca at that time was a larger constituency, 
and certainly flying in by aircraft and then driving the rest of 
the way by vehicle was something that was probably not 
uncommon to Mr. Ripley. 
 
I would point out that there are many famous names, in the 
North, of bush pilots and people that have plied their trade in a 
great variety of fields, like Mr. Ripley. And some of the names 
we often hear that would be associated with Mr. Ripley is some 
of the names like Greening, Midget, Clark, Waite, Morris, 
Gran, and the list goes on of some of the people that had that 
adventurous spirit in the North in those days; become bush 
pilots, become merchants, become commercial fishermen, and 
so on and so forth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also very important that we point 
out that in those days of being a bush pilot, that they didn’t have 
a lot of luxury that the pilots have today. Today of course 
there’s very little chances taken in the air. But in those days, to 
be a bush pilot, you often had to hazard a lot of weather 
conditions that were probably not the best for flying. 
 
And I noticed in some of his history here that he flew many 
patients and perhaps saved many lives of flying people into Flin 
Flon for medical or emergency services. And in those days, Mr. 
Speaker, you didn’t have the option. You had to sometimes fly 
off in some very tough weather. 
 
And the reason why I know this, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 
earlier, is I did not know Mr. Ripley but my father was a bush 
pilot. And he often spoke of some of the people that were 
involved in this particular trade and that they had to be hardy 
men, otherwise they would not make it in this business. 
 
And certainly you see that he not only represented a 
constituency, Mr. Ripley did, but he also was a bush pilot and a 
commercial fisherman and a merchant and the list goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I also join with my colleagues in the 
Assembly here, as the member for Athabasca, to stand here 
today and offer our sincere sympathy to the family. And again, 
to thank the family and friends of Mr. Ripley for his good 
service, his long-lasting service to his North. It is well done, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell him today, if I would, through his family, that his 
work has been very consistent, it has been very hard work, has 
been very visionary work, and today it is paying off. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move . . . I ask leave of the 
House to move a motion of transmittal. 

Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memories of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Biggar-Rosetown 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, to move a motion of urgent 
and pressing necessity under Rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader is requesting 
leave to move a motion. I would ask the member to, at this 
time, give a brief explanation of the motion. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Disclosure of Personal and Confidential Information 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I will give a 
brief explanation. 
 
Yesterday, as everyone is aware, it came to light that the 
security and safety of Saskatchewan people were put at risk 
when confidential and personal information may have been 
released by public servants. 
 
As well, there is concern that the same thing may have been 
happening with the police services in Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
That being said and that coming to light, Mr. Speaker, and the 
fact that the public security and safety is at risk, I would like to 
move a motion, seconded by the hon. member from Rosthern. 
And that motion reads: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan orders the 
Privacy Commissioner of Saskatchewan to conduct a full 
and complete investigation into circumstances relating to 
the possible release of personal information by 
Saskatchewan public servants and/or Crown employees. 
 
That the Assembly orders the Privacy Commissioner to 
review all departments, agencies, Crowns, and other 
government organizations to evaluate safeguards that are in 
place to protect the privacy of Saskatchewan residents; and, 
that the Privacy Commissioner table with the legislature 
complete report into these issues. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner is responsible to the 
legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan and it is under . . . 
it is for that reason under Rule 46 that I move this urging and 
pressing motion. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2002 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with wishes for a relaxing 
and enjoyable weekend for all the members back home and 
with their families and friends, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to an order of this Assembly, this 
House stands adjourned until Wednesday, May 22 at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 15:59. 
 


