















































Hansard: March 22, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 189 
 March 22, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the province’s 
tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the cities of 
Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Sturgis, Yorkton, Melville, and Saltcoats. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. This petition, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of lives and to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in the area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in Indian Head, 
Vibank, Davin, and Odessa area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
concerned residents from my hometown of Swift Current. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re concerned about tobacco control legislation. 
And the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today do come from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been received and are hereby read: 
 

A petition concerning implementation of 34 
recommendations of the final report of the Special 
Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children Through the Sex Trade; 
 
A petition concerning amendments to tobacco legislation; 
 
A petition concerning repairs to Highway 35; 
 
A petition concerning guidelines for deductibles on 
vehicles damaged as a result of attempted car thefts; 
 
A petition concerning the resolutions in the Lake of the 
Prairies situation; and finally 
 
A petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 339. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 12 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: how many square feet does 
SPMC lease at 1084 Central Avenue in Prince Albert on 
behalf of Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management; and further to that, what does SPMC pay for 
this lease on a square foot basis? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning as 
seated in your gallery are two gentlemen from Saskatoon: Mr. 
Craig Docksteader of the Prairie Centre Policy Institute, and 
also Mr. Ken Dillen who was a former MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from the province of Manitoba. 
 
I’d ask all members to kindly join me in welcoming them this 
morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . much, Mr. Speaker. I want to draw 
your attention to a group of men and women sitting in your 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

gallery. They are here to meet with me this afternoon regarding 
the Rosemount Grazing Co-op. And present here today is Mr. 
Ray Hawkins who’s the president of the co-op. He farms and 
ranches in the Landis area. And next to him is Don and Bonnie 
Suchan who are farmers and ranchers in Leipzig area. And Wes 
Garrett who is a farmer and rancher from the Landis area. 
 
So I want to ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 
today in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I wonder if I could introduce to you and to all the members . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I can, thank you, three people sitting 
in the gallery here, friends and hard workers for First Nations 
people in this province: Rod Gopher from Saulteaux First 
Nation, Patrina Friedle who’s from the Association of 
Aboriginal Coordinator Results Program 2002 from Cowessess 
First Nation, and Ken Finlayson is with them too. 
 
Please join me in welcoming them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’d take a few minutes to 
also join my colleague from the Battleford area to welcome Mr. 
Ken Dillen. Ken and I have known each other for many years 
and I remember the conversations we had at JLM, and just on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan I want to welcome 
Ken to the Assembly today. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs in welcoming our First 
Nations friends to the Assembly today. We do hope that you 
enjoy the proceedings and enjoy your time in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
myself and the member from Regina South I would like to 
welcome two young men who are here to observe our session. 
They are both grade 12 students at Campbell Collegiate in 
Regina South: Matthew Paslowski and Colin Black, and they 
are both considering taking political science at university so we 
wish them the best there. So I would ask others to join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
And I also would like to join my colleague, the Minister of 
Justice, in welcoming Ken Finlayson who I’ve known since I 
was a young man. We used to be in the same 4-H light horse 
club together. So welcome to him as well. 
 
So if you’d join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

World Water Day 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 
Assembly to bring to members’ attention the importance of this 
day, which is World Water Day. The United Nations General 
Assembly adopted a resolution in 1993 declaring March 22 be 
proclaimed World Day for Water, a day that brings to the 
attention of government and individuals world-wide the 
importance of safe drinking water supplies. 
 
The theme this year, Mr. Speaker, is water development. We all 
recognize the importance of developing new freshwater 
supplies in places less fortunate than Canada. But we must also 
remain committed to developing new freshwater resources right 
here in Saskatchewan. We must focus even more on funding 
critical water testing and water infrastructure and improvement 
and replacement. 
 
We must take the steps necessary to conserve our freshwater 
resources, to ensure them in the future for the benefit of the 
people who have placed their trust in safe water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hoped by members on this side of the House 
that by declaring today World Water Day we see the provincial 
government take water safety of water infrastructure in towns 
and villages more serious. 
 
And considering the drought this year . . . or the past year, Mr. 
Speaker, it is also hoped that they use the money for such 
serious things instead of wasting the money on shaky schemes 
like dot-coms in Atlanta, Georgia. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Launch of Saskatchewan Writer’s Book 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we 
were visited by our Poet Laureate and other Saskatchewan 
poets. Today I’d like to bring to the attention of the Assembly a 
young author born and raised in my constituency and currently 
teaching at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
 
Tuesday night at the Book and Briar Patch here in Regina, 
Warren Cariou gave a talk and reading from his new book Lake 
of the Prairies, published by Doubleday Canada. Warren and 
the poets mentioned by the Minister of Health yesterday are 
testament to the depth and the variety of the arts in 
Saskatchewan. We are better and richer for it. 
 
In fact, during his talk, Warren gave credit both to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to their institutions like the Arts Board which 
have nurtured his now realized dream of becoming a writer. 
 
Lake of the Prairies is a funny, moving and very personal 
memoir of his childhood, and the eternal children’s question: 
where do I come from? Warren comes from the town of 
Meadow Lake, and more significantly, he comes from the 
complex social and cultural mix that is Meadow Lake and 
practically every other town in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some very respected Canadians have praised Lake 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

 

of the Prairies. I recommend all members to do both themselves 
and Saskatchewan literature a favour by buying and reading this 
fine book and to learn more about this Meadow Lake writer. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Local Soldier 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Lt. Derek Prohar was deployed to Afghanistan on 
Tuesday, February 5, 2002 from the Edmonton garrison as part 
of the 3rd Battalion, Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry 
Battle Troup, Operation APOLLO. 
 
Derek was born and raised in Avonlea and after graduating 
from Athol Murray College of Notre Dame in 1994, he attended 
McGill University in Montreal for four years. Upon graduation 
he applied to the Canadian Armed Forces and was accepted 
September, 1999. 
 
I’m sure that all members will join me in wishing Derek all 
possible success in carrying out the duties of Operation 
APOLLO and to thank him for his courageous and selfless 
service to his country, his province and his community, and to 
pray for his safety until he gets back home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Flicks Film Festival 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well it’s that season again. Film festivals are 
gearing up in our province. The first one, and I would argue the 
best, begins today at the Broadway Theatre, right in the heart of 
my constituency, Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Just a quick comment, Mr. Speaker. The Broadway Theatre is 
one of the last independent theatres anywhere, and it’s a tribute 
to our community that it survives and prospers in this era of 
chains and franchises. 
 
All weekend the Broadway will host the seventh annual “Flicks: 
Saskatchewan International Film Festival for Young People.” 
Flicks will present three days of the best children’s cinema, 
featuring 16 films from eight countries. This is a film festival. 
It’s also a celebration of multiculturalism and international 
creativity. It is only appropriate that this festival be part of the 
attractions in Canada’s very best small city. 
 
There will be films for kids and parents, workshops for 
teachers, students, and budding filmmakers, on film animation, 
screen writing, and other aspects of filmmaking. 
 
I’m happy to say that one of the films to be shown, The 
Impossible Elephant, was filmed in Saskatoon. Another, 
Christmas at Wapos Bay, is about family life on a trapline in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m also pleased that our very own Governor-General award 
winner, Guy Vanderhaeghe, will be a special guest for a teen 
screen series. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if I read the program right, the films are all free at 
all of our Saskatoon public libraries, and along Broadway 
Avenue. Well worth the price of admission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of the Sherry Anderson Curling Team 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
am bringing further recognition to a sports team that continues 
to keep Saskatchewan women at the forefront in national, and at 
times, international competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that team is led by a long-time family friend, 
Sherry Anderson from Delisle. Sherry’s curling expertise began 
in my home community of Northside, Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and grew incredibly as her love of the game increased. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, Sherry Anderson and her team of Kim 
Hodson, Sandra Mulroney, and Donna Gignac are without a 
doubt in the handful of women’s curling teams that are amongst 
the best in the world. 
 
An aside to this, Mr. Speaker. Donna Gignac is from my 
hometown of Paddockwood, Saskatchewan. Thus two young 
ladies who have climbed the ladder to international curling 
recognition are long-time acquaintances of mine. 
 
It appears that Sherry Anderson may have had a hard-luck 
season, first losing to Kelly Law in the Canadian Olympic 
trials, and then losing to Colleen Jones in the Scott Tournament 
of Heart finals. There is a silver lining to all of this though, Mr. 
Speaker. In the Saskatchewan curling women’s scene, Sherry 
Anderson is recognized as one of the elite women curlers in the 
world. 
 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, to succeed locally, regionally, provincially, 
or nationally, the road to the top is cluttered with the Sherry 
Anderson foursome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you and all members of our Assembly 
join me in congratulating Sherry Anderson, Kim Hodson, 
Sandra Mulroney, and Dawn Gignac for all the thrills they have 
provided us during the curling season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Phosphate Distribution Centre Announced 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to new 
developments occurring in Belle Plain. CWS Logistics Ltd., a 
Regina-based logistics company has unveiled a plan to build a 
new $1.5 million phosphate distribution centre at IMC Global 
Solutions potash mine in Belle Plaine, effective immediately. 
 
CWS and IMC Global have entered into a 20-year distribution 
agreement where CWS will be responsible for the distribution 
logistics out of the new centre. IMC will be supplying annually 
approximately $24 million of phosphate to be distributed in the 
prairie region. 
 
This project represents an investment in the future of 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

Saskatchewan agriculture. Mark Bonner of IMC Global said, 
and I quote, “We’re two Saskatchewan companies investing in 
Saskatchewan, investing in agriculture, and using Saskatchewan 
funds.” 
 
This project demonstrates that companies are willing to invest 
in our province and achieve great successes with the benefits 
extending to the community. In addition to the financial 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, this agreement will also create 15 
new jobs for Saskatchewan people, with three or four being 
employed at the site and the remainder being based in Regina. 
 
I applaud this investment in agriculture and the Saskatchewan 
economy and hope, Mr. Speaker, that we all recognize this 
endorsement of our agricultural sector. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Water Day 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
World Water Day. Last year the minister celebrated World 
Water Day by telling us of the government’s commitment to 
safe drinking water. Canada, with 20 per cent of the world’s 
fresh water, should be the last country in the world to have a 
problem with water. 
 
However, this year there are communities all across our 
province facing crisis. The government has informed us that 
they have no money for safe water beyond the regular 
infrastructure program. And that those communities having to 
haul water can expect nothing more than sympathy and friendly 
advice from their government. 
 
When the Premier called the North Battleford water inquiry, he 
said I wasn’t much in favour of it. He was right. The inquiry has 
cost millions of dollars and the government says that it has 
millions to study the problem, but none to fix it. Mr. Speaker, 
today is also the annual spring bull sale in North Battleford. I 
ask, what can we expect: safe water or more bull? 
 

New Cultural Centre in Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news 
from Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw, famous for being the home of the 
Snow Birds, the spa, Al Capone’s tunnels, the birthplace of the 
Premier, can now add cultural mecca to its claim to fame. 
 
On Wednesday, an important public event took place in Moose 
Jaw as we launched the community fundraising campaign for 
the Moose Jaw Cultural Centre. 
 
The project has had $1,750,000 committed from the provincial 
government, which along with the federal, municipal and local 
donors have committed $6.8 million towards the $7.4 million 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have absolutely no doubt that the people and 
local businesses of Moose Jaw and the surrounding area will 
rise to the occasion and raise the remaining $684,000 that will 
finish the project. As members know, the people of Moose Jaw 
feel good about their city, they are proud to be Moose Javians, 
and they are confident about the city’s future. 

The new centre will be a first-class facility for the performing 
and visual arts. It will be a venue for the city’s people to come 
for concerts, live theatre, and art exhibitions. Students from 
over 30 schools in Moose Jaw and area will bring youthful 
enthusiasm to the facility. In addition, it’ll bring . . . it’ll boost 
the city’s already growing and dynamic downtown. 
 
This is an exciting project for the people of Moose Jaw. The 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow and I wish James Tessier, 
Chair of the public giving campaign, and the volunteers 
involved in the project all the best and look forward to opening 
the centre in 2003, the centennial year for the city of Moose 
Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Possible Effects of Budget on Health Care Costs 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has received some further information 
about next week’s budget. We understand the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government is planning to increase the 
monthly charges to seniors who life in long-term care homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is simple. Is the NDP government 
planning to increase the monthly charges to seniors in long-term 
care homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be pleased to rise in 
the Legislature on March 27 to deliver the budget and then the 
budget will become clear to the opposition and the people of the 
province. 
 
But while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, and speaking of 
budgets, let me say that it appears the cat is out of the bag when 
it comes to the opposition’s plans, because on February 27, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Lloydminster had this to say on 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio. He said, with 
respect to our income tax reductions that we’ve done in this 
province — over their opposition, I might add — the member 
from Lloydminster had this to say. He said, with the financial 
strain facing the province, the Saskatchewan Party can no 
longer promise to maintain income tax cuts. That’s what he 
said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then, then the Leader of the Opposition had to come out 
and rescue him, Mr. Speaker, and . . . But there’s a lot of 
confusion over there; but there’s no confusion over here, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
would be very interesting if the Finance minister or the Health 
minister or someone over on that side would actually deal with 
the questions that we put forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday it became pretty 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

 

obvious that this government is going to increase the deductible 
for the prescription drug plan. Today, Mr. Speaker, it also 
seems equally obvious that there is a plan by this government to 
further put onto the backs of the ill and the elderly the extra cost 
for long-term care homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this government prepared to put the cost of their 
mismanagement on the backs of the ill and the elderly in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in the last four or five years 
this government has increased spending on health care by 
approximately 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And we have not done 
it, as their cousins in Alberta and their cousins in BC (British 
Columbia) have done it, by raising taxes as they want to do, Mr. 
Speaker. Because they want to pull a BC: be all things to all 
people; promise tax cuts before the election; and if they ever got 
elected — which won’t happen — then raise taxes, which is 
their real policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when it comes to health care, we’ve increased health care 
spending. And I don’t think it would be a surprise if health care 
spending increased in the next budget. Contrary to what they 
said in the last election they would do, Mr. Speaker, which was 
to do what? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Freeze. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To freeze health care spending so that 
eventually they could privatize health care, which is their real 
agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for Farmers 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my questions are for the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, unfortunately, 
unfortunately we may be faced with a continued drought 
problem here this year in Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister . . . Mr. 
Speaker, Alberta has implemented a drought-relief strategy to 
assist their farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, what steps are you taking to protect Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry. Sorry. Would the member repeat 
his question through the Chair, please? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, what . . . Mr. Speaker, what steps is the Government 
of Saskatchewan, Minister of Agriculture taking to protect our 
farmers in Saskatchewan from the possibility of a continued 
drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . question that the Agriculture critic 
asked me because I’ve now responded to the critic on three or 
four occasions indicating and highlighting to him what we’re 

wanting to do in Saskatchewan and what we’ve done in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have written him a letter earlier in February and said to the 
member — or January — and said to the member opposite, 
could you please tell me what it is that you’re planning on 
doing because you tell me, you tell me, sir, in a radio interview 
that he had in the GX radio in Yorkton, that he’s got a plan — 
that he’s got a plan. 
 
He tells me that he has a plan. And today, Mr. Speaker, I still 
wait to hear from the member from Kindersley about what he’s 
prepared to do and support us. And I have not had one piece of 
correspondence or return of a phone call from the member for 
Kindersley. Not one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, here is what this government is 
prepared to do to assist farmers in this province. Farmers now 
are sitting down to calculate their crop insurance premiums and 
they are shocked at the huge jump in premiums. 
 
Many farmers heard the Minister of Agriculture say that 
premiums will go up by about 7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
simply not the case. Farmers are discovering increases in their 
crop insurance premiums of 40, 50 — all right, as high as 60 
per cent increases. Huge increases, Mr. Speaker, to pay for 
reduced coverage at a time when we have every possibility of a 
province-wide drought here in Saskatchewan. Is this what the 
Minister of Agriculture believes is standing up for farm 
families? 
 
Why is the NDP, Mr. Speaker, cutting crop insurance coverage 
and jacking up insurance premiums to farmers in this province 
by as much as 60 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member from Kindersley and the 
Agriculture critic has finally woke up. He finally has woke up. 
He now finally says, you know what, Saskatchewan farmers? 
We got a problem here. We got a huge problem, Saskatchewan 
farmers. We’ve had a drought. 
 
And finally, we’re saying to the . . . We see that the federal 
government has not put its share of money in. And I have said 
now for several months and I’ve said to the member opposite, 
what we need to do here is we need to get the federal share of 
what we need to put in the safety net. 
 
And what the member says: we don’t need any federal money 
here at all; we’re going to build our own program; we can 
support a safety net program on our own. And we’ve been 
waiting now, Mr. Speaker, to hear from the members opposite 
about what their farm plan has been for a year and a half. Ours 
is on the Table, Mr. Speaker. Not heard a word from the 
members opposite about what their farm plan is. 
 
And then they get in the way and say, they get in the way and 
say, we don’t need any federal money; we’re going to do it on 
our own. And I say, get out of the way, Mr. Member. Get out of 
the way. You’re in the . . . 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member not to play with 
the rules. The rules are either you maintain the speeches all 
through the . . . through the Chair, even the last five seconds. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province, and the 
farmers particularly, are wondering when this minister will be 
waking up. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is Saskatchewan farm families, Mr. 
Speaker, will be paying thousands of dollars more for crop 
insurance coverage this year and getting less coverage from this 
government. 
 
That’s how the NDP is protecting Saskatchewan from a 
possible drought. NDP is slapping farmers with a huge increase 
in premiums and at the same time they’re reducing coverage by 
taking away the spot loss hail coverage as well. It’s just one 
more attack, Mr. Speaker, by this government on the farm 
families of this province. 
 
From the same government, Mr. Speaker, that ripped up the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts, now the 
minister promises he’s going to enhance crop insurance for the 
farmers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government jacking up premiums and 
reducing coverage by . . . to the farm families of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
still doesn’t get it. Still doesn’t get it. 
 
The reason for why, Mr. Speaker, that the crop insurance 
premiums this year are increasing for the producer is because 
the federal government has not put its share in. It’s as clear as it 
can be on the nose of the face of the member from Kindersley. 
 
That’s why crop insurance premiums this year, Mr. Speaker, 
have been backfilled and insured by the province. We put our 
money in. We put our money in and added our additional $14 
million, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that that’s maintained. 
 
And we’ve also said, Mr. Speaker, and supported through our 
farm support revenue committee that’s travelled the province, 
and they said, Mr. Speaker, that we should be doing a couple of 
things. We should be building an enhanced crop insurance 
program with support from the federal government, provincial 
government. We should be enhancing some of our NISA (Net 
Income Stabilization Account) program in the crop sector. 
 
We’re on record, Mr. Speaker. We’re on record. Our report has 
been tabled. And when I look at the Farm Support Review 
Committee, Mr. Speaker, where they travelled the province, 
nowhere in here does it appear that one member of the 
Saskatchewan Party made a submission to what we should be 
doing. Not one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only are they not involved, they’re out of touch. 
 
(10:30) 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what is on record here in this 
province is the Minister of Agriculture going around and telling 
the farm families of this province that their crop insurance 
coverage — or the crop insurance premiums rather — will be 
going up by 7 per cent. 
 
Well let’s look at an example, Mr. Speaker. Here’s the premium 
increases for the risk area no. 11. Crop insurance premiums on 
oats up 30 per cent; canola up 38 per cent; durum up 44 per 
cent; chickpeas up 45 per cent; barley up 55 per cent; and 
premiums on lentils, Mr. Speaker, up a whooping 64 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers of this province are stunned by the size of 
the increases in their premiums and at the same time the NDP is 
reducing coverage by taking away the spot loss coverage as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister justify these huge premium 
increases and at the same time cut the coverage levels as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan farmers 
and producers are stunned about, they’re stunned about the fact 
about the member opposite from Kindersley, the Agricultural 
critic says, that we don’t need any more federal money — that 
we don’t need any more federal money. Now that’s what stuns 
Saskatchewan farmers and producers across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because what’s happened in this province, Mr. Speaker, is that 
every farm organization which I meet with — and I meet with 
them every six or seven weeks — and they say to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that in Saskatchewan today in order to build a good 
safety net and to enhance our safety net we need to have federal 
money. 
 
And we had a committee who travelled the province, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had a committee who’s travelled the province. 
They were in Saskatchewan, just recently in Swift Current and 
the member opposite was there, he was there, and we all said 
we need to enhance the federal share. 
 
But not the member opposite. He says we don’t need the 
money. And every member of that committee from the federal 
government who travelled the province from the federal 
members said we need federal money. But not the member 
opposite. He says we don’t need federal money. And we can’t 
build Saskatchewan-Canadian programs unless the federal 
government puts in their share and they’re not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture knows 
full well that by increasing the premiums on crop insurance to 
the farmers there are two people that benefit — two 
governments that benefit from it. 
 
First of all, the province of Saskatchewan share is reduced. And 
in addition to that, the federal government’s premiums are 
reduced as well. So who, Mr. Speaker, is taking or sending 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

 

money back to the federal government? It certainly isn’t the 
opposition. It’s the minister opposite that’s sending back money 
to the federal government for the reduced coverage and the 
reduced premiums to farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is all the result of the Premier and the 
Minister of Agriculture trying to make up a $20 million 
shortfall in the program. So the farmers of this province are 
reduced in their coverage, paying higher premiums to make up 
for their mismanagement opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister of Agriculture 
so intent on raising premiums for farmers, reducing coverage, 
and sending money back to the federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean it’s amazing 
that the member opposite, now he’s calling for us to make sure 
that no money goes back from Saskatchewan to the federal 
government. And we don’t. 
 
A couple of days ago he said, we don’t need the money. Today 
he’s saying, you know what — we should be keeping the 
federal money. 
 
Well I want to say to the member opposite, he is absolutely and 
totally out of touch with what’s happening on this file and on 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . has absolutely no idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatchewan today not only have we maintained our 
premium level for Saskatchewan producers at 35 per cent, 
we’ve also enhanced it, Mr. Speaker, by putting additional 
money in — $14 million more. 
 
And when you look at what the federal government’s premium 
has been, the federal government’s premium has gone down, 
Mr. Speaker, by 7 per cent. Absolutely right. And who’s 
picking that up, Mr. Speaker? The federal government . . . the 
producers are picking that up, Mr. Speaker; the producers are 
picking it up. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, don’t help us any more. You 
helped us get AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) 
. . . (inaudible) . . . in this province, Mr. Speaker, and you blame 
the grasshoppers and you blame the drought. And now the 
farmers have another, another problem. They’ve got the 
Saskatchewan Party in the way as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Constituency Boundaries Commission 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week I wrote a letter to the Premier regarding the 
appointment of a new Constituency Boundaries Commission. 
The commission is to be made up of three members, Mr. 
Speaker — one, a judge and two others . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the new boundary commission is to be made up of a judge and 
two members appointed by the Premier. 
 
In the interest of electoral fairness, I asked the Premier in a 
letter if he would allow the official opposition to nominate one 
of those two candidates. That way the committee would be 
made up of a judge, one person appointed by the government, 
and one person appointed by the official opposition. What could 
be more fair than that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has now responded to my letter but he 
didn’t answer the question. So will the Premier agree to appoint 
one commission member nominated by the official opposition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Act is very clear — the 
arrival of the census figures, the process begins. The process 
will include an appointment of a judge to head the commission, 
a judge appointed by the courts of Saskatchewan. The Act is 
also very clear that government has a responsibility to appoint 
two other members to that commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear today that I will be 
consulting with the Leader of the Opposition and I will be 
speaking with independent member of the legislature about 
those appointees. We will have a fair Boundaries Commission 
in the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just while I’m on my feet, just while I’m on 
my feet, I understand why the members want to talk about the 
Boundaries Commission. They sure don’t want to talk about 
their plan in this legislature any more. 
 
What have we seen, Mr. Speaker, during the course of this 
week? I ask, what have we seen just in the course of this week? 
We have seen a government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He 
wants to talk about the Throne Speech? That’s what I’m talking 
about. In the course of this week we’ve had announcement 
about extension of high-speed Internet to 191 communities in 
this week. We’ve got a plan for the building of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve had announcements about taking on the johns in this 
province and supporting the victims of crime. Yesterday we 
released the foundation ethanol plan for this province that 
would lead the continent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What have they been talking about? The doom and gloom that 
we hear. And I tell you again, Mr. Speaker, this government is 
not . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At least the 
Premier recognizes that we do have a plan, which is more than 
he has. The fact is he has to take our plans to implement their 
ethanol strategy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Party 
understands the need to redraw the boundaries based on the 
latest census data. That redistribution must be done in a fair 



196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

way or it can be gerrymandered by . . . to the advantage of the 
party in power. 
 
Our proposal, Mr. Speaker, ensures fairness. In contrast, if the 
committee has a majority of NDP appointees, there is the 
tremendous potential for unfairness. If the Premier truly 
believes in electoral fairness, will he accept our proposal? One 
judge, one government appointee, one nominated appointee 
from the official opposition. What could be more fair? 
 
Mr. Premier, will you agree to this proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member should do 
himself a favour and put down those written questions and 
listen to the answer. I’ve just committed that we will follow the 
law of Saskatchewan, which is that the courts will appoint the 
head of the thing. Government has the responsibility to appoint 
the commission. I will consult with the Leader of the 
Opposition, I will consult with the independent member from 
North Battleford, and we’ll form a commission. 
 
Now he began his question by talking about their plan. Well we 
learned something else this week, Mr. Speaker. In Canada, 
we’ve learned something else — how their plan, this so-called 
plan to grow Saskatchewan, is proven to be a folly. It’s a folly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where did we learn this? We learned this in the legislature of 
Alberta, because over there was a plan, a plan which said we 
can cut all the taxes and we can spend more money and it’s all 
going to balance out. Well we know what happened in Alberta. 
Now they’re raising the taxes. They’ve forgotten their plans to 
cut taxes and they’re cutting services. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition goes to Calgary, Throne Speech
  night, what does he say? Our plan is to cut taxes. Every day 
this week members have said, more spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t work. It doesn’t add up. The plan is a 
folly. And I tell you the plan of this government and the work 
of this government is not going to be stopped by those nabobs 
of negativity who sit over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, since the government is taking our ethanol plan, 
perhaps they can take our plan on electoral reform. I’d like to 
ask the Premier another question that he didn’t answer. 
 
I asked whether or not it was in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask 
another question that the Premier didn’t answer from the letter. 
I asked whether it was his intention to contest the next election 
under the new proposed boundaries or under the current 
boundaries. That is also a question of electoral fairness. All 
parties are starting to nominate candidates. All parties need to 
know whether they should be holding those nominations based 
on the current boundaries or on the new boundaries. It’s unfair 
that only one party, the NDP, knows the answer to this 

question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, barring some unforeseen event like the defeat of 
the coalition government to a confidence vote, does the Premier 
plan to contest the next election based on the new boundaries or 
the current boundaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again I invite the member 
simply to read the legislation. The process is set out in 
legislation. The commission will be established. The court will 
appoint its head. I will consult with opposition. We will appoint 
the members of the commission. There are time frames set out 
— 30 to 60 days, three months, or an extension possible of 
another three months. The work is laid out in the legislation. It’s 
not up to this Premier or this government to change that work. 
 
But again he talks about plans. Well we’ve learned a lot this 
week about their plans, Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned a lot about 
their plans. 
 
They have a plan which says it’s entirely all right — it’s 
entirely all right — for workers from Alberta to come into this 
province, earn money, and take it home to Alberta, but that’s 
not all right for residents in northern Saskatchewan. They say 
that’s not all right. 
 
They say they want . . . every day, they say they want further 
Internet coverage in the province, they want cellular coverage in 
the province, but it’s not all right for our telephone corporation 
to go outside of this province to bring home money to do that 
work. That’s not all right. So we shouldn’t invest . . . 
 
But then what do they say? Well then they’ll get up in this 
House and they say, but you can’t invest in workers in 
Saskatchewan either. Strip the equity out of Great Western, they 
say, so we can shut that down and lose those jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re learning a lot about their plan this week. 
Their plan is to bankrupt the corporations, the Crown 
corporations, to strip the equity. Why? Because they’re 
preparing to sell them off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Young Offenders in the Courts 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately Saskatchewan leads the country in a bad-news 
story. 
 
Yesterday, Statistics Canada released a report that indicates 
Saskatchewan’s youth court caseload was more than twice the 
national average last year — 946 out of every 10,000 kids in 
this province are facing the court system. 
 
In every other jurisdiction in the country youth caseloads 
declined, yet the number of youth in the court system in 
Saskatchewan increased by 7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, this trend is 
very worrisome. More of our young people are finding 
themselves in trouble with the law and facing the court system 
than in any other province. 
 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

 

Will the minister explain why more Saskatchewan kids are 
ending up in the criminal justice system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the hon. member raises one of our most serious challenges in 
this province, the capacity we have to deal with . . . to engage 
large numbers of socially marginalized youth. We shouldn’t 
underestimate the challenge that this presents. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me remind the member of the kinds of 
things we’ve been doing in this House. In fact, I was thinking 
that I would ask my officials to list all the programs, all the 
initiatives, all the investments that this government has made in 
dealing with crime and dealing with safety in our communities, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s such a long list, Mr. Speaker, they’re still 
preparing it. 
 
But let me remind the member — let me remind the member — 
that we have increased policing in this province funding by $11 
million, to record numbers in this province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
invested more money in SHOCAP (serious and habitual youth 
offender comprehensive action program) — the program that 
deals with the most serious offenders— by four times in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What has the member opposite, and her party, what did they 
recommend in the last election? Well, Mr. Speaker, they 
recommended nothing for crime control, nothing for safety and 
security in our community — nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Emergency Protection for Victims 
of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, The 
Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and 
Exploitation Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I move this Bill be moved for the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Speech-Language Pathologists and 
Audiologists Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, The 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists Amendment 
Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open, honest, 
and accountable government, we are very, very pleased to table 
a response to question no. 1. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to no. 1 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of an open, honest and 
accountable government, we are extremely pleased to table a 
response to written question no. 2. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to no. 2 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I stand on 
behalf of an open and accountable government to respond to 
written question no. 3. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to no. 3 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I stand to 
answer, on behalf of an open, honest, and accountable 
government, written question no. 4. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to no. 4 is tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Toth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
wish to continue with some of the points that have been made in 
our Throne Speech about the health plan for Saskatchewan. 
 
I was very proud to be in the Legislative Building on December 
5 when the Premier and I introduced our action plan on health 
care. This was the result of much work by many members of 
this House, including members opposite as they worked on the 
standing committee last summer. And we ended up coming 
forward with a plan which allows us to proceed towards the 
future for health care. 
 
And I think it’s important that we all recognize that this is 
something that we are doing together. This is not something that 
can be dictated from on high or from . . . down from the bottom. 
It has to come from everybody. 
 
And I’d like to just quote from a speech that was given not too 
long ago, about . . . well, last spring actually. And this is a 
speech given by Dr. Kenneth Shine who was the Robert H. 
Ebert Memorial lecturer at Harvard Medical School, I think is 
where it was given. And this was a speech sponsored by the 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

Milbank Memorial Fund. And this doctor, who was . . . Dr. 
Shine was a student of Harvard Medical School; and Dr. Robert 
Ebert who was . . . the lecture given in his favour about . . . in 
his memorial, was one of his professors. 
 
And what Dr. Shine said was that he wanted to talk about health 
care quality and how to achieve it. And the point that he made 
in his speech was that in the 21st century, medicine will no 
longer be able to foster an aura of infallibility of the system. It 
has to recognize that there are many pieces to it. And what he 
did — and this is the point that I want to include in my speech 
today — is he wanted to contrast the characteristics of the 
cultures of medical system doctors in the 20th century versus 
the 21st century. 
 
In the last century much of the system was based on autonomy. 
In the 21st century it’s going to be based on teamwork and 
systems. In the last century much of medical practice was based 
on solo practice. In the 21st century it’s going to be about group 
practice. 
 
In the 20th century there was a very strong emphasis on 
continuous learning. In the 21st century we’re going to have 
that emphasis, but we’re also going to have emphasis on 
continuous improvement in how practice is done — 20th 
century characteristic was infallibility; the 21st century is 
multidisciplinary problem solving. 
 
In other words, I can’t know everything but I’m going to find 
the people that need to know that particular issue. I’m going to 
work with the pharmacists. I’m going to work with the physios. 
I’m going to work with the nurses. I’m going to work with the 
. . . with the people who have the special skills that I need. 
 
Another characteristic of the 20th century for doctor was 
knowledge. It was a sort of I know everything. In the 21st 
century the key point is going to be change. I use those quotes 
from that lecture because I think that reflects the kind of attitude 
and the kind of change that we see in the action plan that we’ve 
presented to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is about change at a manageable pace. It’s about going to 
work to improve the system, to improve the kind of services 
that people receive all over the province. And so the things that 
are highlighted in that particular plan are things like the 
recognition that we have a province-wide hospital system that 
has community hospitals, northern hospitals, district hospitals, 
regional hospitals, and provincial hospitals. 
 
We’re going to have 12 regional health authorities which will 
replace the 32 health districts, plus we’ll have the Athabasca 
Health Authority in the North. 
 
We’re going to be establishing primary health care teams of 
doctors, nurses, pharmacists, others, other health care providers 
in the regional health authorities, to ensure that patients have 
better access to the most suitable health care provider. And 
these teams will diagnose and treat illness, but they’ll also focus 
on dealing with prevention of health problems and managing 
existing ones. 
 
We will have a 24-hour toll-free health line to provide 
convenient, immediate health information and advice. This will 

maybe save a few of the late night trips through blizzards or 
through storms or over long distances, and it will provide a 
place where people can get information that they need. 
 
We’ll also be establishing the first quality council, a group of 
professionals who will be continually monitoring what we’re 
doing and making sure that we improve what we do and making 
sure that people get the best service possible. 
 
Our action plan is something that is a continuous process of 
renewal. We will be listening carefully to what people say 
because we will have to make sure that the kinds of things that 
we wish for the plan and for the services that people have, 
actually accomplish those services. 
 
And so already we have had suggestions come forward that 
allow us to adjust what we’re doing and develop better ways of 
doing things. And this comes from the people within the 
system, but also the people outside of the system. 
 
Now I just want to point out a few things that have been 
highlighted over the last number of months that we’ve done 
since we’ve announced our plan. 
 
In January I had the pleasure to announce that we have a new 
cervical cancer screening program for women across the 
province. And this is building on the good work that’s been 
done with the breast cancer screening program. And so this will 
be another service that is available for women in our province. 
 
We’ve also announced a number of points around the retention 
and recruitment of health professionals of all kinds. This 
includes some of the bursary programs that are available. Last 
fall we were able to increase the number of seats at the College 
of Medicine from 55 to 60. And we’re continuing to look at 
that. 
 
We have been working with the registered nurses. Last spring 
we were able to bring in legislation that allowed for advanced 
clinical nurses to be part of our total system. And we know that 
this is something that’s important in the country. And we 
understand now that Alberta is considering doing the same and 
British Columbia as well. 
 
One of the things that was announced last week was the fact 
that we have now put in place our board for the Saskatchewan 
Surgical Care Network. This will be the first system like this in 
Canada whereby on a province-wide basis we will manage the 
waiting lists for non-emergent or urgent surgery. And this will 
allow us to have better information about how the system 
works, but it will also allow the surgeons to have a better 
understanding of how they can flow through in the system. 
 
Dr. Peter Glynn has agreed to be the Chair of that committee. 
And many of our fine surgeons in Saskatchewan as well as 
administrators are part of the management team in that 
particular program. 
 
When we look at what we are trying to accomplish in our health 
plan for Saskatchewan, what we always have to remember is 
that the patient comes first. It’s the people who are getting 
served that are the people that are the most important. And 
many times we forget that all of the things that we do in this 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

 

legislature around trying to organize the spending of this 
present year, $2.2 billion, really is about making sure that a 
patient has the proper relationship with the health care provider, 
whether it’s a doctor or dentist, nurse, or whatever. 
 
And so one of the things that I’m very pleased about the 
enthusiasm that I’ve seen and the enthusiasm that I’ve heard as 
I’ve met with the people who are working with us on our 
province-wide plan is the fact that they can see where we are 
going and what our goal is. 
 
And this plan, I think, is a small piece of the kind of plan that 
the Throne Speech sets out which is a plan for all areas of our 
economy and our province. And I think just even the headings 
that are in the Throne Speech around the economy and the 
environment, around infrastructure, and around providing 
quality education to our people, and providing healthy and 
self-reliant families. All of those ones reflect the fact that we 
have a plan for the coming years and our goal is to work 
together with people as we develop this particular plan. 
 
Now it’s not often that you get a chance to use some poetry in 
your speech two days in a row, but I know yesterday that we 
were challenged as legislators by some of our poets to make 
sure there was at least one poem in the legislature every day. 
And so yesterday I got in part of one and a full poem. 
 
And today I’m going to close off my little reflection here by 
quoting another of our Poet Laureate’s poems called, 
“Reflection.” And it doesn’t totally apply to me, as you’ll 
quickly hear when I read it. But it is, I think, a very good way 
of summing up what it is when we do planning, and what it is 
when we look back, and look at what we’re doing now, and 
then look to the future. 
 
So this is one of Glen Sorestad’s poems called, “Reflection,” 
from his book Ancestral Dances: 
 

Today my grandfather’s bones ache. 
My father’s back is stiff. 
And the ghosts of both 
look back at me 
while I shave. 

 
The point, Mr. Speaker, is that we have the aches and pains of 
our grandparents, our great-grandparents, as part of the things 
that we have to deal with as we plan for the future; as we plan 
for our children and our grandchildren and our great 
grandchildren. 
 
And what this government is about is making sure that we 
reflect where we’ve come from, but we also reflect where we 
want to go. And I think where we want to go as a government is 
to build the Saskatchewan community on a strong, solid 
economy in a way that will allow us to attract people from all 
over the world, but also to make sure that we who live here and 
who have built this place are extremely proud of what we do. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I will be 
voting in favour of the Throne Speech and against the 
amendment proposed by the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
honoured to stand in this Assembly to speak on behalf of the 
constituents of Estevan in response to the Throne Speech. 
 
But before I begin, Mr. Speaker, there are a few people that I 
would like to acknowledge. And first of all I would like to 
acknowledge my family: my husband Vic; and my son Terry 
and his wife Marnell; my daughter Trisha; and of course my 
grandchildren, Beau, Brooke, Bailee, and Shelby and Tristan. 
And I would also like to thank my mom and dad at this time 
and also my extended family for all their love, support and 
prayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would also be remiss if I did not thank my dedicated and 
hard-working constituency assistant, Shelley, who always goes 
beyond the call of duty to get the job done. And last, but 
certainly not least, I would like to thank the people of my 
constituency, the constituency of Estevan. 
 
These are very hard-working people, Mr. Speaker, who are the 
backbone of this province. And I am humbled that they have 
chosen me to be their representative in this honoured Assembly. 
And for this I thank them for their support and encouragement. 
 
Now getting back to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately, this speech really contained nothing more than 
disappointments for the people of my constituency and indeed 
the people of the entire province. This Throne Speech was just a 
re-announcement of previous throne speeches, only the date had 
been changed and sometimes, Mr. Speaker, even that was 
questionable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and his entourage did their famous 
bus tour last summer playing hit-and-miss with the 
communities of this province. I guess if you were fortunate 
enough — or perhaps unfortunate enough — that they had to 
refuel or maybe use washroom facilities, they stopped in your 
constituency. Otherwise they just zipped on through or 
bypassed you completely. 
 
I certainly wish that their tour would have included parts of my 
constituency — or any part of my constituency actually, but 
especially Highway 47 south of Estevan and also on Highway 
18 in the Oungre/Lake Alma area. I know that they would have 
spent a little more time in my constituency as the bus would 
have needed a wheel alignment and probably a new windshield. 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, they chose not to come into 
my constituency at all. And Estevan incidentally wasn’t the 
only constituency they chose to completely ignore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech contains statistics claiming that 
we lead the way for high school graduates and university 
enrolment rates up to the age of 24 years old. Well above the 
national average it stated. I have seen the graph that gives this 
information, and I wish the Throne Speech would have stated 
what happens after they reach the age of 24. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, the next group, the age of 25 to 64 years, 
the age of people in their productive years, the group that pays 
most of the taxes, spends most of the money, and drives the 
economy is far below the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people need to be given a reason to stay 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

rather than reasons to leave. After they’re educated, they leave. 
They leave rather than stay and invest in our province. They 
know that the chances of the government competing with their 
investment, with their own tax dollars, is a great possibility. The 
government should be initiating programs that encourage 
business and investment, not implementing programs that 
compete with them. Mr. Speaker, I ask them, is this fair? 
 
The current government has no plan — no plan for the 
economy, no plan for health, no plan for how to deal with their 
deficit, and no plan for agriculture. The Saskatchewan Party 
does have a plan and it is a workable plan that can be 
accomplished within a balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you and all members are aware, the 
Saskatchewan Party travelled throughout the province to lay out 
their Grow Saskatchewan plan. This is a bold plan. It is a good 
plan. At the meetings I attended the people liked our plan. Mr. 
Speaker, we on this side of the House have a lot of faith in the 
people of this province. Mr. Speaker, it is the current 
government that we have absolutely no faith in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again this year in the Throne Speech we hear of 
their commitment to a long-term safety net in agriculture. Now 
this keeps playing just like an old record that skips — probably 
a 78 that was popular about 50 years ago because that’s the 
same era that they’re stuck in. We have heard these same words 
in every Throne Speech and every budget since the NDP ripped 
up the GRIP contracts they had with the farmers of this 
province. Rehashing the safety net — last year all we heard 
about this after the budget was that a tersely worded letter had 
been sent to the feds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has had nine years to come up 
with a long-term safety net — something that is bankable. We 
need action and we need it now. Farmers are going broke. 
Farms that have been in families for generations are going 
broke. Crop insurance has hiked their premiums, removed 
spot-loss hail coverage, and removed the variables. This is the 
new enhanced crop insurance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just last week I received a couple of booklets in 
the mail. These were sent out by local auctioneers advertising 
the auction sales in the Southeast. Mr. Speaker, in the two 
booklets I received there were 41 auction sales listed — 41 farm 
auction sales listed with two auctioneers. And I can think of 
about four more auctioneers in the area that I haven’t even 
received listings from yet. 
 
Again this year, we are losing farmers left and right while this 
government sits twiddling their fingers and not doing a simple 
thing about it except increasing the crop insurance premiums, in 
passing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have continually seen our population drop and 
how does this government deal with it? Well instead of 
implementing programs that would attract people, that would 
grow our population, they choose to grow government. 
Population shrinks, government grows. It doesn’t make any 
sense. If a private business is facing hard times do they imply 
. . . do they hire more employees? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is 
simple; the answer is no. 
 

In the past four years the provincial government employees 
have increased by 1,100 people. Last week, Mr. Speaker, 
StatsCanada released their population figures resulting from the 
2001 census. We have less than 1 million people in this 
province; that’s the lowest number since 1981. 
 
This shows that the socialist plan, if they have one, is not 
working. The Throne Speech boasts of reduced social assistance 
caseloads to the lowest level in 10 years by increasing 
participation in the labour force. Mr. Speaker, we have no 
numbers that substantiate this claim. Perhaps the reduction in 
caseloads is because many of the people have just given up on 
this province . . . or pardon me, on this government, like so 
many others, and left the province. 
 
The NDP promised to create 30,000 new jobs but that has 
turned into another dismal failure. Twelve thousand jobs have 
been lost in the last two years. And speaking of NDP broken 
promises, this government promised to hire 500 more health 
care providers. Their record is that there are almost 1,200 fewer 
nurses than in 1999. We were also promised that surgical 
waiting lists would be cut by 30 per cent. Again the record of 
this government is that surgical waiting lists have increased by 
50 per cent. 
 
We continue to have the longest waiting lists in Canada. But, 
Mr. Speaker, if it is any comfort, you can now visit the Web site 
and find out just how far you are down on the waiting list. How 
comforting! 
 
We are also making the move from elected health boards to 
fully appointed boards. When the health boards were elected, 
board members were accountable to the people, Mr. Speaker, 
the people that put them in that position — the electorate, the 
people of the province. Appointed board members will be 
accountable to those who put them in that position — the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that our province will 
participate in the national sex offender registry. I am also 
pleased that action is being taken to prevent the abuse and 
exploitation of children through the sex trade. And I would like 
to commend all the members of this committee, but I would 
really like to commend and thank my colleague, the member 
from Humboldt, who brought this to the forefront and 
persevered to bring this legislation into reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier I touched on the conditions of highways in 
my constituency and, as you can imagine, I have had many 
phone calls and letters regarding the state of the highways. In 
the western area of my constituency, the highways are 
extremely poor. But the people in that area have another need as 
well. That is for cellular service. 
 
There is no cell service in the Gladmar, Lake Alma, Minton and 
Beaubier areas of my constituency. These hard-working, 
taxpaying citizens deserve cell service. They feel that the 
government should be investing money in them, rather than 
Atlanta-based companies like Retx. So I guess perhaps this 
government just has too much of Georgia on their mind. So I 
ask the government to be serious, Mr. Speaker, and support 
them in this regard. After all, these are people who are paying 
the bills. 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time, I would just like to do a little 
housekeeping regarding speeches delivered . . . the first one by 
the member from Regina South. Mr. Speaker, that member 
proceeded to tell me about my constituency. He says he’ll take 
me around. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, those government 
members and their Partridge Family-style bus tour did not come 
near my constituency. They couldn’t be bothered with the 
people of Estevan. 
 
I have family and friends that own and operate oil and 
oil-related companies in the Estevan constituency. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South can pass on 
his so-called knowledge to Dwain Lingenfelter and Doug 
Anguish if they ever return from that dreaded promised 
province, Alberta. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, they are more likely to 
be taken in by that member than I or my constituents are. I trust 
the knowledge and advice of my constituents. I do not trust the 
knowledge of the member from Regina South or, for that 
matter, any member on that side. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if that member wants to come to Estevan 
constituency, perhaps he’ll accept this list of businesses to visit. 
The first step he should visit should be River Bend Nursery. 
And if he’s not tarred and feathered there, he can go to the 
agriculture implement dealers, the car dealers, the oil 
companies, industrial communications, retail businesses, and 
the businesses that have to deal with ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). And I would also encourage him 
to stop in and have a chat with the farmers, especially now after 
we received the notice of this enhanced program. 
 
Then, he’ll know what the people of my constituency really 
think of the NDP. He will see why the NDP came in a very 
distant third place in the last provincial election. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we are really going to miss the witty 
but sometimes sarcastic comments of the Regina South member 
after the next provincial election. As this member knows, he is 
in serious danger of losing his seat. But we will miss him and 
his droll attempts at humour. 
 
(11:15) 
 
But perhaps he should consider seeking the nomination in the 
Regina Elphinstone riding or the Regina Dewdney riding if he 
wants to continue his life in politics. If he is successful in doing 
that, he should keep in mind that he will be sitting in the 
opposition benches after the next election. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he’ll probably take my advice about as 
seriously as I take his. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of days ago the member from Regina 
Centre, in her response to the Throne Speech, made comments 
regarding the member from Wood River, saying that he had 
been living off the public purse. 
 
And I asked that member, Mr. Speaker, what was he doing? Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Wood River was serving in the 
armed forces. He was defending the freedoms we enjoy today. 

And one of them is the opportunity to speak in this legislature. 
And when we are given that opportunity, we should at least 
have the decency to stand up and tell the truth. 
 
And perhaps the member from Regina Lake Centre took some 
lessons in misleading the public from former NDP cabinet 
member, Eric Upshall. Mr. Speaker, any . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I would ask 
members in their remarks to be very careful. Keep all their 
language parliamentary. And there are certain words that are 
forbidden, and I . . . or not . . . almost forbidden. And I have the 
book of bad words here. And if the member would refer to 
pages approximately 140 to 150, you can look them up before 
you put them into your speeches. 
 
I ask the member to continue, but keep in mind her remarks. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will keep your 
comments in mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that anyone in this 
Assembly or anywhere who has served in this country, whether 
it be with the armed forces or the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), city police, or anyplace, or any job where they 
have to put their life on the line, I think we should all respect 
them. And I would never think of them as a burden to society. 
They have served us and they do serve us and I’m very proud of 
them all. 
 
And I just really feel, Mr. Speaker, that an apology would be in 
order to the member from Wood River, and also to the member 
from Melville who is a former RCMP officer. And any person 
who serves in these roles, I think they should be apologized to, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now that I’ve ended that, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to 
say that there isn’t anything new in the Throne Speech that will 
reverse the trend of job loss, population loss, or lost investment, 
and it is clear that this government does not have a plan. And I 
cannot support the Throne Speech. However, I do support the 
amendment put forth by the member from Moosomin. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m so 
pleased to be able to rise today in the House and speak to this 
very excellent Speech from the Throne. Mr. Speaker, I believe 
this is the ninth or tenth time that I’ve been fortunate enough to 
respond to the Throne Speech, and I have to say that each time I 
just feel more and more proud of the great job that this 
government is doing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with the great job that you are 
doing. Your even-handed skill and ability to herd cats — or 
MLAs, as the case may be — is totally astounding. Thank you 
for the good job that you are doing preserving our traditions of 
democracy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I launch into my remarks about this very 
excellent Throne Speech, I want to take just a moment to 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

congratulate the newest member of this House — the newly 
minted representative for Saskatoon-Idylwyld. I have watched 
his enthusiasm, his keen sense of social justice, and very 
obvious love and caring for his constituents, with a great sense 
of pride. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Now I have to admit that I do not know 
him nearly as well as I do his wife, who is renowned in 
Saskatoon for the wonderful work she does for the Saskatoon 
Open Door Society, and who is such a key player in the 
professional arts community. Whenever I would meet with her 
— as we discussed our mutual interest in Persephone Theatre 
and 25th Street Theatre — she would talk lovingly about her 
schoolteacher husband. 
 
But I did not get a chance to meet our newest MLA till I 
actually started to work on his campaign. I was immediately 
impressed with him, and I can confirm Dawn’s good taste and 
judgment of character. Mr. Speaker, the new member for 
Saskatoon-Idylwyld is but the latest in a hat trick of election 
victories for the NDP, confirming also the good taste and 
judgment of the Saskatchewan electorate. 
 
Before I begin my formal remarks, I should like to take this 
opportunity to once again thank the constituents of Saskatoon 
Southeast for the trust they have placed in me by electing me to 
this very privileged position as their representative in the 
Legislature. 
 
I spoke just the other day with a group of schoolchildren from 
St. Luke School in my riding and I was struck anew with the 
verve and brilliance of so many of the people in my riding. 
They care passionately about this province, about ensuring that 
government strikes the right balance between public ventures 
and private enterprise, about the balance between services and 
taxes, between individual and community responsibilities. By 
and large, Mr. Speaker, I can report that they think this 
government has found the correct balance. In short, they feel 
that we are doing a good job ensuring fiscal prudence with 
compassionate, common sense programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been listening with great interest to the 
speeches of my colleagues on both sides of the House these past 
few days. I want to acknowledge right off that I feel all of the 
speeches have been extremely interesting and I have been very 
impressed with the quality and the passion of the oratory. 
 
It is not an easy matter to stand in this Chamber and to deliver a 
speech about your personal and political values and to 
communicate it in a way that is both compelling and 
intelligible. I want to congratulate members on all sides of the 
House for their keen and interesting speeches. 
 
Although I will acknowledge a slight bias in endorsing the 
views of the government coalition members more so than those 
of the opposition, nevertheless I’ve learned a great deal 
listening to all of them about their hopes and dreams for the 
future of this great province. 
 
And indeed, Mr. Speaker, as I have said before many times in 
this House, it is time that we moved beyond — as well as we 

are capable — the petty politics of old-fashioned notions of left 
and right, since in many ways the old ideologies do not fit the 
new challenges of this century. 
 
So I thank all the members for the hard work and dedication, 
not to mention good old-fashioned confidence, as they expose 
for all of us and for the television viewers and for the 
permanent record we call Hansard as they expose their 
priorities and principles as we work together to ensure the 
democratic rights of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Having acknowledged all the wonderful speeches that preceded 
mine, I am now about to do what one should never do. I’m 
going to single out a couple of speeches, simply because they 
were delivered in such grand style by two fantastic friends of 
mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we’ve all individually finished our turn in 
the legislature; when we retire, either by choice or by the 
consent of the majority of the voters in our respective ridings; 
we will take away memories of the great friendships we’ve 
made with our colleagues — whether they be on this side of the 
House or in the opposition. 
 
People are often amazed that we, as legislators, can scrap it up 
so much during the proceedings, yet emerge from this red 
Chamber laughing and joking with the very people we were 
castigating just moments earlier in the thrust of debate. People 
sometimes have a hard time distinguishing between the passion 
of the debate and our real feelings. 
 
They find it hard to believe that firm friendships can develop in 
this heated atmosphere and they do not perfectly understand 
that when we trade barbs and political jabs, that we still respect 
and admire each other despite our political differences. But it is 
so and that is one of the endearing and enduring strengths of our 
unique Canadian system of democracy. 
 
In the legislature we trade in rhetoric, not bullets, and our 
country is all the stronger for it. And we do make lasting 
friendships, Mr. Speaker. At the risk of offending some I want 
to single out two very impressive men who have shown such 
wisdom and humour, leadership and patience as they work for 
legislative and program changes for their constituents. And their 
speeches this session were top notch. 
 
I refer to the member for Athabasca, the self-styled athlete, 
whose hockey prowess is only exceeded by his electoral 
success. And I refer as well to the retiring, though definitely not 
shy and retiring, member for Cumberland. They have been the 
source of much wisdom and guidance for me this past year. 
And I want to acknowledge the tremendous work they are doing 
to sensitize all members of this Assembly to the unique and 
special concerns and dreams of the North. Thank you. 
 
And I want to steal a page from their speaking style, Mr. 
Speaker. I listened in awe to these two gentlemen as they 
skilfully wove their personal experiences into a tapestry of 
beliefs, guiding principles, and calls for action. I was especially 
impressed with the compelling way they related their life 
experiences with the ambitions and aspirations of their 
constituents. 
 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this week there was a radio news clip about 
a group of students at the University of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned that too many young women today would deny that 
they are feminists, yet believe implicitly in the goals and aims 
of earlier feminists. These young women are organizing a 
seminar to inform their peers that feminism is not really about 
bra burning and militancy, that it is about the way of life that 
many people today take for granted — equal opportunity for all 
regardless of gender, equal rights and responsibilities for 
parents, and a workplace where the only limit to your career 
ambitions is your own imagination. 
 
They want to demonstrate to other students that feminism is not 
a dirty word, and I applaud their efforts. And I would only add 
one little homily that I learned early on in my struggles as a 
woman — and that is that the personal is political. I’ve 
consistently found that to be so throughout my life, and the 
speeches from the members of Athabasca and Cumberland 
reminded me once again of that basic truth. The personal is 
political. Our personal life experiences shape and inform our 
political beliefs, our aspirations, our values, and our principles. 
 
So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit in this 
speech not about lofty-sounding principles or high-minded 
values of which members on this side of the House have many. 
But rather I want to talk about a few of my life experiences and 
how they’ve shaped my beliefs and why they have led me to 
this point where I will be wholeheartedly endorsing the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken in years past in this House about my 
mother who lives in a nursing home in Moose Jaw. She is 
extremely well cared for, and I want to publicly acknowledge 
the tremendous love and patient care that she receives in 
Extendicare in Moose Jaw. But the simple fact of the matter, 
Mr. Speaker, is that she is in the terminal phase of an 
Alzheimer’s-like disease process and, for her, life is what is 
carrying on long after the thrill of living is gone. 
 
It is a sad fate for her because, as someone remarked to me at a 
Speaker’s tea a couple of years ago, she had such a hard life. 
And it is so sad that her end-of-life reward would be to lie in a 
nursing home, a shrunken little woman weighing scarcely 60 
pounds, unable to communicate or even to move. 
 
Still, my mother was — and probably still is — a proud woman. 
For most of her life, the odds were stacked against her, yet she 
always showed the steely will and steadfast dignity that all her 
children loved her for. 
 
(11:30) 
 
She taught us a lot — the six brothers and sisters growing up 
without a father and relying on the public dole for charitable 
food and shelter. My mother had determination and a gutsy 
attitude. And I’m sure she wasn’t unique. I’m sure most 
members in this House could tell similar stories about the 
hardships and deprivations that our parents had to endure, and 
the can-do, carry-on-regardless attitude that they had. 
 
My mother taught us a lot of things. She always said: work with 
what you have; the grass isn’t greener on the other side of the 
fence; you get what you pay for; a job worth doing, is worth 

doing well; and never ask someone to do something that you’re 
not prepared to do yourself. 
 
So these principles became our mantra, our way ahead as we 
worked to get out of the welfare trap. And we succeeded 
because our mother recognized that her children had potential 
and because she nurtured our imagination and our ambition. 
And because she challenged us to be more than we thought we 
could be. 
 
Now I could tell you many stories, Mr. Speaker, not all of them 
of the Kraft Dinner and Spam variety, let me assure you. But 
since I am honoured right now to be the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education, I’m going to stick to one story only 
— that of my mother enrolling both my brother and myself in 
higher learning. 
 
When I was 16, newly graduated from Mortlach 
Comprehensive High School, Mr. Speaker, I had no idea what I 
was going to do with my life beyond the fact that I was ecstatic 
to have a summer job at Joyners department store in Moose 
Jaw, for the princely sum of $34.50 a week. That’s about 85 
cents an hour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was going to stay with my aunt in Moose Jaw, and I figured I 
was really grown up, moving into the big city and all. When I 
left home, mom told me that I had to work hard and save all my 
money because I was going to go to university. And why was I 
going to go to university? Because she was so mad at the 
Department of Veterans Affairs. 
 
You see, when I was five my father re-enlisted in the air force 
because he couldn’t find a job as a recently demobilized war vet 
in his hometown of Eastend. The family moved to Calgary to 
live on the base there, and my father commuted to the airbase at 
Claresholm, Alberta. 
 
One weekend, hitching a ride home with a fellow flyer, he was 
thrown from the truck. This was way before the days of 
seatbelts, let alone mandatory seatbelts. He was killed instantly. 
And the RCMP came to our home in the middle of the night to 
tell my mom she was a widow. When she applied for assistance 
from the RCAF (Royal Canadian Air Force), they told her she 
didn’t qualify for anything because her husband died off the 
base. However, they would do one thing for her. Her oldest son 
could have some money in trust so that when he was old 
enough he could go to university — but nothing for the girls. 
 
This enraged my mother and she fought back the first chance 
she got. She enrolled me in university and told me that I had to 
succeed just to show the military that even though they 
wouldn’t support the girls, her daughters were every bit as good 
as her son. 
 
So I went off to university, the first one in my family to do so. 
And the next year, my brother — a bit stubborn and 
independent like my mom — refused to go to university but 
registered instead at the old Saskatchewan Technical Institute in 
Moose Jaw. That college, by the way, was the precursor to what 
we nowadays call the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) Palliser Campus. 
 
My brother took a two-year electronics course. I took a 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

seven-year, two-degree course in psychology. And until I was 
honoured by the current Premier and chosen to go into cabinet, 
my brother always earned more than me. But that’s not the 
point. The point is that we both earned our way. And that was 
only possible because we had access — despite our family 
income or lack of it — to post-secondary schooling. 
 
Without the grit and determination of my mother, without the 
student loans and the values we learned at home, we would not 
have succeeded. So in what is sometimes a clumsy and less than 
elegant manner, I have been trying to repay my debt both to my 
mother and to post-secondary educational opportunities as I 
have been Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training. 
 
Doors have been opened for me and experiences and 
opportunities that I could not have imagined as a scrawny little 
welfare brat growing up in Caron, Saskatchewan have been 
possible because of my mother and education. I salute them 
both. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that by now I have 
convinced at least you, if not all members of this House, that I 
care very passionately about ensuring that post-secondary 
training opportunities in Saskatchewan are accessible to all, 
affordable to all, and of the highest quality for all, whether they 
pursue their learning at a technical or an academic institution. 
 
And I believe that I owe a debt to the people of Saskatchewan 
for assisting me at first from age 5 to 16 in basic survival, and 
then during my university years in underwriting a major part of 
the total actual cost of my education — and to the politicians of 
the day who had the wisdom and foresight to set up the student 
loan program and to give me a chance at the various summer 
and sessional jobs I had in order to finance my way through 
those seven long years. 
 
I hope in my five months as Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education that I have been able to shape some public policies, 
some budget priorities, some program opportunities that can in 
a small measure help to repay my debt from so many years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a whole lot of personal learning over this 
past year. And I want to, at this point, thank the Premier for 
giving me, first, the opportunity to serve as Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs and now, as Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training. 
 
I also want to thank all my wonderful staff — my eyes and ears, 
arms and legs — on those many, many days when I needed to 
be cloned, needed to have eyes in the back of my head, ears the 
size of elephants, a cranial capacity beyond human capabilities, 
and organizational skills that I never did possess. To those staff 
who have moved on to retirement or other opportunities, to 
Tim, Robbie, Patricia, Ted, and Jaime, —thanks for all the help. 
And to those of you still coping with my whims and whimsies, 
to Nadene, Pearl, Virginia, Don, and Michelle, thank you for 
always being there. Thank you for your patience and guidance, 
your humour and your wit. You have my gratitude, my respect, 
and my admiration. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as I want to make abundantly clear in this speech, 
Saskatchewan has a whole host of wonderful post-secondary 
institutions — a clear recognition by both the people and the 
government of this province that lifelong learning, continuing 
education, training opportunities beyond the K to 12 system are 
essential for our citizenry to take their rightful place to fulfill 
their potential and to contribute to the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, right now as I speak, there are in excess of 
50,000 students of all ages, from all walks of life, from corner 
to corner, border to border in Saskatchewan taking courses in 
our post-secondary education system. That’s over 5 per cent of 
the population studying right now; being helped and taught by 
10,000 dedicated men and women, almost as many as there are 
teachers in the K to 12 system. That is a huge undertaking, Mr. 
Speaker. And if I were to describe the missions and mandates of 
all of these post-secondary institutions, the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
campuses, the regional colleges, the private vocational schools, 
the universities, we could be here all weekend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’ll restrain myself and focus instead on one part of the 
system, one very important part. And harking back to my earlier 
theme that the personal is political, I want to talk today about 
the universities in Saskatchewan, since I am myself a graduate 
of one of them. 
 
There’s another reason I want to focus on the universities, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s because the opposition keeps harping about 
growing the economy — an ugly and inelegant phrase, but one 
that seems to have entered the popular lexicon. So I will use it, 
and use it to illustrate how the economy of Saskatchewan has 
diversified, become more complex and challenging, and how it 
is built upon the very taproots of ingenuity and stubborn 
determination that formed this province. 
 
We all know that the University of Saskatchewan is nearly as 
old as the province itself. Indeed we hope that in 2007, the 
100th birthday of the U of S (University of Saskatchewan), that 
we will be successful in showing off the U of S to the world, if 
we are awarded the World Universiade — the international 
university games that are the equivalent of the Olympics. 
 
What may not be so well known is that the University of 
Regina, while technically a much younger university has its 
roots in the second decade of the 20th century, being originally 
the Regina College, founded by the Methodists in 1911. 
 
So both universities have been central witnesses, and in many 
cases major players, to the changing economic landscape in the 
province as we moved from hunters and trappers before 
European settlement, to pioneer grain farmers, to larger 
agricultural producers, to miners, manufacturers, and all the 
other key elements of our successful, modern-day economy. 
 
Throughout the past nine and one-half decades, the universities 
have been there — training students, doing the research we 
needed, and providing the inspiration and ingenuity to diversify 
our economy. 
 
The face of Saskatchewan is changing, Mr. Speaker. We all 
witness with sadness and nostalgia the disappearance of the 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

 

grain elevators. We see the statistics about the changing nature 
of our workforce. The farms that have to get bigger and bigger, 
if agricultural producers are to survive while they compete 
against market-distorting European and American subsidies. At 
the same time, we see with some pride, the growing mining 
sector, third largest in all of Canada; the oil and gas sector, 
second only to Alberta. 
 
Behind all this change is one constant, and that is the 
contribution that our universities make to make all of this 
embracing of change possible. We would not have been able to 
handle all of the changes the past couple of decades have forced 
on this province nearly so well if it weren’t for the innovation 
and experience we’ve received from the universities. 
 
To paraphrase the U of R (University of Regina) president, Dr. 
David Barnard: In the middle ages great states were known by 
the presence of cathedrals. Today as we deal with growing 
urbanization and the need to diversify our economy, this 
province will survive and thrive in large part because of our 
universities. They are the modern-day equivalent to the 
Renaissance cathedrals. 
 
People who preceded us in this Chamber had the wisdom and 
foresight to establish not one but two universities in 
Saskatchewan. They understood the fundamental, and growing 
importance of universities to civilization, particularly to western 
democratic societies. And they understood the important role 
that universities play in the social, cultural, and economic 
advancement of our province. 
 
I invite you to think back to 1905, the year the province of 
Saskatchewan was formed. Who would have thought then that a 
grade 12 education would become the basic credential for the 
labour force? Who would have thought that a university degree 
would become increasingly the minimum requirement for a 
growing number of jobs? Who would have thought that 23 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s 18- to 24-year-olds would be enrolled 
fulltime at university; that well over 10 per cent of university 
students would be First Nations or Métis? And who would have 
thought that about 60 per cent of university students would be 
women? 
 
Our universities help build capacity all across this province. 
They have educated generations of Saskatchewan’s professional 
people, and more importantly, they have educated generations 
of thoughtful Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Saskatchewan’s two universities offer many similar programs. 
It is good that they do so. First of all, Saskatchewan’s tradition 
is one of balancing social, cultural, and economic development. 
And so a sound liberal arts and science education is 
foundational to every university program. Regardless of a 
student’s major, it is essential that they receive a well-rounded 
education. Never has this been more critical than in today’s 
world — with its social, cultural, and economic complexities. 
We need people with broad perspectives and deep 
understandings. A solid grounding in the arts and sciences 
provides that, and so both universities have at their core the arts 
and sciences. 
 

Secondly, the demand warrants some common programs. 
Education and administration and commerce are excellent 
examples. 
 
While Saskatchewan’s universities share a common tradition of 
the liberal arts and sciences, they have evolved though, Mr. 
Speaker, in separate and complementary ways. They are not 
replicas of each other. 
 
For example, both universities offer programs in engineering. 
While students could study many varieties of engineering at 
either university, the University of Regina’s Faculty of 
Engineering has developed particular expertise in petroleum 
engineering, and the University of Saskatchewan’s College of 
Engineering has an emphasis on transportation and electrical 
engineering. 
 
While the University of Saskatchewan houses the College of 
Agriculture, the College of Law, and the health sciences 
colleges, the University of Regina has the province’s Faculty of 
Social Work, the School of Human Justice, the Police Studies 
program, and the School of Journalism. They are different, in 
separate and complementary ways. 
 
Both universities also serve the broader community outside of 
Saskatchewan. For example, the University of Saskatchewan 
hosts the Western College of Veterinary Medicine. The 
University of Regina’s Police Studies program is becoming a 
resource for all the Prairie provinces. And the Faculty of Social 
Work is educating social workers in the Yukon and the 
Northwest Territories, as well as in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Petroleum Technology Research Centre at the University 
of Regina and the Canadian Light Source, the synchrotron at the 
University of Saskatchewan are international in scope. 
 
The two universities, as I’ve said, are different and 
complementary. Their rivalry belongs — quite properly, Mr. 
Speaker — on the football field and nowhere else. They have 
important and different mandates. And now more than ever this 
province needs both universities strong, proud, and working for 
the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
They have, as I said, different mandates. So let me talk very 
briefly about those mandates. 
 
The University of Regina takes its role in contributing to the 
social, cultural, and economic advancement of Saskatchewan 
very seriously. In discharging this role it recently chose five 
academic themes to focus on that not only build on the 
university’s strengths but also align with the strengths and the 
needs of the province. 
 
Those five academic themes are: culture and heritage, energy 
and the environment, informatics, population health, and social 
justice. By focusing on those five areas, the University of 
Regina is mustering the energies of faculty members across the 
university and attracting partnerships with the private sector, the 
federal, provincial, and municipal governments, and community 
groups. 
 
The University of Regina knows that contemporary problems 
need contemporary solutions while the traditional disciplines 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

provide the essential foundation. Working across disciplines 
and across sectors is the way to synergistically find innovative 
answers to the most difficult and complex challenges of our 
world. 
 
The University of Regina majors in co-operative and 
interdisciplinary work and understands that Saskatchewan will 
flourish only as a result of the efforts of all sectors. 
 
And the University of Saskatchewan, my alma mater, is an 
academic community whose mission is to achieve excellence in 
the scholarly activities of teaching, discovering, preserving, and 
applying knowledge. The U of S is justifiably proud of its role 
and reputation as the research-intensive home of our 
professional, medical, and dental faculties. 
 
And that university is undergoing major and important change 
right now. Just as the University of Regina has within the past 
five years renewed over one-half of its academic staff — an 
accomplishment both challenging and invigorating — the 
University of Saskatchewan has also embarked upon a major 
program of renewal. 
 
I quote President Peter MacKinnon, who said: 
 

In the two and a half years that I have been President of the 
University of Saskatchewan, there is one theme that has 
continued to inspire me — the remarkable vision of our 
university founders. They understood that the success of a 
new province, established only two years before the 
University itself was inextricably linked to the availability 
of advanced programs and scholarship on a campus of 
outstanding beauty. Now I believe that it is time to renew 
the noble dreams of our founders. 

 
President MacKinnon goes on to say: 
 

In our second century, however, we will face issues 
unimaginable in the days of our founders. Rapid change 
and uncertainty have become defining features of our 
culture. Universities must learn to anticipate and to respond 
quickly, but without losing sight of those core values that 
have made them the most enduring of the world’s 
institutions. Boundaries are becoming less distinct. In the 
new global environment, our faculty and our students must 
be citizens of the world. Knowledge is the new currency, 
and as a university we have a weighty responsibility to 
develop and transmit that knowledge. 

 
And they are doing that, Mr. Speaker. The U of S has 
recognized the issues of student enrolment pattern changes, the 
competition for faculty all across North America, and the need 
for increased differentiation among universities. 
 
So they are building a reinvigorated campus with an intense 
research focus that maintains strong links to the community. 
They are determined that the U of S will be known for its 
adherence to high international standards and its pre-eminence 
in specific areas of innovative, interdisciplinary programming. 
 
Let me give you just two examples. Just two days ago I 
attended an announcement of a $2 million research project that 
will look at co-operatives all across the continent — a major 

piece of social research. And we all know about the 
synchrotron, the hopes for so many who are working to grow 
the innovation agenda. 
 
Underlying all this, Mr. Speaker, is a total commitment to the U 
of S to be known for research and training programs related to 
Saskatchewan, to Western Canada, the North, and the Great 
Plains environments of the world. In other words, the 
University of Saskatchewan has, as one of its key elements as it 
pursues excellence and change, a true sense of place. 
 
Yes, the university is changing, but it is changing by building 
on the strengths of the past, strengths that have been nurtured 
since the university was founded. The U of S will succeed in a 
way that is uniquely Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to paint a picture of the incredible 
importance, indeed the centrality of the two universities in the 
economy, the hopes and aspirations of this province. I hope I’ve 
done so in a way that offends neither one. 
 
I also trust that members will understand that even though I’ve 
spent a fair amount of time extolling the virtues of the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, that 
this in no way diminishes my respect and regard for the 
important role played by SIAST; the regional colleges; as well 
as all the federated colleges and Aboriginal educational 
institutions such as SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College), SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies) 
and GDI (Gabriel Dumont Institute); as well as the private 
vocational schools. 
 
But I did think it was important, Mr. Speaker, to address the 
issue of the universities’ mandates and to brag them up just a 
bit. After all, Mr. Speaker, together these two universities 
receive over $311 million of provincial funding and they take 
that money, that operational support, as well as research money, 
clinical health fund and other indirect research cost supports to 
provide innovative research opportunities, exemplary 
community services, and a quality education for over 30,000 
students in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I started this address in reply to the Speech from 
the Throne commenting that for me at least the personal is 
political. By that I mean that our life experiences change and 
shape our values and our priorities. The events of the past year 
have really emphasized for me the wisdom of that old feminist 
saying, the personal is political. 
 
I’d like to end my speech today by giving a few more examples. 
In the past few months, Mr. Speaker, I have visited all four of 
the SIAST campuses — Parkland in Prince Albert, Palliser in 
Moose Jaw, Wascana in Regina, and Kelsey in Saskatoon. 
Overall I was struck with the intense dedication and motivation 
of the teachers and the incredible determination of the students. 
I would go into classrooms, particularly basic education 
classrooms, and the students kept working rather than 
welcoming the distraction of a tour through their class. 
 
I’ve been to almost every regional college in the province and I 
am struck with the sense of pride and recognition of the urgency 
of the work they do to bring post-secondary educational training 
opportunities to people in their home communities. 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

 

Not many people, it seems, know about the gems that we have 
in our regional colleges. They should go, it seems to me, from 
being our best kept secret to being the subject of routine daily 
coffee shop conversations. The regional colleges are very 
successful in fulfilling a basic regional educational need, and I 
applaud them. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, I was very privileged and honoured to 
be appointed to cabinet as the minister for Aboriginal Affairs 
and Provincial Secretary. It was an exhilarating, whirlwind 
time, those nine short months holding that portfolio, and it 
changed my point of view quite considerably. 
 
I never would have thought, for instance, that I would spend 
half a day in a limousine with the Prince of Wales. And I 
certainly could not have imagined going to South Africa to 
attend a UN (United Nations) conference against racism, racial 
discrimination, xenophobia, and related intolerance. I was there, 
incidentally, when the world trade towers were crumbled on 
September 11, and being on foreign soil at that tragic time 
brought me a feeling of keen and intense love for this country 
of Canada. 
 
While I was in South Africa I toured our twin province of the 
Free State and I would like to tell you just briefly about one 
experience as I was leaving the township. I was escorted by two 
police officers since the government was very concerned about 
the high levels of violence and concerned for the safety of a 
cabinet minister from Saskatchewan. As we left I asked one of 
the police officers what his name was in his native language. He 
told me, Leef-hoo. When I asked him what that meant he said, 
dead. It means simply, dead. I was shocked and then I asked the 
other officer what his name translated to in English and he told 
me that it meant, my spirit doesn’t sleep here. 
 
Apparently it was quite common 20 or 25 years ago for parents 
to give their children names that reflected the despair and 
hopelessness that apartheid created. This strengthened my 
resolve that we must work even harder for a bright future for all 
of our citizens here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sat down earlier this week and reviewed my 
calendar of events for last summer. It was a wonderful summer 
of learning. I attended over 30 powwows and I even learned to 
dance a bit, even though I have to be honest and admit here that 
one young man told me that my fancy dancing looked a lot 
more like just plain hopping around. I was slightly more 
successful at the Métis jigs that I went to. 
 
(12:00) 
 
I visited many First Nations in Saskatchewan and I was struck 
with the indomitable spirit and incredible patience of so many 
of the people that I met. From Thunderchild Reserve in the 
Northwest to Okanese in the South, everywhere I went, people 
were open, generous, and welcoming. Even at wakes, as people 
gathered to honour loved ones who had died, they still found 
time to share a joke or a funny story with me and to patiently 
teach me some traditional ways. 
 
I learned first hand about the cultural significance of tobacco. 
And I even came to understand, as a diehard feminist, why it is 
so important for women to wear a long skirt during traditional 

powwows. The healing gatherings I attended, even the 
indescribable sadness and grief on Little Black Bear First 
Nation after the shocking and tragic events last summer, all 
were important and compelling experiences for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for too long in this province we have had two 
solitudes. I encourage every member of this Assembly to take 
time this year to visit a First Nation, to learn first hand about the 
dreams and ambitions of the residents, to see the eager children, 
innocent and hopeful, to listen to the elders, wise and patient. 
 
You will come away with a deeper understanding and 
appreciation of the treaties as living, breathing contracts 
between Indians and the federal government and the provincial 
government. You will see why it is so critical that we move 
quickly and aggressively to ensure that we have a representative 
workforce. It is key to the future of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
It is key to the success of Saskatchewan, its businesses, and all 
our citizens. 
 
You know, some 80 per cent of non-Aboriginal people in the 
province are employed, and 20 per cent — seniors, permanently 
disabled people, and others — are unemployed. But for First 
Nations and Métis people, these statistics are reversed. There is 
80 per cent unemployment. More to the point, 75 per cent of 
First Nations and Métis families have incomes under $25,000 a 
year. It’s pretty hard to see how you can build a successful and 
sustained economy with this kind of income distribution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 52 per cent of Aboriginal people are under the age 
of 20, compared to less than 30 per cent of non-Aboriginals. 
Generally speaking, the Aboriginal population is 10 years 
younger than the non-Aboriginal population. And by the year 
2045, First Nations and Métis people will be one-third of the 
population of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, in 15 years the Aboriginal share of new labour force 
entrants will be 30 per cent, but if they are not educated to enter 
the workforce, the jobs may be there but the workers will not 
be. 
 
These grim statistics can only be reversed through education, 
Mr. Speaker. That is why it is so critical, so imperative, that we 
move forward on the second year of our Métis and off-reserve 
strategy. That is why, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to 
table the post-secondary sector Aboriginal education and 
training plan. I encourage all members of this House to study it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close off with a couple of Cree phrases 
that I was taught this last summer. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Education is sacred, education is important. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Let’s keep working together. Let’s respect each other. That is 
the good way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the bus tour this summer, I often heard our 
Premier say the future is not ours to know, but it is ours to 
choose and to build. 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

We have a great province here, Mr. Speaker. We’re the fourth 
richest in all of Canada; third in mineral production. We have 
the second fastest growing economy. 
 
But we must also be first in inclusiveness, Mr. Speaker. We 
must lead the way in making sure that all people in 
Saskatchewan get a good education and get good jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the future is not ours to know, but it is ours to 
choose and to build. The choices we make today will determine 
our future. And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will definitely be 
voting for the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
lengthy comments I wanted to offer today, but I looked at the 
clock and I realize that I’m not going to get anywhere near 
finished in the 25 minutes or so that are left. 
 
I would like to offer my congratulations though to the Minister 
of Post-Secondary Education who just delivered what I feel is a 
very personal view of her role and her obligations as the 
minister and did a very effective job. I would even go so far as 
to say she waxed eloquent. That’s in direct contrast to some of 
the droning speeches that I heard earlier. But nevertheless, I 
think credit needs to be given where credit is due, and I’d like 
to recognize the minister for that speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m gratified to be here today. I’m gratified to 
have the opportunity to stand in this House and address the 
members of this House and to deal with some of the very 
important issues that face this province. I’m gratified for the 
privilege that democracy offers us. And even though it becomes 
very frustrating from time to time, we still have the opportunity 
to say what we feel needs to be said on behalf of our 
constituents. 
 
I remember the first day after I was elected, walking up toward 
the building, approaching the building as so many of us have 
done over the years and looking up at the grandeur of this 
particular facility and being amazed at my good fortune, 
obviously — but also a little bit awed by the obligation and 
responsibility that comes with being an elected member. 
 
And as I climbed the stairs to the front door, one question kept 
coming back. It’s a very simple question and maybe 
underwhelming in its simplicity, but what am I doing here? And 
I’ve asked that question many times and the question I think has 
been answered several times over. What I’m doing here is 
representing the people who put their confidence in me as their 
elected representative. I am here on a day-to-day basis to make 
sure that their concerns are heard. And I want to express my 
appreciation to the constituents of Cypress Hills and to thank 
them for the opportunity to serve them in the best capacity that 
I’m capable of doing. 
 
I’d like to also acknowledge this morning the support of my 
family. I heard the member from Sutherland the other day 
acknowledge the support of his wife and his children, and I 
have wanted to make that point on several occasions in this 
House. None of us serve in this capacity without the, either tacit 
or willing, support in varying degrees of our families back 

home. And the sacrifice that we make being here is not nearly 
as significant, I believe, Mr. Speaker, as the sacrifice made by 
the family members that we leave behind. 
 
In my own case, I usually drive to the city of Regina from my 
home in Eastend on a Sunday night — it’s a four-hour trip — 
and I don’t return as a rule until late Friday evening. And during 
those times, my wife and daughter are at home alone to tend to 
the business of family life and all the other peculiar little things 
that arise in the time span, time frame, that I am away. 
 
So today I would like to acknowledge specifically my wife 
Marilyn, and my daughter Brooklyn, who spend at this time 
each year by themselves basically while I am here about the 
province’s business. 
 
One of the things related to that particular note of appreciation 
is the fact that we as the missing family members, or the away 
family members, we miss opportunities to share in the special 
events of our family members who are at home. 
 
And in my own case, this past week my daughter has been 
performing in the music festival in Shaunavon each day, either 
as a singer or as a pianist and maybe participating in musical 
theatre. And prior to my being elected, those were occasions 
that I was able to spend being with my wife and watching my 
daughter perform. And I haven’t had the opportunity to do that 
in the last three springs. 
 
And so I miss that and I think that my daughter misses my 
presence there. It’s a sacrifice that we’ve made as a family. And 
I know that it’s something that my daughter may not understand 
at this point, but I’m sure she will accept as she comes to 
appreciate the importance of the job that we do on behalf of our 
constituents at home and the people generally throughout the 
province. 
 
As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Cypress Hills 
constituency is a tremendously large constituency. And I have 
alluded to that on several previous occasions in speeches I’ve 
made to the House. If you get in your vehicle at the very south 
end and drive as straight north as possible at 100 kilometres an 
hour, it would take you two and a half hours to cross the length 
of the constituency. At the same speed, going from the Alberta 
border to just outside of Webb on the eastern boundary of the 
Cypress Hills, you’ve got an hour’s drive. 
 
So given those kind of dimensions you can understand the vast 
size of the constituency of Cypress Hills. From the community 
of Consul in the extreme southwest to the community of 
Success which would be the most northeasterly community. 
From the southern points of Frontier to the northernmost points 
of Leader. From Maple Creek to Webb. A tremendous, 
tremendous area, filled with wonderful people, very supportive 
people. People that, whether we agree or not politically, have 
learned that during the interim between elections I am there to 
serve them. And I appreciate again the opportunity to do that. 
 
One of the things that does concern me, having mentioned the 
size of the constituency of Cypress Hills, however, is that there 
is a prospect with the redrawing of electoral boundaries 
sometime prior to the next election or immediately thereafter, 
we are going to have an even larger territory to serve in that part 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

 

of the province. We’ve had enough of a population loss, which I 
want to address in a few minutes, to require an expanding of 
those boundaries. And it’s going to make it even more difficult 
to serve adequately the people in that vast area. We will try; we 
will try to the best of our ability. But that is a serious 
impediment to the democratic system I believe, having 
constituencies that are so tremendously large. 
 
And that’s why I might add at this point that it is of great 
importance to me personally, but to the people of constituencies 
like mine and similar large and underpopulated areas, that we 
have a plan in place in this province to keep people who are 
willing to stay otherwise, but to keep people in the communities 
that are encompassed by these large constituency boundaries. 
We cannot afford, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to lose one more person 
from those vast areas because of the impact that has not just on 
the economy, not just on the social structure but on the very 
democratic elements that we talk about having representation 
on a very personal plane. 
 
And I think that the principle of democracy is eroded, to some 
extent, as boundaries get ever larger in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have the privilege of serving literally 
hundreds of farmers, an equal number of ranchers, 
small-business people, operators of all kinds of businesses 
throughout the constituency. I have the privilege of serving 
teachers and health care workers, homemakers, retirees, artists, 
and many, many other individuals of various occupations. 
 
Even though we are a small population and a large area, we 
have a very eclectic group of people in my constituency, and 
there are communities there that are home to tremendous 
capability and talent and wonderful artists. And I would 
encourage anybody who — from this Assembly — anybody 
who has not yet visited the communities in the Cypress Hills 
area to do that, to make that part of their opportunity for travel 
this summer, and to come see what our small communities have 
to offer, not just in the way of wonderful, artistic works, but 
also in terms of some of the great museums we have down 
there. Some of them are in very small communities but have 
done . . . represent wonderful efforts to display the history and 
even what they believe to be the future of their areas. And 
tremendous volunteerism has been exhibited by the 
development of these museums in many small communities. 
 
And one other thing I’d like to allude to is the wonderful murals 
and similar efforts at artistic expression that adorn the walls of 
buildings in a couple of my communities. But the one that 
comes to mind first and foremost is the community of Sceptre, 
where artists have come in and painted the walls of some used 
and some unoccupied buildings but have depicted various, 
important, historical scenes from that area in those murals. And 
it’s a very attractive feature for the community to attract people 
into their community and to tell them a little bit about 
themselves. 
 
And one other thing I would like to do before we get into the 
substance of my presentation today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 
talk about the people who work in my office. I currently have 
two individuals who jointly share the role of constituency 
assistants in the Cypress Hills constituency office and I’d like to 
acknowledge them today. They are Sherry Webster and Beth 

Humphrey. 
 
Those two ladies have been on my staff at differing intervals. 
Mrs. Webster has been part of my staff since day one and Mrs. 
Humphrey has just come on staff in the last couple of months. 
And together, those two ladies do a wonderful job of supporting 
me, researching for me, writing letters, communicating with 
constituents, handling the telephone calls, and generally trying 
to make me look good. It’s a difficult task but they’re doing as 
good a job as they can with what they’ve got to work. I really 
appreciate their efforts on my behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of the Speech from the Throne this year 
was province of opportunity. What a wonderful title. Mr. 
Speaker, I can’t think of a province that has more opportunity 
than the province of Saskatchewan. I have no dispute with the 
title. 
 
I think that the members of the government have often tried to 
portray us as purveyors of doom and gloom. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
here to say today that nobody — nobody— believes in this 
province more than me personally, and my colleagues in the 
official opposition. We have every reason to be optimistic about 
the potential, about the opportunity that exists in this province. 
 
If there’s any concern on our part about what the . . . is in . . . 
held for the future of this province is the way in which it is 
governed, frankly. And if there is doom and gloom in this 
province, I would say that our view is that that is part of the 
government’s record, frankly. And we have looked at their 
record of governance and we’ve seen the statistical information 
and the evidence of the results of their government’s policies. 
And the doom and gloom arises as a direct result of what we see 
are the policies implemented that have caused this province not 
to realize its full potential. 
 
And consequently to be called the purveyors of doom and 
gloom is not just misleading, it’s unfortunate. Because there is 
no lock, there is no lock on love for this province by any one 
political party. And I think that that point needs to be made very 
clearly this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are loyal, we are enthusiastic, and we believe the 
opportunities and the potentialities of this province to be 
limitless. What we’ve seen unfortunately is limitations put on 
realizing that opportunity and potential through the policies of 
the current government. 
 
A few minutes ago I was talking about the size of the 
constituency of Cypress Hills and how we cannot afford to lose 
any more population. I had brought with me a copy of a 
printout, statistics from the most recent census conducted by 
Statistics Canada. And looking through this, I just wanted to 
make a particular note of the constituencies in the extreme 
Southwest — particularly my own, the constituency of 
Kindersley, and the constituency of Wood River. 
 
Cypress Hills in the last five years, according to StatsCanada, 
has lost 880 people. Now I understand there might be an 
opportunity for some adjustment of these figures. But by and 
large, I think that would be fairly representative of the reality 
I’m familiar with anecdotally and through personal experience 
— a loss of 880 people in the Cypress Hills constituency in the 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

last five years. 
 
Now if you can extrapolate that over the past decade since the 
previous census was undertaken, that’s 1,700-plus people that 
have gone from that constituency. You know, that’s the size of 
two or three small communities. It’s as though they would have 
been obliterated from the map. 
 
Unfortunately — or maybe fortunately — all those losses don’t 
come from just one community; they come from all the 
communities. But you can see the consequences of that loss in 
each of those communities with decaying houses, abandoned 
houses, closed businesses, and failing opportunities. 
 
The constituency of Kindersley has lost 1,081 people and Wood 
River has lost 1,577 people. Those two latter figures taken from 
the last census which accounts for the last five years. 
 
Now you add those up and just out of the extreme southwest 
corner we have tremendous losses that cannot continue 
unabated. There has to be something put in place to challenge 
people to stay here, to keep people here, to give them a reason 
to stay in this province, and to contribute to its growth and its 
opportunity. 
 
And that’s why I think the population issue is so significant. 
While the losses that have been announced have been 
downplayed by the government and by their sympathizers, the 
reality is that those losses mean very significant things to areas 
that are underpopulated already. And we simply cannot 
continue to have that kind of out-migration in the rural areas, 
particularly in the Southwest. 
 
I digress just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, to say that I am also . . . 
I’m affronted by the assertion from members of the government 
that call us the Alberta-envy party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is, the reality is that for most of the 
people that live in the southwest part of the province, and in my 
constituency in particular, Alberta is the land of opportunity. 
That’s where their medical care happens. That’s where they do 
their shopping. That’s where their children go to post-graduate 
school, by and large. That makes Alberta much more relevant to 
the people in Cypress Hills than Regina or Saskatoon. 
Proximity is very important. And it’s not that we envy Alberta, 
but it is our reality in terms of where we get our services and 
where we seek our professional help. 
 
And I don’t know anybody in Regina, frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
who would willingly drive to Saskatoon if they didn’t have to. 
We in the southwest part of the province are closer to health 
care in Medicine Hat than we are in Swift Current even, in 
many instances, but certainly closer than we are to Regina or 
Saskatoon. 
 
So we have an immediate opportunity to make direct 
comparisons. We don’t like having to do that, but that’s the 
reality we’re faced with. And I think that because we’re in a 
position to make those direct comparisons and live with that 
particular proximity, we shouldn’t be automatically called 
Alberta-envy or people of Alberta-envy. 
 
That’s not true. We think that the opportunities that Alberta 

provides for many residents of southwest Saskatchewan, can be, 
ought to be, available to us in Saskatchewan. And unfortunately 
that has not happened and it is our desire to see the economy 
grow and the population grow so that we can have the 
availability of very important services right close to where we 
live. 
 
I just want to refer briefly to the article out of The Leader-Post 
dated March 13, Wednesday, March 13, 2002, referring to the 
drop in population. And I guess this particular article, well I 
won’t quote from it at length, this puts into perspective the 
significance of the population loss as we’ve seen in this 
province: 
 

Not since Ronald Reagan took the president’s office and 
(Prince) Charles married Diana have fewer people lived in 
Saskatchewan, according to the latest national census. 
 
Just under 979,000 people currently call Saskatchewan 
home. 

 
And that’s according to the numbers that were released just 
about 10 days ago. 
 

That’s the lowest number since 1981 and a drop of more 
than 11,000, or 1.1 per cent, from the most recent census in 
1996. 
 
. . . Saskatchewan people moved around both within and 
outside of provincial boundaries during the five-year gap 
between 1996 and 2001 . . . 

 
But listen to this article . . . or I mean this particular sentence 
from this article, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Alberta’s thriving economy continued to lure Saskatchewan 
residents across the border, which partially accounted for 
that province leading the country in population growth at 
10.3 per cent. The national rate was four per cent. 

 
Now the reason I want to point that out and emphasize that, Mr. 
Speaker, is that as I alluded to earlier, when young people 
graduate from the high schools of the Cypress Hills 
constituency or from the Wood River constituency or the 
Kindersley constituency, without very many exceptions, 
Alberta is the destination of choice. 
 
And I need to know — I need to know — what the government 
intends to do about changing that. When I go to speak at 
schools, I talk to those young people and I ask them to assume 
their responsibility as citizens of Saskatchewan. I challenge 
them to look at what Saskatchewan has to offer. I promote the 
University of Saskatchewan, the secondary . . . I’m sorry, the 
post-secondary institutions that this province very proudly 
funds. I ask them to look at opportunities that exist here. And if 
they must leave to go to school, would they please come back. 
 
But too many times, Mr. Speaker, the response from those 
students is, if we go to Alberta to school, we’re not coming 
back — we’re not coming back. And we have witnessed that 
first hand over and over and over again. 
 
I don’t deliberately send them to Alberta. The official 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

 

opposition does not send them to Alberta. Their parents 
especially don’t send them to Alberta. Those young people are 
mature enough to make some important distinctions and choices 
for themselves. They look at the realistic opportunities, they 
make the comparison, they make the choice themselves. It’s an 
unfortunate choice, Mr. Speaker. We need to level the playing 
field to give those young people every reasonable opportunity 
and every desire to stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, many people on the government side deny 
the reality of this scene. They don’t know anybody from their 
constituencies who go to Alberta, or they know very few. They 
don’t live with this reality. But because they don’t live with the 
reality, they deny the reality. And I find that very offensive. It’s 
as though the border starts outside of Moose Jaw. It’s as though 
anything west of Moose Jaw doesn’t matter. 
 
And I think that when the government starts taking this whole 
scenario seriously, they will have shown themselves as a 
legitimate, province-wide government. At this time, Mr. 
Speaker, they do not address the issues that compel my 
constituents to make this very unfortunate choice. And I think 
that it’s time, high time, that the government paid attention to 
that. 
 
I want to quote my own leader on that very subject. Mr. 
Speaker, our leader said, in view of the statistical information 
that showed Saskatchewan’s population plummeting like a 
stone, he said: 
 

When you have a province that people want to leave rather 
than coming to it, you have to say that the policies and 
actions of the government are driving people, are driving 
taxpayers from the province. 
 

And that unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, is the reality that we live 
with in the Southwest. 
 
You’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure several times, and you’re 
about to hear many more times, the statistics about population 
loss in this province. I alluded in that article to the fact that the 
population is the lowest it’s been in 20 years . . . 
 
(12:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members of the Assembly, it is now 
12:30 and pursuant to rule 14(3) that is incumbent upon me at 
this time to put the motion which is the amendment to the main 
speech. 
 
We have been debating the original motion along with the 
amendment. And I will reread the original motion first and then 
I will reread the amendment. We will be voting on the 
amendment. 
 
The motion is: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To Her Honour The Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 
 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
That was moved by the member from Saskatoon Greystone, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
Pursuant to that there is an amendment, which has been moved 
by the member from Moosomin and seconded by the member 
of Rosetown-Biggar, which we will shortly vote. And the 
amendment reads: 
 

That the following words be added after the word, session: 
 
however this Assembly expresses its non-confidence in the 
provincial government which has failed to put forward a 
plan to deal with the growing crisis of out-migration from 
our province and a lack of economic growth caused by the 
short-sighted policies of the current Premier and cabinet. 
 

The vote then is on the amendment to the motion. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:31 until 12:41. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
Order, please. Remain standing please, members. Order, please. 
We must be able to hear every member’s vote distinctly, 
members. 
 

Yeas — 21 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Boyd 
Toth Bjornerud Eagles 
McMorris D’Autremont Bakken 
Wall Kwiatkowski Brkich 
Weekes Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert Hillson 
 

Nays — 29 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Harper 
Forbes Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Thomson 
Yates McCall  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I would ask leave to introduce guests. 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank all members and 
thank the current speaker on the debate. Mr. Speaker, we have 
three very important guests in your gallery today. That would 
be Kevin DeWalt, chief executive officer of Minds Eye 
Pictures, well known to many of us. And with Kevin today, Mr. 
Tim Johnson, who is the executive vice-president of 
programming for PAX TV. And with Mr. DeWalt and Mr. 
Johnson another well known Saskatchewan citizen, Valerie 
Creighton, who is the CEO (chief executive officer) of 
SaskFILM. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will be interested to know that Mr. 
Johnson, who is the executive vice-president of programming 
for PAX TV, represents the seventh largest broadcast television 
network in the United States. It’s a network that features shows 
which promote very positive role models and programming. 
And Mr. Johnson just moments ago flew into Regina. He’s here 
to tour the Canada-Saskatchewan sound stage, very near to 
completion here in the capital city, and will be touring a variety 
of locations in and around Regina. 
 
PAX and Minds Eye are discussing the potential of several 
television projects for the province. And if I may say, Mr. 
Speaker, not just several weeks ago I joined Mr. DeWalt and 
Ms. Creighton at the Babelsberg studios just outside of Munich, 
Germany — Europe’s largest studios and oldest studio — 
where Minds Eye have signed a memorandum of understanding 
for a film production in our province where Minds Eye and 
Saskatchewan people are well known and highly regarded. 
 
So I would invite all members this afternoon to give a very 
warm welcome to Mr. Tim Johnson from PAX TV, to Kevin 
DeWalt, and Valerie Creighton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why was the member from Milestone on his 
feet? Debate resumes on the main motion . . . Why is the 
member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add my 
welcome as Minister of Culture for the province and I want to 
say that I couldn’t be happier to have such talented people 
interested in our province and we look forward to all the 
partnerships that we are able to do with people around the 
world. And we thank you very much for considering our 
community and thank people like Kevin and Valerie for all the 
good work they do. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Wood River on his 
feet? 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the behalf 
of the official opposition, I’d also like to share with the Premier 
inviting the guests to the gallery this afternoon, and welcome 
them to Regina and Saskatchewan to look at some of our 
beautiful country and the sound stage that maybe we can get 
some business out of. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of 
pleasure that I rise today to enter debate and to make a few 
remarks on the Speech from the Throne. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
was a very good Speech from the Throne that lays out our 
government’s plans and vision for this province. But first of all, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few minutes to welcome our 
newest member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
It hasn’t been that long since my first day of walking into this 
Assembly and taking my seat. I remember the sense of awe in 
entering the House and the Assembly and assuming that 
privilege. And, Mr. Speaker, it was a sense of awe at the history 
and also the future that is held within this Assembly. But, Mr. 
Speaker, when we also walk into this Assembly we bring with 
us that sense of responsibility as representatives of our 
constituency. And if any . . . if the first few days of this session 
have been any indication, the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld 
will do his constituents proud. And I’m sure that he will make 
huge contributions to the good government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as other members have done, I would like to take 
a few minutes and just thank my family for all the support and 
advice and encouragement that they have given to me 
throughout the years. And not only since politics but from the 
very beginning, Mr. Speaker, when I have become involved in 
many activities throughout the province, the family has been 
very supportive. 
 
And I’m sure that all of us in this House would recognize that 
we couldn’t do this job, we wouldn’t have the opportunity to be 
here if it wasn’t for the sacrifices and support that we get from 
our families. They can be our best encouragement and support, 
but also our sharpest critics at times. But we couldn’t do the job 
without them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of . . . 
Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of representing the 
constituents of Moose Jaw Wakamow. And I’m sure the 



March 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

 

members in this House are aware of the success that Moose Jaw 
has achieved over the last number of years — the Tunnels of 
Moose Jaw, the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa, the murals 
throughout the city, the revitalization that’s going on in our 
infamous River Street, museums, art galleries, shops, stores. 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on for a lengthy bit of time 
talking about Moose Jaw. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the real source of pride that I have as a 
representative of Moose Jaw Wakamow gets down to the 
simple fact that in Moose Jaw it’s the people that make the 
difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — None of the successes, none of the 
changes, none of the innovative ideas that have never come 
about . . . or would have never come about but for the vision, 
the dreams, and the hard work of the people of Moose Jaw. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I think of those people, one of the first 
that springs to mind is Yvette Moore. She’s a well-known local 
artist and entrepreneur. She owns and operates an art gallery in 
a restored land titles building — Mr. Speaker, a building that 
her family and herself renovated and restored. 
 
This art gallery not only sells and displays Yvette’s artwork, but 
she is an enthusiastic and shameless supporter and promoter of 
other Saskatchewan artists and specialty crafts. As a strong 
supporter of Moose Jaw, Yvette gives generously of her time 
and energy to various boards and projects within the city. And 
also she gives back to the community in so many other ways. 
 
And Yvette Moore is not alone, Mr. Speaker. We have Michelle 
Powers from the Moose Jaw Tourism who has worked tirelessly 
to build a new tourism centre in Moose Jaw. Deb Thorne from 
the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa, the spa that’s currently 
undergoing an expansion. 
 
And also Gary Hyland, a former teacher, a writer, a founder of 
the Saskatchewan Festival of Words, and he will soon be the 
recipient of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal awarded here 
later next month. 
 
But Gary is also a driving force behind our proposed new 
cultural centre in Moose Jaw. And the public fundraising drive 
for that was just kicked off a couple of days ago and we heard a 
member’s statement about it today. But knowing these folks in 
Moose Jaw, I know that the construction and renovation will be 
underway in no time flat. They’ll have the job done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the very active people in 
Moose Jaw. But the really exciting part is, is that success builds 
on success. Enthusiasm is contagious. And this positive attitude 
that’s displayed by these few people in Moose Jaw is 
flourishing within our city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the four pillars spoken about in the Throne 
Speech, the pillars on which we will strengthen our province’s 
future, speak of investment in the economy and in the 
environment; an investment in infrastructure to build our 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we can read the throne speeches and we hear 
many of these comments and they may seem remote statements. 
So what I like to do, Mr. Speaker, is take these statements and 
think of the investments in our community, how it relates to 
myself, how it relates to my family, how it relates to my 
community. And I would encourage others to do this also. It 
makes it easier to understand what the plan is that this 
government has laid out and how it relates to each and everyone 
of us. 
 
Moose Jaw has invested in the economy. Municipal and private 
partners have worked together with support from this provincial 
government, Mr. Speaker, one step at a time. And each step 
over the years has built a solid foundation for Moose Jaw to 
grow and flourish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another one of those steps is the Moose Jaw 
Wakamow valley. It’s another source of pride for all of our 
citizens. The valley authority along with the manager Bob Wills 
have worked tirelessly to revitalize this beautiful piece of 
Moose Jaw. Walking and biking trails, wildflower gardens, bird 
watching in the summer; skating and cross-country skiing in the 
winter — the valley holds something special for all of us and is 
truly one of the best assets of our city. 
 
Another one of those steps, Mr. Speaker, that has been taken in 
our community, one more addition to our community’s 
foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another one of the four pillars in the Throne 
Speech talks of the provision of quality education. Quality 
education is essential to the success of our province, and it’s 
essential to expanding the economy and providing opportunities 
for our youth. Community schools have been spoken very 
highly of, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very pleased to have a 
community school in Moose Jaw Wakamow. Riverview 
Collegiate and Empire School play important roles within our 
community and in our city. 
 
The adoption of the SchoolPLUS program integrating education 
and human services and building on these community schools 
and allowing these community schools to adjust and address the 
problems and concerns that are in their communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I see that time is running late, and I have 
many more things. I’m going to stand . . . on Monday I promise 
I’ll stand and talk about Moose Jaw forever. But right now, 
seeing the lateness of the day, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
the House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — This House will stand adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. I wish everybody a good weekend and see 
everybody back at 1:30. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:58. 
 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2002 

 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 134 of Hansard No. 5A Wednesday, March 20, 2002, 
the line beginning 
Mr. Elhard: — . . . hear we lobbied 
should read: 
Mr. Elhard: — . . . year we lobbied. 
 
On the same page, the line beginning 
Mr. Elhard: — This government 
should read: 
Mr. Elhard: — . . . (inaudible) . . . government 
 
We apologize for these errors. 


