















































Hansard: May 14, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1383 
 May 14, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
disappointed with the treatment of the snowmobile industry in 
this province by the current government. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails and obtain funding 
for this through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown land and 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registrations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have three petitions and they are signed by 
citizens of Naicam, Tisdale, Big River, and Prince Albert. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present 
today by people who are concerned about the lack of interest in 
the snowmobiling industry: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails and obtain funding 
for this through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown lands and 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registration. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Weekes and 
Porcupine Plain. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with this government’s tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the community of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I present a petition on behalf of constituents in the 
Cypress Hills constituency concerning crop insurance premium 
hikes and coverage reductions. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition was signed by producers from Cabri, Lancer, and 
Abbey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens that are 
concerned about the deductible for prescription drugs. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Estevan, Regina, and 
Lampman. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with people 
opposed to possible reduction in services to the Davidson and 
Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, doctorial 
services available as well as lab, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to the 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the many citizens from Craik and Aylesbury. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon by citizens of the . . . Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the ineptitude of the tobacco legislation. And 
the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be found in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $50 . . . $100, pardon me. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good 
people from Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the government’s tobacco 
strategy. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the . . . And as in duty bound, your petitioners 
will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Delisle and Saskatoon area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the recent 
changes to the drug prescription plan. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the deductible on 
prescription drugs. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from Duck 
Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today with a petition also concerning the costs of drugs and 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Glentworth and McCord. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 7, 11, 18, 23, 24, 31, and 59. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 47 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister for SLGA: what is the annual cost of 
operation and staffing for the kitchen facility in the Albert 
South liquor store in Regina; what are the hours of 
operation of this kitchen facility; how many people are 
employed to operate the kitchen facility; were the jobs 
attached to the operation of this kitchen facility publicly 
advertised or tendered? 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
on day 47 I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SPMC: (1) what are all the details 
concerning the provincial government’s lease of the new 
aircraft including details regarding the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund and any private companies 
involved in the lease; and (2) will the government table the 
cost analysis it used to compare this lease arrangement with 
the cost of using charter aircraft. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
Legislative Assembly 51 grade 4 and 5 students seated in the 
west gallery. 
 
They’re from Henry Janzen School in my constituency and 
they’re accompanied by their teachers Mrs. Taylor and Mrs. 
Sorensen. And it’s really nice to have Mrs. Taylor back again 
and I’m looking forward to meeting Mrs. Sorensen today. I 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

 

should point out that they’re also accompanied by some 
chaperones: Mrs. Battams, Mrs. Sthamann, and Mrs. 
Katzberg. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to meeting with them a 
little later, around 2:30, taking a picture. And I’d just like you 
and all my colleagues here to welcome these grade 4 and 5 
students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased too 
to introduce a number of students to the Assembly today. There 
are 30 grade 8 students from Rosetown Central High sitting in 
the east gallery. Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their 
teachers Miles Bennett and Avis Dahl. And they also have some 
chaperones along although I’m sure they’re not needed. Their 
names are Mr. Brigham, Mrs. Eskelson, Mrs. Montruiel, and 
Mrs. McDaniel. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they already were able to see the special 
celebration outside the doors in honour of Queen Elizabeth II, 
Her Majesty’s 50th Anniversary, and they received books and a 
pin as well. So I’m hoping that might get me off the hook for 
the trip to the Dairy Queen. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. I hope they enjoy 
the proceedings and I know I’ll have a chance to visit with them 
afterwards. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m very 
happy and excited this afternoon to be able to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, two groups. 
The first are a group of women and their escorts, seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. One has already been introduced in the 
ceremonies from the IODE (Imperial Order Daughters of the 
Empire), Noreen Edwards. And the others are part of the Prairie 
Lily Chapter, with their escorts — Gladys and Ken Davis, 
Adeline and Keith Watson, Reva Laing, Phyllis Wright, and 
Edith Chisholm. They’re accompanied this afternoon by 
someone who’s very important and a very special part of my 
life, my constituency assistant, Tammy Watt. 
 
And I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the members 
of the IODE. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, another 
reason to be excited about today is I have special guests from 
the constituency, the grade 4 students from Jack MacKenzie 
School and they’re seated in the west gallery. There’s 27 
students accompanied by their teacher Joanne Patron, and 
parent supervisors, Mary-Anne Wihak, Raelynn Fry, Dona 
Jones, Nina Lobb, Sheila Moore, Dan Price, Layne Prudun, 
Charlene Sawatzky, Kathy Serbu, Janice Stefan, Wendy Tsang, 
and Sophia Yannitsos. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to give them a warm welcome. 
They’re going to be especially privileged today to meet with the 

Lieutenant Governor at 2:30 in the Cumberland Gallery. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and please welcome our special 
guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And members of the Assembly, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, 
members of the Saskatchewan Committee for the Queen’s 
Golden Jubilee Celebrations. They had a meeting this morning 
at Government House, followed by a noon luncheon, and 
they’re here to celebrate the events of the day with us today. 
And I’d ask all members to join in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Musical Comedy at Birch Hills School 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week Birch Hills School staged the musical comedy, Dragon 
Tale. This play, written by John Carter and Mary Kay Beall, is 
the story of a drifting nobleman that outwits a barbarous 
dragon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Birch Hills School annually conducts a musical 
that is always well received by the local community. However, 
Mr. Speaker, Birch Hills School in recent years has taken on the 
additional role of inviting elementary students from 
neighbouring schools to witness their delightful endeavours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Darcy Sander, who is also the school principal, 
directed Dragon Tale, assisted by a multitude of staff members. 
Although five students — Jordan Dyck, Kendra Barkman, 
Rachelle Larson, Jordan Ruder, and Rebecca Quale — 
performed the lead roles, approximately 75 other students had 
roles and responsibilities in Dragon Tale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, performances such as these require months of 
preparation and dedication so that hundreds and hundreds of 
adults and students who attend the three days of the performing 
can enjoy a first-rate musical comedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to all the staff at Birch Hills School, a big thank 
you for all you do for our children. And to all the students 
involved in Dragon Tale, congratulations on a well-performed 
event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in giving Birch 
Hills staff and students the well-deserved recognition they have 
earned. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Potash Industry 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we heard 
yesterday, this week is Opportunities Week in Saskatchewan as 
well as Mining Week. During this double-purpose week, it is 
worth a moment of our time, I think, to reflect on how our 
potash industry serves to enrich the provincial economy, 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

enhance national exports, and reduce world hunger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon calls itself the POW city — potash, oil, 
wheat. That proud title helps encapsulate the significance of this 
major provincial industry in spurring economic diversification, 
steady employment, and ongoing investment. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have potash reserves able to meet world 
demand for several hundred years. These high-grade reserves 
are easily accessible, giving the industry the lowest production 
costs in the world. 
 
Our 10 potash mines had sales last year of $1.6 billion; only 
five per cent of that is consumed in Canada with about 
two-thirds going to the US (United States) and the rest to the 
Pacific Rim markets. 
 
The Saskatchewan potash industry directly employs over 3,000 
Saskatchewan people, and spends about $100 million a year in 
capital investment. These are good, well-paying union jobs. 
And this is money invested in Saskatchewan. 
 
As well we have in POW city a world-class corporate 
headquarters which has in turn funded a research Chair at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Food for the world and opportunity at home. We are fortunate 
to have this resource and this industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Scholarship Winner 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to have this opportunity to give recognition to a 
constituent of mine, Mr. Bernard Levesque, of Prud’homme. 
 
At a recent scholarships ceremony at SIAST, (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) Kelsey Campus 
in Saskatoon, Bernard Levesque was awarded the Edward Ted 
Clayton Memorial Award. Mr. Levesque is a student in SIAST 
agriculture machinery technician program. 
 
Edward Ted Clayton Memorial Awards are awarded to 
full-time students based on academic standing in both theory 
and practice and the individual’s application of skills and 
initiatives. 
 
Congratulations, Bernard, on this achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Standard Machines Opens New Facility 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we’ve 
heard, Saskatchewan Opportunities Week is about celebrating 
and highlighting the many successes of Saskatchewan’s people. 
 
And my constituency, Saskatoon Northwest, is home to many 

new, exciting, and successful business stories. One such 
business is Standard Machine which has recently made a new 
75,000-square-foot facility on 60th Street East in Saskatoon 
Northwest, its new home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Standard Machine employs 100 people and does 
everything from precision grinding, highest quality gear 
manufacturing, to welding and fabrication. It is one of only a 
handful of full-service machine shops in North America to have 
such a diverse assortment of machining and metal fabrication 
services under one roof. 
 
And Standard Machine has enjoyed success far beyond the 
Canadian borders. They have shipped their products to as far 
away as Asia and South America and they continue to take on 
other and new world markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we celebrate Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Week, I would like to congratulate Greg Porter, Standard’s 
president and owner, for expressing his confidence in Saskatoon 
and Saskatchewan because he has helped to set the standard for 
successful business stories in our province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wilkie Volunteer Firefighters Honoured 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The town of Wilkie 
and surrounding municipalities of Buffalo, Reford, Tramping 
Lake, and the town of Scott honoured volunteer firefighters at a 
banquet in their honour on Saturday, May 10. 
 
A number of firefighters were awarded plaques for their years 
of service. But special awards were presented to Ed Elder and 
Jim Coffee who have retired from completing nearly 37 years 
of voluntary service to their community. 
 
Shirley and I were pleased to be able to attend this important 
event. It is very fitting that we recognize the commitment of 
these dedicated individuals. This is another example of the 
importance of volunteers in keeping many of our local 
organizations operating successfully. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in saluting and thanking all 
volunteers and especially the Wilkie firefighters. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw and District Launches 
Business Resource Centre 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
know it’s Opportunities Week in Saskatchewan, but in my 
hometown of Moose Jaw where the entrepreneurial spirit is 
doing very well and the tourism industry is thriving, business is 
doing very well thank you. Mr. Speaker, we consider every 
week to be opportunities week. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this morning along with Mayor 
Schwinghamer and several of the business community in 
Moose Jaw, I helped to launch what will be another terrific 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

 

resource for our city’s business people — the Moose Jaw and 
District Business Resource Centre. 
 
This partnership between the Moose Jaw Chamber of 
Commerce, our local regional economic development authority, 
the South Central Community Futures, and Saskatchewan 
Industry and Resources will combine many business services 
under one roof — a one-stop, full-service centre making it even 
easier for people to start or expand their businesses. 
 
At this one-stop shopping centre for business, people will be 
able to access services provided by each of the partners. Alone, 
each of these partners is a valuable asset. Together they make 
an unbeatable team — a team to improve service delivery, 
reduce overlap in government services, and enable increased 
job creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is good news for Moose Jaw and the 
surrounding area and it was a good way to start my day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Richmound Selected for Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past April 24 the 
small community of Richmound in the Cypress Hills 
constituency was recognized for its history as a baseball town. 
 
Richmound has the unique distinction of being the first 
community with a population less than 1,000 to be selected into 
the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame. This is a new 
category and it seems fitting that the town of Richmound, which 
has an illustrious baseball history, be chosen as the first 
recipient of this award. 
 
The induction ceremony will take place on August 17 in the 
town of Battleford. The community’s first ball team was 
organized back in 1913. And since that time, Richmound teams 
have been winners perennially at tournaments and 
championships throughout Saskatchewan, Alberta, Montana, 
and North Dakota. 
 
This community has produced outstanding baseball players and 
promoters of the sport, two of whom have already been 
inducted into the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame. 
 
Now over the years, many dollars have been raised to maintain 
and improve the diamond. And in 1998, a new diamond was 
built when the Richmound team hosted the provincial bantam 
championships. 
 
The residents of Richmound have always been sports minded 
and have supported all types of sporting events from early 
homestead days to the present. The selection of this community 
to the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame is a tribute to the 
players, the managers, coaches, fans, and volunteers both past 
and present. They’ve contributed much to the sport of baseball 
and to its history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Legislative 
Assembly join with me to offer congratulations to the 

community of Richmound for the recognition it so truly 
deserves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Claude Resources Finds New Gold 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, Claude Resources has made a 
new gold discovery on the Currie Rose property that surrounds 
the Seabee mine in northeastern Saskatchewan. 
 
Tests indicate that the area has high concentration, 55 grams per 
tonne, well above the average indication of 8 grams per tonne. 
Most of the holes drilled contain between 2 and 15 grams per 
tonne in one-three metre intervals. 
 
The gold vein on the Seabee property runs east and west, but 
this deposit is north of that main trend on the Seabee property. 
Claude spent $250,000 on the 18-hole drill program and will 
continue drilling to find out how far the system extends to the 
northwest and southeast. That’s exciting good news for northern 
Saskatchewan. It means more jobs and more investment. 
 
President Neil McMillan has said that: 
 

It really exemplifies how much potential there is for that 
area to become a major mining camp. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I might add that over these years, we had 
increased some support in the government side by providing an 
airline fuel tax downtrend. Also as well, we also had the 12 per 
cent royalty rates go down to 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Employment of Consultants by 
Crown Investments Corporation 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So this morning a 
number of MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
this Assembly were in Crown Corporations Committee 
meetings hearing testimony from the CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) president, Mr. Frank Hart. 
 
And we found out that the NDP (New Democratic Party) keeps 
coming up with ways, creative ways to pay off their NDP 
friends. But this one really takes the cake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year CIC paid Reg Gross’s and Garry Aldridge’s firm 
$36,000 to survey the board of CIC about what they thought of 
CIC. Mr. Speaker, that’s incredible. The board of CIC is made 
up entirely of NDP cabinet ministers. Shouldn’t they be telling 
CIC what they think on a regular basis? 
 
Why does CIC need to survey the board of CIC to find out what 
they think of CIC, and why did the government pay $36,000 to 
its political friends for this phony-baloney survey? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

Speaker. I see there’s only one person who doesn’t see over 
there, Mr. Speaker — it’s that member over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the consulting firm, Points West, does a lot of 
consulting, first of all, right across the province, inside and 
outside of the province, Mr. Speaker. They’re a professional 
consulting firm, and the member, if he’s suggesting that the 
survey that they did was only related to CIC board members, is 
incorrect. 
 
The survey that they did, Mr. Speaker, included boards on the 
different Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And it’s all about, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s all about trying to provide independent advice 
so that we . . . so that we can put in place boards that manage 
our Crowns in a very proper way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you will know, Mr. Speaker, from the number of times that 
. . . you will know from the number of times that I’ve been on 
my feet in this Assembly, our Crown corporations have 
amongst the best governance structure in all of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister missed one group that 
this NDP firm also surveyed. The NDP firm that received 
$36,000 for this didn’t just survey the board of CIC and the 
other boards of the Crowns that are wholly owned by CIC, they 
also surveyed, I understand, the senior management of CIC to 
find out what they think of CIC. 
 
Let’s go through it again, Mr. Speaker. The NDP government 
paid its NDP friends to survey NDP ministers about what they 
thought of NDP Crowns. And it cost $36,000 in taxpayers’ 
money. It’s absolutely ridiculous. Why do they need a survey? 
Do they not hold board meetings? Are they scared to tell CIC 
president Frank Hart what they think to his face, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Why is the NDP handing out untendered contracts to their close 
political friends for needless surveys? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we always look for ways 
to improve the structures of the board, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, and part of the way you do that is you bring in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Part of the way you do that, Mr. 
Speaker, is you bring in independent advice who can survey the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Part of the way you do that, Mr. 
Speaker, is to bring in independent advice. It’s standard 
business practice, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Conference 
Board of Canada rates the governance structure of our Crowns 
amongst the best in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Institute of public accountants . . . of Public Administration 
of Canada awarded CIC the Governor . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, please, with apologies to the minister. 
There are too many people talking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the Institute of Public 
Administration of Canada awarded CIC the Governor General’s 
gold medal for our governance and performance management 
systems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t think there is anything inappropriate whatsoever about 
having an independent body doing an analysis and providing 
advice. What sense would it make, Mr. Speaker, for the boards 
to examine themselves, Mr. Speaker, and then make 
recommendations without independent third party advice, so 
that we can continue to improve the governance structure of our 
boards, Mr. Speaker, to serve the people of Saskatchewan even 
better? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, it’s no 
wonder that the NDP is so out of touch. This is the kind of 
consultation they do, Mr. Speaker. The NDP pays the NDP to 
ask the NDP how they think the NDP are doing, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the kind of consultation they do. 
 
It would be funny, Mr. Speaker, it would be funny if it hadn’t 
have cost the taxpayers $36,000. Mr. Speaker, Points West, the 
firm that was awarded the contract without tender, is run by 
Garry Aldridge and Reg Gross. They got $36,000 taxpayer 
dollars from CIC for this survey. 
 
Altogether they got a quarter of a million dollars last year in 
untendered contracts. What did they do to deserve those 
contracts besides being political friends of the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is great political 
theatre. But, Mr. Speaker, the point is that you need to have 
good governance structures in place to provide good services 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that member and that party can portray this consulting firm 
as a bunch of political hacks, Mr. Speaker, but I look on their 
Web site, Mr. Speaker — I look on their Web site — and who 
are some of their . . . who are some of the people they do 
consulting for, Mr. Speaker? They consult for Alliance Pipeline 
Partnership. They consult for, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers — that’s CAPP, Mr. 
Speaker. They consult for Enbridge. They consult for 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. They consult for 
Greystone Capital Management. They consult for IMC 
(International Minerals and Chemical Corporation (Canada) 
Ltd. ) Kalium. They consult for IPSCO, Mr. Speaker. And I 
could go on. 
 
The point is, Mr. Speaker, that you need to have good third 
party advice and independent advice, Mr. Speaker, so that we 
can ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we have a governance structure in 
place that continues to serve the people of Saskatchewan in the 
best possible way we can. 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Ethanol Industry 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it ends up 
that Points West does not only just consult, they also lobby with 
CIC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Last week it was 
revealed that the NDP have been negotiating with US-based 
Broe industries through Points West to set up several ethanol 
plants in Saskatchewan. In fact, the NDP are planning to make a 
multi-million dollar equity investment in some plants to secure 
the deal. 
 
John McCook is the president of Canadian BioEnergy Inc., an 
Alberta company that is one-third owned by Saskatchewan 
business people. He says that they are doing the groundwork to 
build ethanol plants and integrated feedlots in Saskatchewan, 
but the announcement that the government may help finance 
Broe industries has made them rethink their plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP planning to finance Broe 
industries when there are other companies prepared to build the 
ethanol industry in Saskatchewan with private investment 
dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that 
what the member should understand is that anybody that wants 
to build an ethanol plant in Saskatchewan today is welcome to 
come forward and do so. That is point one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Point two is, is that unlike the 
members opposite who are ideologically hidebound and 
committed to selling off our Crowns, we believe that the 
Crowns can play a role in rebuilding rural Saskatchewan. You 
tell us that they can’t invest offshore. You tell us that they can’t 
invest out of province. And you know what? Now you tell us 
they can’t even invest in your own communities. 
 
I think what we’re seeing here today is exactly what the Sask 
Party is all about. It’s about ideology. It’s not about growth, it’s 
not about Saskatchewan, and it’s certainly not about the 
economy of this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, what that minister needs to add 
is, anybody can invest in ethanol in this province if they’re 
willing and they have deep enough pockets to invest against 
that government’s money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, local investment groups and 
other established bioenergy companies are interested in building 
ethanol plants in Saskatchewan. But now some of those groups 
are reconsidering because they do not want to compete with the 
government. 

Canadian BioEnergy has been working very closely with a 
group in Nokomis, who has raised local financing, concluded a 
feasibility study, and is proceeding with the geotechnical work. 
The next step for the group is to develop a business plan. But 
John McCook says if the NDP grants exclusive manufacturing 
rights for ethanol production to Broe industries, and I quote: 
 

. . . any further work on the integrated facility could be 
negated. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP assure everyone interested in ethanol 
development in Saskatchewan that Broe will not be given 
exclusive ethanol manufacturing or production rights in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I can be very clear, as we 
have been about this. This we believe: there is an opportunity 
here for a 400 million litre industry. We believe that this 
industry will be first and foremost an export industry. 
 
What I say is investors that are interested in investing in ethanol 
in this province in our rural communities is certainly welcome 
to do so. The question in terms of how that ethanol will be sold 
here in the province is one . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question 
of how the ethanol in this province will be sold will need to be 
worked out with Federated Co-op. That’s the marketing arm 
that we are going to need to work with. 
 
But let’s be clear. If a company wants to come in and they want 
to build a plant, they can build a plant, just as a successful plant 
in that member’s riding will continue to function. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
believes that there is unbelievable potential — not necessarily 
just capped at 400 million litres. We believe that it is as good as 
the private sector wants to drive it. We believe that the markets 
are the ones that the private sector are willing to find. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister failed to answer the question. And the 
question was: will the NDP assure everyone interested in 
ethanol development in Saskatchewan that Broe will not be 
given exclusive ethanol manufacturing or production rights? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I . . . When I was the 
minister responsible for ethanol, I met with many different 
companies that are interested in investing in this province and 
developing it. And I’ll tell you what — these companies tell us 
that they are interested in going into partnership. 
 
Incidentally, you have to ask yourself, is the party opposite — 
the Saskatchewan Party — do they support us helping to put 
this industry on the map in this province or don’t they? Do they 
support us using public funds to kick-start a 400 million litre 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

investment, a 400 million litre plant, a half-billion litre . . . a 
half-billion dollar investment? And the question, I think, also 
has to be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
potential here for a half-billion dollars worth of investment. If 
the province can put some money in to help kick-start that, why 
wouldn’t we? If that’s good enough for the ethanol plant in the 
member for Watrous’s riding, why wouldn’t it be good enough 
for other plants throughout the province? 
 
This is the issue today — is how do we now move beyond ideas 
and get into production? That’s what we want to work on on 
this side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very concerning that the 
minister opposite will not directly answer the question about 
exclusive rights with Broe industries. And there’s a number of 
communities that have been putting together dollars, putting 
together plans, and I’m sure they would like to hear the answer. 
 
The other question that I would like to ask the minister is, can 
retailers purchase their fuel wherever they choose, or is this 
government planning that they will have to purchase their 
ethanol-blended fuel from the Co-op? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, when I announced the 
policy some six weeks ago now, we said at the time that we 
thought that this policy would result in a blend of different sizes 
and locations of plants. This policy that we have introduced will 
do just that. 
 
In terms of the number of investors, in terms of the companies 
that are involved, it is up to the investors. Surely I don’t need to 
explain to the Saskatchewan Party how the free market works. 
 
But they cannot seem to get it into their mind is, why would we 
say no? Why would we say no to a potential 
multi-hundred-of-million dollar investment of out-of-province 
money in their rural communities? Why would they oppose 
that? Why would they oppose it, and yet in this House complain 
that we may look at putting some money into it? 
 
This is what I do not understand, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 
time the Sask Party come clean — not only with this legislature, 
but with their constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the 
question one more time. Will the NDP assure everyone 
interested in ethanol development in Saskatchewan that Broe 
will not be given exclusive ethanol manufacturing or production 
rights? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 
say to the member opposite that companies that are in 
production of ethanol today, we have worked with to keep in 
production and we will continue to work with to keep in 
production. Incidentally, the company in that member’s 
constituency we have helped out and we will continue to. 
 
Now if other companies are interested in coming out . . . 
coming into production in this province and we can assist them, 
we will assist them. There is nothing wrong with that. 
 
We are talking about building a 400 million litre industry in this 
province’s rural communities and we are looking at the markets 
being south of here. We are not looking at this all being sold 
here in Saskatchewan, so there is going to be lots of room in 
Saskatchewan for lots of different companies to do lots of 
different investment. 
 
I ask the members opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The minister has 15 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the opportunity to complete my answer. I would say to the 
members opposite it is time for them to start standing up for 
their constituents, not just their party, and to come forward and 
help us build the ethanol industry, support what ACRE (Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy) has said that we should 
invest where it’s necessary, support what this government’s 
policy is, and leave your ideology behind, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority Price List 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
Annually, SLGA publishes their official price list. This price 
list was mailed out to vendors and became effective on April 1. 
But a few days later they got a second booklet with a new price 
list that was effective April 2. It turns out that the first price list 
does not include the liquor tax increase that was announced in 
the March budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain when this first price list 
was printed and why the tax increase was not included in the 
first booklet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was obviously 
as a result of the budget having been announced on March 27. 
And as the member and members would probably know, that in 
advance you prepare information for your customers, for people 
that work in the industry. And as it turned out after, subsequent 
to the announcement, there was a need to make changes. That’s 
— very simply — that’s the reason for it. The prices changed 
on April 1. 
 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, another difference between the 
two price lists is a full page ad inside the first booklet from the 
Lang Family Distilleries but, when the second publication came 
out, somehow this advertising was not included. It’s only in the 
first book. 
 
I wonder how much the Lang distillery paid for this ad only to 
have it disappear on the second day’s advertising in the second 
booklet. Will this now mean that SLGA will have to print yet 
another official price list because they forgot the ad in the 
second book? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much did the distillery pay for this ad and 
will they be reimbursed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for that 
question and I will take note and report back to her exactly what 
the costs were that were involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it’s apparent that the minister 
does not know what has happened with these two booklets. 
 
Just last week, we brought up the issue of a certain toll-free 
number in the Environment department which the NDP said 
was a mistake caused by human error. Well is this human error 
too or is this just an April Fool’s joke, a sad April Fool’s joke? 
 
Liquor vendors are shaking their heads at this botched price list. 
Mr. Speaker, they are already calling the 3 per cent increase in 
liquor tax a huge expense for their industry and then they 
receive two price lists dated one day after the other. They see 
this as pure waste and incompetence. Is anyone in charge over 
there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much did it cost SLGA and ultimately the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan for the latest mismanagement and 
incompetence of this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure exactly 
how that member spends all of her time doing all this very 
important research, Mr. Speaker, but I thought that my first 
answer was quite logical. 
 
When you print materials in advance — I don’t know how 
quick those members are — and then there are changes that 
need to be made, you have to make those changes. It doesn’t 
happen overnight. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the questions that are raised with respect . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The minister has 
10 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — So, Mr. Speaker, those specific answers 
with respect to those particular costs, I will be happy to supply 

the member with any time. All she had to do was call my office. 
I would have supplied her with those answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Assessment of Agricultural Land 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the minister of Municipal Government. 
 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) had 
a news conference this morning asking for changes to property 
assessment to remove inequities between ag land and other 
properties. After the 1997 reassessment and then again in 2001 
we saw a dramatic shift, placing a much heavier burden on 
agricultural land to do with education tax. They are asking to 
return to the ag land being assessed on a productivity based 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Liberal-NDP government consider 
changing the way that SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) values agricultural land? Will the 
minister consider this, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to respond to that question, just to underline the fact that yes, 
municipal . . . Government Relations works very closely with 
municipal governments and with SAMA and this is certainly 
something that was brought to our attention. It was brought to 
SAMA’s attention and they are in the process of reviewing all 
aspects of the whole assessment process. 
 
So I’m very pleased to report to the House and to the hon. 
member, Mr. Speaker, that yes, there are some reviews being 
carried out and we’re including all the affected people that this 
will apply to, Mr. Speaker. So yes, we are looking at all that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister might remember that back in 1997, after that 
reassessment, the then minister Carol Teichrob give us exactly 
that same answer. And then about three or four consecutive 
ministers since then has also said, we will review it. 
 
And what was SARM asking today? Finally, to finally make 
some changes, to take the load off of education tax off farm 
land to the degree that it’s not fair for farm families. 
 
So while the minister is saying, yes we will review it, how long, 
Mr. Speaker, are farm families going to be downloaded on by 
this government before they finally get some action on this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I can report to the hon. 
member that as a result of the consultations with our good 
friends in the municipal sectors that SAMA . . . my 
understanding is the SAMA board will be reviewing this very 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

situation, the agricultural land valuations, at its May 21 
meeting, this year, in a very short period of time. Just in a very 
few sleeps, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want to tell you one thing that municipalities in this 
province are very happy about, that the same thing didn’t 
happen to them as what happened to Alberta where $631 
million of projects were cut; where there was almost $724 
million of tax and fee increases in that province — something 
that didn’t happen here. 
 
We supported our municipal sector; we increased the revenue 
sharing, Mr. Speaker; and we’re working with them to improve 
all aspects of concern to that community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
might . . . Let’s review a little bit for the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The ag budget this year cut dramatically, another $25 million 
cut on the education tax rebate. They gutted crop insurance. 
How long will they continue to download these taxes onto farm 
families? 
 
They said, Mr. Speaker . . . this government said years ago to 
the farmers of this province, diversify. They diversified. They 
said, get more efficient. They got more efficient. And what have 
farmers seen in this province? Continual downloading by this 
NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well this morning Neal Hardy talked about 
the drought; he talked about high taxes; he talked about the 
things that our farmers have to deal with day after day under 
this socialist government. He’s asking for some reprieve. 
 
Will the minister, Mr. Speaker, promise once and for all? Make 
changes to SAMA, don’t wait for it to happen. Take the 
initiative, do the right thing, help farm families in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very easy for 
the members opposite to look at all the negative aspects of a 
very good, positive budget this year. It’s simple to pull those 
out. I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
municipalities and our friends and neighbours out in rural areas 
recognize the fact that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Please be patient. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The municipalities recognize that, under 
the circumstances, this coalition government is doing 
everything it possibly can to ease the burden. 
 
Matter of fact, Mr. Hardy, that the hon. member had referred to, 
said that he was pleased to see that there was an additional $4.3 

million increase in revenue sharing grants to RMs (rural 
municipality), Mr. Speaker. 
 
 In addition to that there will be some money for roads and 
fixing bridges. 
 
 So really it’s easy to look at the downsides but there are very 
many positive aspects of what’s been happening in our efforts 
to assist our rural communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 49, The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Department of Agriculture and Food 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, The 
Department of Agriculture and Food Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to advise the Assembly that I 
hereby table the Saskatchewan . . . the report, the 2001 Annual 
Report of the Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate. 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Congratulations to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly by prior agreement 
of the Government House Leader and the Opposition House 
Leader, this Assembly will be considering a motion of 
congratulations to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II prior to 
orders of the day. 
 
It is my duty at this time to advise the Assembly that I have 
received a message from Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, 
Dr. Lynda M. Haverstock. Would all members please rise. The 
message is as follows: 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

 

CANADA 
PROVINCE OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 
ELIZABETH THE SECOND, by the Grace of God of the 
United Kingdom, Canada and Her other Realms and 
Territories 
QUEEN, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the 
Faith. 

WHEREAS the year 2002 marks Our Golden Jubilee 
of Our Accession to the Throne as Queen of Canada; and 

WHEREAS We wish to express Our thanks for the 
affection and loyalty of Our Canadian people which We 
have enjoyed for the past fifty years; and 

WHEREAS We have invited Canadians, by 
Proclamation under the Great Seal of Canada, to join in 
celebrations of this happy occasion and to recognize their 
achievements during Our Reign; and 

WHEREAS Our Executive Council of Our Province of 
Saskatchewan has indicated its desire that Our Golden 
Jubilee should be formally recognized in the Province; and 

WHEREAS Our Legislature of Saskatchewan will 
observe Our Jubilee on the 14th day of May, 2002, and Our 
Province will mark Our Official Birthday on the 20th day of 
May, 2002, through a Golden Jubilee Celebration at Our 
Government House in Our Regina; 

NOW KNOW YE, that by and with the advice of Our 
Executive Council of Our Province, We do by these 
Presents proclaim Our Will and Pleasure that the 14th day 
of May to the 20th day of May, 2002, shall be The Queen’s 
Golden Jubilee Week in Saskatchewan. 

OF ALL WHICH PRESENTS Our loving Subjects of 
Our said Province and all others whom they may concern 
are hereby requested to take notice and govern themselves 
accordingly. 

IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF We have caused Our 
Great Seal of Our Province of Saskatchewan to be hereunto 
affixed. 

WITNESS: Our right and trusty and well-beloved 
Honourable Lynda Maureen Haverstock, Lieutenant 
Governor Of Our Province of Saskatchewan. 

AT OUR GOVERNMENT HOUSE in OUR 
CAPITAL CITY OF REGINA, in Our Said Province, this 
Eighth Day of May, 2002, and in the Fifty-first Year of Our 
Reign. 

 
By Command, 
Joanne Crofford 
Provincial Secretary 
Lorne Calvert 
President of the Executive Council 
Chris Axworthy 
Attorney General 
 
(Signed), Lynda Haverstock 
Lieutenant Governor 
 

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN 
 
Please be seated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly 
to move a humble address to Her Majesty the Queen. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour and a 
pleasure for we in this legislature and across Saskatchewan to 
be extending congratulations to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 
on this occasion marking her 50th anniversary of her accession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in her accession speech in 1952 the Queen 
declared the following, quote: 
 

I shall always work, as my father did throughout his reign, 
to uphold constitutional government and to advance the 
happiness and prosperity of my peoples, spread as they are 
all the world over. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is a task she has undertaken faithfully and 
unflinchingly, through good times and bad, for 50 years. And 
we have witnessed directly her inspiring example of devotion to 
duty and unselfish labour on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people of Canada, and in other nations of the 
Commonwealth. 
 
This Golden Jubilee is an occasion both to look back at the role 
the Queen has played in the affairs of our province and nation 
and Commonwealth over the last 50 years, but also an 
opportunity to look forward. The Queen has expressed the wish 
that her Golden Jubilee should be an occasion for celebration 
involving the whole community throughout the 
Commonwealth. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, we join with all Canadians and members of the 
Commonwealth in doing just that — celebrating this occasion 
and trusting that she may reign for many years to come in 
health, happiness, and in the affectionate loyalty of her people. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That a humble Address be presented to Her Majesty the 
Queen in the following words: 
 
TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY: 
 
MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, QUEEN OF 
CANADA: 
 
We, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Session 
assembled, wish to extend our sincere congratulations to 
Your Majesty, on this year of celebration marking the 
fiftieth anniversary of Your Accession. 
 
The People of Saskatchewan have been honoured to 
welcome Your Majesty and other members of the Royal 
Family to our province during Your reign and have 
witnessed directly, your inspiring example of devotion to 
duty and unselfish labour on behalf of the welfare of the 
people of Canada and in the other nations of the 
Commonwealth. 
 
We trust that Your gracious and peaceful reign may 
continue for many years and that Divine Providence will 
preserve Your Majesty in health, in happiness and in the 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

affectionate loyalty of Your People. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — With leave to respond. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
deal of pleasure that I stand in the Assembly today on behalf of 
Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and join with the Premier and all members of the 
Legislative Assembly to congratulate Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth II on her Golden Jubilee, the 50th Anniversary of her 
accession. 
 
A 50-year reign is indeed a magnificent milestone and a reason 
to celebrate. Over the last 50 years, Her Majesty has a played an 
important role in the affairs of the Commonwealth Nations. 
Indeed she is respected and revered around the world. 
 
She visited Saskatchewan, and on one occasion in 1987, visited 
just a number of communities; Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Saskatoon, Canora, Yorkton, Veregin, Kamsack, Kindersley. In 
other words, she showed an interest in the entire province. 
 
And she said on that occasion in Saskatoon, that the 
constitutional monarchy has always placed the emphasis on 
people and community — as it were, a national family with a 
sovereign as its head. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Her Majesty’s 50-year reign is a time for 
reflection on how our nation and our lives have changed over a 
half century. It also provides us with an opportunity to look to 
the future, guided by the principles that sustained Queen 
Elizabeth throughout her reign. 
 
I would like to second the motion, in honour and celebration of 
the Queen’s 50 years of dedicated service, and wish her many 
more years of health, happiness, and loyalty from her people. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to move a 
motion of transmittal. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the address to Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II be 
engrossed, signed by Mr. Speaker, and forwarded through 
the proper channels. 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today on behalf 
of the government by leave to respond to written questions no. 
173 through 180 inclusive and question 191, 192. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 173 to 180 inclusive 
have been tabled. Also have been tabled questions . . . responses 
to 191, 192. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that we convert 
for debates returnable questions 181, 190 . . . through 190 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has requested 
conversion of questions 181 through to 190. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure today for me to stand up and talk about the topic of 
ethanol because I believe that it is something that is sincerely 
felt on both sides of the House, that it’s an extremely important 
economic opportunity that we have in this province. 
 
It’s an opportunity not only for the environment and an 
opportunity to go a long ways to meet the Kyoto agreement if 
that ever needs to be ratified, but it’s an industry that would 
create jobs with the construction of the plants. It’ll create jobs 
when the plant is up and running and it’ll create jobs in the 
service industries from the trucking companies and different 
suppliers. 
 
And it’s an extremely important industry for the agriculture 
sector in our province, Mr. Speaker, because it’ll be a place 
where we can locally use our products that we grow. It’s a 
value-added industry, so there’s an opportunity to take the 
products that we grow that has depressed prices right now and 
add value and sell them as a product that perhaps is more 
valuable. And it’ll help in the spinoff industry. And in particular 
I know a lot of different private investors and communities are 
looking at building feedlots in conjunction with the ethanol 
plant or expanding existing feedlots that they have already. 
 
So it’s a win situation for the environment and for the 
community of the whole . . . as a whole and it’s a win-win 
situation for our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So although I do sincerely believe that both sides of the House 
have a strong belief that it’s important to our province, I think 
the difference that we are experiencing in the House, is who 
should ultimately be the driver of such an important industry. 
 
And as everyone in the House knows, I’m quite familiar with 
Pound-Maker Agventures, which was built over 10 years ago 
now, by a group of investors. These investors, Mr. Speaker, had 
a vision for the future — for the future needs of a friendly 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

 

environment or an environmentally friendly fuel. And this was 
even before the Kyoto Agreement was talked about. And it was 
before there was such a huge downturn in agriculture, and it 
was before value-added just became a real common buzzword 
that we hear all over the place. 
 
They were a group of investors, Mr. Speaker, that had a vision 
and they had leadership. They had the wisdom to recognize the 
potential market and they had the willingness to take the risk. 
And now it is our . . . right at the present day it’s our province’s 
only existing ethanol plant and it’s the largest feedlot we have 
in our province. 
 
And the question that we have to ask is, how did that happen? 
Was Pound-Maker Agventures just an accident? Is it something 
that’s really rare? Is it a fluke, a chance, Mr. Speaker? Or is 
Pound-Maker Agventures an example of what the producers 
and the business people of this province are capable of and all 
we have to do is give them a chance and the business 
environment to do so? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the appetite for a renewal, environmentally 
friendly fuel is accelerating at an incredible pace right now. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order, please. The member from Watrous has the floor. Order, 
please. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — And it’s common knowledge that we in 
Saskatchewan have an abundance of feedstock. 
 
It’s interesting that the Minister of Agriculture is presently 
yelling across the floor that the government was detrimental in 
the building of Pound-Maker Agventures and he said that the 
government’s involvement was with Sask Wheat Pool. So it’s 
interesting to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member from Yorkton and 
the member from Redberry to allow the member to speak, 
please. The member from Watrous has the floor. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting to 
know that the Minister of Agriculture thinks that the 
government owns Sask Wheat Pool. 
 
Now it’s also interesting that after dragging its heels for a 
number of years, the NDP has finally recognized the 
opportunity for economic development that we have here and 
introduced a piece of legislation to promote ethanol production. 
Now they need to get their heads around the policy that should 
go with it. 
 
And the fundamental question that we should all be asking here 
in the House is why do we want to build an ethanol industry in 
our province? Do we want to build an ethanol industry simply 
to become the number one ethanol producer in Western 
Canada? Or do we want to build an industry that can revitalize 
rural Saskatchewan and grow Saskatchewan? 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party believes that we can do both, but 
only if we leave it in the hands of the private sector with CIC’s 
involvement restricted to the sole role of a lender of last resort. 
 

It’s no surprise the Saskatchewan Party received a couple of 
anonymous letters from someone concerned about CIC’s 
beginning a deal with OmniTRAX Broe industries out of 
Denver, Colorado. And Frank Hart has told us — from CIC, the 
president of CIC — has told us that the deal isn’t signed yet but 
they are negotiating. And the question is, why? Why are they 
negotiating with anyone at this point in time? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members are being completely unfair 
to the member who is on the floor — completely unfair. And I 
would ask the members . . . I would ask the members to give the 
member who has the floor the respect that any member and 
every member in this Assembly has, and that is the right to 
speak without being interrupted. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So 
again I ask the question. Why is CIC considering signing any 
deal at all only weeks after the NDP ethanol announcement? If 
this government is so sincere about allowing the growth of the 
industry to be driven by the private sector — which is what the 
minister who made the announcement said in a number of 
different forums, many of which that I was at — then what is 
the rush for CIC to get involved? 
 
And why are they favouring Broe industries who is a real estate 
company in Denver, Colorado — a company that has absolutely 
no experience in ethanol? And why are they favouring that deal 
over and above any others? 
 
This government’s dragged its feet for years on even going so 
far as creating a level playing field in our province by 
exempting the road tax, which is what our neighbouring 
provinces do for their ethanol producers. 
 
And they announced a study that was supposed to be released 
last summer and they then said it was going to be released last 
fall, and then I believe they said it was going to be released the 
beginning of this year, and so on and so forth. 
 
It finally was released, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and when the 
announcement came along with the release of the study the 
minister had said that it would be driven by the private sector 
and they wouldn’t be picking winners and losers. 
 
And interestingly, perhaps they forgot to tell Frank Hart at CIC. 
I had the privilege of going to a CIC committee meeting on 
May 7th and I would just like to, if I may, quote something that 
was said by Mr. Hart. 
 
The question that was posed to him is — there was questioning 
on why he was involved with the ethanol industry, why they 
were getting involved with, in particular, Broe OmniTRAX and 
when this all began. And he said: 
 

. . . late last fall I think. And you know, the opportunity 
potentially to do some investment in the ethanol business 
came forward and we agreed that we would look at it 
together to see if there was in fact potential to do 
something. 

 
So in other words, Frank Hart was in negotiations with Broe 
industries last fall. And that’s rather interesting because the 
report was not complete, according to the government. They 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

hadn’t completed the report; they hadn’t made an 
announcement. However, Frank Hart seemed to have an inside 
track on that and he was already busy making . . . or having 
negotiations with Broe industries even though the minister 
announced that it would be driven by the private sector. 
 
So who’s in charge? Is the private sector going to be allowed a 
chance or not? And by the answers of the minister to the 
questions during question period this morning, I really question 
if the private sector is going to have a chance. 
 
Broe industries is asking for an exclusive right to the 
manufacturing of ethanol for a five-year time period in this 
province. They are picking four communities; they are picking 
the size of the plant; they are picking all of these factors. So 
where does the communities come into play here? Where do the 
private sector dollars come into play? 
 
At committee Mr. Hart said all the right things about how the 
industry is important and how they’re willing to help out 
because they’re needed, and everybody’s going to need them to 
help out. But when I quizzed him as to if he knew of a private 
sector companies that were willing to put their own dollars into 
it, that perhaps, maybe, CIC wasn’t needed; perhaps there was 
enough investment dollars, enough interest amongst 
communities and private businesses, he didn’t know. He said 
that CIC had no process in place to find that out. 
 
So I questioned him. And again, I quote from the Hansard from 
that meeting. I said: 
 

How do you know then if there’s a need for you to become 
involved in the industry? 

 
And Mr. Hart said: 
 

Because so far the individuals we’ve talked to have told us 
they want us to involved. 

 
(14:45) 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no kidding. I don’t think the private 
sector’s going to go and have coffee with Mr. Hart and say, 
how’s the weather, nice day out, and by the way we don’t need 
help from you. We just stopped in to have coffee. 
 
The people that are approaching Mr. Hart of course are the ones 
that are asking for help. That is no indicator to the number of 
groups and communities that are not asking for help. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other question that I have to ask, you 
know with Broe industries, it’s quite alarming. We’re talking 
about an American-based industry. So why is Broe their 
choice? They’ve been negotiating with some other companies 
that I can understand as well. And the only connection that 
makes any sense as to why the deal is being negotiated with 
Broe Industries over and above other industries that have 
experience in ethanol, other industry — or other companies that 
rather — that have or that are Canadian owned, is the fact that 
there’s a connection to Points West. 
 
And again, in question period we pointed out how Points West 
is connected to our government. Points West has done over a 

quarter of a million dollars of consulting fees for CIC. So you 
have to sort of wonder why that they are doing this in 
conjunction with just Broe Industries. 
 
The third question, and I think this is a fundamental question on 
growing Saskatchewan, how does this deal add value at the 
farm gate? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How does this add 
value to the farm gate, if we have a company that’s solely 
American and government owned? 
 
The way to add value to a product is you take the low-priced 
products — and our prices are low right now, Mr. Speaker, 
because of subsidy wars, international subsidy wars — you turn 
that product into something of greater value. And if the 
producers and the communities are involved, then the producers 
themselves can add that value and that is how they realize a 
better profit at the farm gate. 
 
Now if the government owns that company, who’s adding 
value? Who’s getting the profit out of it? And I assure you that 
it’s not going to be the farm gate. 
 
And if they’re in partnership with Broe Industries, those profits, 
where are they going, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Are they going to 
be spent in those local communities or are they going to the 
US? These are questions that need to be asked. 
 
Are we going to build an industry for the profit dollars to be 
going into two coffers — one is that of a company in the US 
and, secondly, that of the government? What is the advantage to 
the farm gate? 
 
Is this company going to pay the producers more money for 
their grain? I hardly think so, Mr. Speaker. I really doubt that 
very much. 
 
So also, you know, since the announcement has been made, 
there hasn’t been all that long a period of time that has passed, 
but there has been a number of communities, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that have started to look into perhaps this being a 
possibility in their community. They’ve done water tests, soil 
tests. They’ve done feasibility studies. They’ve done a lot of 
work. And it doesn’t come without a dollar value. 
 
So if all of a sudden they’re written off by some exclusive deal 
made by the Crown corporations so that we can have a state 
owned ethanol industry in our province, who compensates those 
communities? 
 
They were encouraged by the minister of the day that this was 
going to be driven by the private sector, that there was a place 
for these communities to be involved in this decision. They 
were not told that there would be four winners and four winners 
only. 
 
So with that, I would like to move the motion, seconded by the 
member from Redberry Lake: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the provincial government to 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

 

live up to its original commitment regarding the ethanol 
industry in Saskatchewan and let the private sector build 
the industry here and that the provincial government refrain 
from interfering in the determination of the location and 
number of ethanol facilities in the province and from 
picking winners and losers in the ethanol industry. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to speak on this motion today. 
 
We have to remember that the whole ethanol debate goes back 
some time. It actually goes back to September 19 when the 
Leader of the Opposition made an announcement concerning 
the Saskatchewan Party’s plans for the ethanol expansion. And 
the Leader of the Opposition announced that a Saskatchewan 
Party government will promote the expansion of ethanol 
industry by introducing an environmental tax credit for the 
ethanol-blended gasoline, require all the gasoline sold in the 
province be 10 per cent ethanol blend. 
 
Other aspects of the announcement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 
that Saskatchewan should lead the way in the production and 
consumption of environmentally friendly ethanol. Ethanol 
production has a potential to create new jobs, diversify the 
struggling agriculture economy, and contribute to a cleaner 
environment that we must all act on soon. 
 
Doing that announcement, we talked about the lower tax on 
capital investment that would stimulate expansion of the 
ethanol production right here in Saskatchewan by using 
Saskatchewan-grown wheat, feed grains, and straw. 
 
The announcement went on to say that Saskatchewan doesn’t 
need another Crown corporation taking ownership position and 
financing the construction or operation of new ethanol facilities. 
And we believe that the private sector construction and 
expansion of ethanol production facilities is good news for 
Saskatchewan for many reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Ethanol is an environmentally friendly substitute or additive for 
gasoline, so burning more ethanol as fuel means cleaner air and 
a cleaner environment for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Ethanol production will create a new market for Saskatchewan 
grown feed wheat and grain and straw, and the construction and 
the operation of ethanol production facilities would create 
hundreds of new jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
As well, the ethanol production creates several valuable 
by-products including high-protein cattle feed that we use as a 
key input in large feedlot operations, and also a significant 
increase in number of feedlot operations could supply cattle 
necessary to attract large-scale slaughter facilities as well as 
meat processing and packaging facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know after that the government basically 
stole the Saskatchewan Party’s plan and took credit for it, and 
we as the Saskatchewan Party would not have any problems 
with that if they took our plan in whole. But unfortunately, 
that’s where the comparisons end. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government does not believe in 
private sector investment. They believe that the government 
must have its fingers in every facility and every business 
venture in this province. And it’s very disappointing to not only 
the people of Saskatchewan but also to the potential investors of 
this province that the government, once again, is entering into 
agreements with foreign multinational companies and taking 
equity positions where the private sector would be more than 
glad to take the position. 
 
And I’d like to point out that initially the minister said, and I’d 
just like to quote from Hansard, that: 
 

. . . the former Energy minister, the member . . . (of) Regina 
South, announced the NDP’s ethanol strategy in March, 
(and) here’s what he told Leader-Post reporter, Bruce 
Johnstone: 

 
“Thomson promised the province would not be involved 
directly in the industry either through equity investment, 
debt financing, or Crown corporation participation.” 

 
Well unfortunately, unfortunately, we see now it was, it was 
less than two months later that the government has totally 
changed its mind. Or maybe the government didn’t know what 
they were doing at all, because as we know, the Crown 
corporation that is involved, CIC, has been negotiating this deal 
that they’ve . . . that the government is announcing, in the 
process of putting together more than a year ago. 
 
So unfortunately, the minister of the day did not have any 
particular clue what he was really talking about. He said one 
thing, and unfortunately the CIC president had other ideas that 
he didn’t inform the government and the minister of the day of 
what the intention was. 
 
And so not only the government has not lived up to its original 
commitment, but this whole process is scaring away private 
sector investment in this industry. And it’s a signal to the 
private investors that this is not a province to invest in. And 
once again, that this is not good for Saskatchewan. This is no 
way to grow Saskatchewan. And the private sector and the 
people of Saskatchewan desperately want the government to 
change its mind and get out of the business of doing business 
and let the private sector do the job that it does so well. 
 
The government is not only being an investor in these projects, 
but also is picking winners and losers as far as which 
communities the ethanol plants are going to be in. They have 
picked four communities. 
 
But what about all the other communities in this province? I can 
name a number of them that have plans to build feedlots. And 
part of their plan is, after the feedlot is up and running, to 
expand and introduce an ethanol plant to their operation. First 
Nations people are looking at investing in ethanol production 
and feedlot production. 
 
Communities all across the province are looking at investing in 
this very important industry with a high potential for growth. So 
what is the government saying to those, those folks? 
 
Unfortunately they’re giving a negative . . . sending out 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

negative signals and the . . . So the private sector is stepping 
back. Now they’re stepping back because there’s the 
government — got their hands in the pie, their fingers in the pie 
once again. And it’s a very detrimental effect on the industry 
that is just being developed. 
 
We’ve had one ethanol plant and it — in Saskatchewan — and 
it was started with private investors and ran . . . and it’s still 
running today — a very successful operation without any 
Crown investment or government investment in an equity 
position in any way. And this is very . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the member so would all hon. members please come to 
order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 
saying, it has really, really sent bad vibes through the private 
sector in this province. And not only that, it’s sent the wrong 
signal to potential investors across the country and across North 
America. 
 
Because as we know, as the ACRE report said, we need billions 
of dollars of investment in this province. We do not have the 
money in this province, whether it be government money or 
private sector money. We have to access capital from around 
Canada, around the world, and we need to start now to 
encourage that investment and set a good example to these 
businesses so that they feel confident that their investments will 
turn out in a favourable way. 
 
And the government’s present tax policies, their present policies 
of government involvement in the private sector is not sending 
the right signals to the industry in any way, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And we only have to look into the details of this arrangement 
that they’re trying to do with the Denver . . . it’s a Denver-based 
real estate company. It’s a company that has never produced a 
litre of ethanol in its whole history and this government wants 
to go into a project with a company that has no background in 
the industry. So one must wonder why the government has 
chosen to be a partner with this particular company and to go 
into the ethanol business with them. 
 
And also again the government is picking the winners and 
losers by picking the communities that the ethanol plants will 
be constructed and operated from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder why they would do a deal with 
a company that has no expertise in the industry, but also one has 
to wonder why that they have given . . . they are in the process 
of giving this company exclusive rights to production and 
marketing of the products. 
 
And again this is a very serious situation where the signals are 
sent out, negative signals to other private investors in the 
province or outside the province that are willing to set up 
ethanol plants in the province when they also . . . not only they 
are competing with taxpayer money in the construction and 
ownership of the facilities but now they must go to this new 
arrangement that the government has set up with this 
Denver-based company to market their product and to produce 

their product. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And now as we see it, it seems, even though the minister would 
not answer the question, so it seems that they’ve also set up an 
arrangement with Federated Co-op — the Co-op Upgrader — to 
blend the ethanol and so . . . exclusively . . . so one must 
wonder what other deals are in the making. 
 
So it gives me great deal of pleasure to second the motion by 
my colleague from Watrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into this debate at this particular time, a debate 
I think is relatively timely and on an issue that is prevalent to 
Saskatchewan. I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s made even 
more prevalent with the recent announcement in the United 
States of their government’s intention to expand and enhance 
their farm subsidy program. In fact I believe the President of the 
United States simply signed that program a few days ago, 
which, as you and I and everyone in Saskatchewan knows, that 
it’s going to have a very negative impact upon Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan economy, particularly on Saskatchewan farmers 
and the rural way of life. 
 
So that is why it is probably a timely debate to have at this time 
because what we’re looking at here is a move, a desire by this 
government to recognize the fact that in order to maintain a 
strong Saskatchewan economy, a strong Saskatchewan rural 
economy, we need to move Saskatchewan from what it has 
been for the last two or three or four generations, I guess, since 
its becoming a province. 
 
And it has had an agricultural industry that has been a 
commodity-based industry; an industry that has produced the 
raw product and exported it abroad. And for a number of 
generations there was enough margin, enough profit in that type 
of operation that we were able to support family farm type 
operations. 
 
But as the world has changed and as agriculture has changed 
too, fairly dramatically, we are now experiencing competition 
in our commodity-based operations — not just from within 
Canada, not just from within North America, but right around 
the world. 
 
We’re seeing the ability of countries which . . . oh, a mere 20 
years ago were net importers of our king product, our wheat, to 
move to . . . Those countries have moved to a production of 
wheat that has now made them self-sufficient in wheat. In fact 
in some cases they are even now net exporters of wheat. 
 
Great Britain is one of those countries that comes to mind. And 
we know that during the Second World War and certainly for a 
long period after the Second World War, Great Britain was a 
net importer of Saskatchewan-grown wheat. 
 
But through plant breeding technology, improvements in plants 
and in wheat products, Great Britain farmers now are able to 
produce wheat that not only meets all their domestic needs but 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

 

they also export nearly 10 to 14 per cent of their annual 
production. So of course this has had a very negative impact 
upon commodity prices. 
 
In more recent years — the last 10, 12, 15 years — we’ve seen 
the European Common Market countries along with the United 
States locked in a battle over market share; causing those 
federal governments in those countries — the European 
Common Market countries and the United States — to come up 
with a subsidy program to offset the productivity costs of their 
farmers. 
 
For example, the price their farmers receive is much greater 
than the price that that product is sold for on the international 
market. Unfortunately our federal government has not seen fit 
to stand up to those unfair trade subsidies from both the United 
States and the European Common Market by supporting our 
Saskatchewan farmers with that type of subsidy program that 
would allow free competition and the survival of Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Instead, our federal government has backed away from its 
responsibility and left Saskatchewan farmers to compete 
directly with the treasuries of European common markets and 
the United States. 
 
But with this in mind has been a recognition certainly by this 
government, but a recognition I think by a growing number of 
Saskatchewan people that there’s a real need for the 
Saskatchewan agriculture economy to move away from its 
traditional base of a commodity-based economy to a 
value-added base. And this debate over ethanol and ethanol 
production and the establishment of an ethanol industry here in 
Saskatchewan is certainly a part of that. 
 
Is it the whole picture? Is it the single answer? No, but it is a 
part of the puzzle that will move the Saskatchewan agriculture 
economy from a commodity-based economy that through the 
last dozen years or more has faced a cash crisis every spring. 
Because of the low prices the farmers receive for the 
commodities compared to their high cost of production, farmers 
find themselves in a crash . . . cash crunch every spring. 
 
And we’ve seen the need for the federal government and the 
call on the federal government on a consistent basis over the 
last 12 years, 15 years, for the federal government to pony up to 
its responsibility and come through with a cash support for our 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
So far they have failed to do that. In fact in more recent years 
they’re indicating their unwillingness even to entertain the idea. 
That’s why it’s most urgent that we here in Saskatchewan move 
our agriculture economy to a value-added economy. That, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, can partially be done through a development 
of an ethanol plant — an ethanol industry in this province. 
 
As we know, there’s . . . ethanol alone, isn’t the only answer. 
There’s certainly a commerce around ethanol production. But 
there’s even a greater commerce that fulfils the whole picture is 
in the utilization of the by-products of ethanol production. 
 
I think a classic example of what I’m trying to get to is 
Pound-Maker’s feedlot at Lanigan, Saskatchewan. And I along 

with my colleague, the member from Regina Victoria, we had 
the opportunity this summer, when we were part of the 
Premier’s bus tour, to stop in at Lanigan and meet with the 
board of directors, representation from the board of directors, 
and some of the people who . . . you know, in charge of the 
operation there. They gave us, certainly a very broad outline of 
their operation, and gave us the history and the background of 
it. And then we were most pleasantly surprised when they 
agreed to give us a tour of the facility. 
 
And as you, I’m sure, are very much aware, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that that facility comprises of a feedlot which was their 
initial operation. And then a number of years ago they added to 
that an ethanol operation where they now produce ethanol and 
export much of that ethanol production, but they use a 
by-product from the ethanol production in their feedlots. 
 
The raw material, the brand, the starch that’s left over from the 
ethanol production is very rich in nutrients and works quite well 
for the production of beef. And also the liquid that’s produced 
in the ethanol production is also very rich and very nutritious 
and that is pumped through the waterlines so that the animals 
not only get the by-products now for their dry intact, but they 
also get the liquid part which is also very rich in nutrients. And 
according to the operators there, they have indicated that their 
records show a higher rate, again, from those animals who are 
fed from the by-products of an ethanol plant. 
 
So it adds to the envelope of a complete operation that has very 
good economic returns. Not only for the direct investors but for 
all the community around it. Not only through the jobs, not only 
through the opportunity for livestock producers to have a new 
market for their animals, but also the spinoff positives such as 
silage production because silage is very intricate part of their 
operation. So they produce . . . Several thousand of acres of 
silage is harvested and stored and utilized by the feedlot. And 
that creates jobs in that spinoff to seasonal workers involved in 
the silage production. 
 
There is also, of course, the grain production as they buy grain, 
much of their grain from the local farmers there which creates 
another market for the farmers that grow the grain in that area. 
 
And then there’s jobs created through the cleaning of the corrals 
and the spreading of the manure and so on. So there’s not only a 
commerce from the ethanol production, not only a commerce 
from the feedlot end of operations, but also the spinoff, all the 
support mechanism that takes to support that type of operation. 
 
And I just . . . As I see my time is running down, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I just want to say that it’s obvious that this government 
is on the right track. It’s obvious simply by an issue . . . an 
article in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, Friday, March 22, 2002 
where the former critic of Agriculture for the opposition, Bill 
Boyd, said: 
 

“It’s a positive development for agriculture,” said Boyd. 
 
And I quote from the article: 
 

“Farmers have been asking for . . . marketing choices. It 
will provide another market (choice) for our grain(s) here 
in Saskatchewan . . . (It’s) certainly . . . (very) positive.” 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

Said Mr. Bill Boyd, former Agriculture critic for the Sask Party, 
the members opposite. 
 
I’m believing that Mr. Boyd’s seen the light. Maybe that’s the 
reason why he left that party, left those benches, and went back 
to his farm. I don’t think he could stand the negative attitude, 
the tunnel vision of the members opposite. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move an amendment 
to the motion, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Elphinstone . . . pardon me, Regina Elphinstone. And the 
amendment will be . . . I’d like to move the amendment: 
 

Amend by removing all the words after “Assembly” and 
replacing it with the following: 
 
commend the provincial government for following its 
original commitment regarding the ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With that talk earlier 
of Saskatoon Elphinstone, I was worried that redistribution was 
getting way out of hand. 
 
But it’s a pleasure to take part in this debate and to second the 
fine amendment put forward by the member from Regina 
Northeast, and to stand in the House today to lend my voice to 
those who support the development of a thriving ethanol 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ethanol represents a natural opportunity for our 
province. It has the potential to address many of the most 
important issues and opportunities in Saskatchewan today. The 
development of a strong ethanol industry in the province has the 
potential to add value to locally grown grains, to create market 
opportunities for grain producers, to create an expanded feedlot 
industry, and to contribute to the growth of Saskatchewan’s 
livestock industry. In short, Mr. Speaker, growing the 
province’s ethanol industry will encourage the further growth 
and diversification of our agricultural industry. Further, Mr. 
Speaker, it will create valuable jobs and economic activity in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the greatest opportunities we have for diversifying our 
agricultural sector and creating rural jobs and wealth, Mr. 
Speaker, is in the area of expanded livestock production. 
Saskatchewan is home to many natural advantages in this area. 
 
We have an expansive, affordable land base, competitive costs 
of production, access to high-quality feed grains, minimal 
disease risk, high-quality breeding stock, access to and 
utilization of leading-edge technologies, and a recognized 
research infrastructure. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the 
opportunities for growing our livestock industry are 
tremendous. 
 
We’ve already seen this opportunity realized, Mr. Speaker, in 
the province’s pork industry. Big Sky Farms was established in 
Humboldt in 1995. Over the last several years the company has 

expanded its operations throughout rural Saskatchewan. It has 
doubled — doubled — its annual production of top-quality 
hogs, and has become one of the largest producers in Western 
Canada. 
 
With that growth, Mr. Speaker, have come valuable jobs and 
economic activity for rural Saskatchewan. Our pork industry is 
now attracting investment and interest from companies outside 
of Saskatchewan and the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province invested $15 million in Big Sky 
Farms. That investment helped to stimulate industry growth and 
made possible ongoing development in the province. The 
growth of our pork industry, Mr. Speaker, is an excellent 
example of an opportunity that was identified and acted upon 
and that became a true Saskatchewan success story. 
 
We have an opportunity to create another Saskatchewan success 
story, Mr. Speaker, by proceeding with the development of a 
provincial ethanol industry . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
would suggest, Mr. Speaker, if the member has questions for 
me, there is a question and answer period. Perhaps she can 
restrain herself until then. 
 
Anyway, such development would stimulate further expansion 
of our livestock industry and would open the door for rural 
development and revitalization. The development of a strong 
ethanol industry, Mr. Speaker, will directly contribute to 
expanded feedlot and livestock industries in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are currently 1.1 million cows in 
Saskatchewan. However, only 280,000 calves are fed within the 
province, and more than 700,000 Saskatchewan calves are sent 
to Alberta to be finished and slaughtered every year. Following 
them are Saskatchewan-grown feed grains and forages. The 
related job opportunities and economic benefits that could be 
staying in Saskatchewan, aren’t. 
 
The development of an ethanol industry that would contribute 
to the expansion of our feedlot industry would put an end to 
this, Mr. Speaker. It would keep value-added opportunities, 
jobs, and wealth right here in Saskatchewan where they belong. 
 
A domestic ethanol market of approximately 150 million litres, 
Mr. Speaker, would feed in excess of 600,000 calves with the 
grain that is a by-product of ethanol production. If we maximize 
that opportunity for exporting ethanol, Mr. Speaker, we could 
feed up to 1.2 million calves right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a direct correlation between the 
development of the ethanol industry and the growth of the 
Saskatchewan cow herd — growth that could help 
Saskatchewan position itself as a world leader in beef 
production. Creating an ethanol industry in the province and 
realizing the potential of our feedlot and livestock industries, 
Mr. Speaker, would result in tremendous benefits to rural 
Saskatchewan and to the province as a whole. 
 
Just last month the Action Committee on the Rural Economy 
released its final report, representing one of the most 
comprehensive reviews of rural Saskatchewan ever undertaken 
in this province. Through their extensive consultations with 
rural people, businesses, and organizations, they identified more 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

 

than 40 priority recommendations for stimulating rural 
development and achieving rural revitalization. 
 
Some of the key opportunities ACRE identified, Mr. Speaker, 
lie in the areas of ethanol production, livestock production, and 
value-added activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ethanol represents an opportunity for 
Saskatchewan that we cannot afford to lose. The benefits . . . 
the development of an ethanol industry has to offer in terms of 
strengthening our agricultural sector, in terms of stimulating 
rural economic development and creating rural jobs, it’s 
tremendous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that ethanol 
development is good for agriculture, good for rural people and 
communities, and good for Saskatchewan. I strongly support 
the development of an ethanol industry in this province. And 
I’ll certainly be voting in favour of the amendment. 
 
But before I close, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say a few words in 
response to the statements made earlier by the members 
opposite as they launched the debate. It seems that public 
dollars, public investment in any way, shape, or form is 
anathema to them. 
 
You know, it reminds me earlier, earlier on in this session, Mr. 
Speaker, a number of weeks ago . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would appreciate if all hon. 
members would give the member who has the floor a chance to 
complete his speech, just as other members would give 
members who have the floor. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In terms of public 
investment in kick-starting this industry, as was mentioned in 
question period and has certainly been talked about since the 
announcement of the policy six weeks ago, you know we have 
never precluded a role for public investments in this exciting 
opportunity. But the members opposite insist on playing games 
where they tack together half-truths and misquotes to try and 
construct this story counter to what the position is of the 
government. 
 
And, you know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. It indicates an 
ideology that is so heavily blindered upon the members 
opposite. You know, there a few weeks ago the member from 
Swift Current stated that we’ve endured — endured — close to 
60 years of unremitting, unrelenting socialism in this province. 
So there was 9 years of that Grant Devine socialism and there 
was 7 years of that Ross Thatcher socialism, and the member’s 
agreeing from his chair. But you know he’s the only person that 
I’ve ever . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . One of my colleagues 
is saying that for 60 years the people got it wrong. How dare 
they. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. If Grant Devine was such a big 
socialist and if Ross Thatcher was such a big socialist, I can 
only conclude that the members opposite — as represented by 
the comments of the member from Swift Current — I can only 
conclude that they’re so far to the right that they’re going to fall 

off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, this government, this government 
believes that there is a role for public dollars to partner with the 
people and the industry to make sure that this opportunity is 
realized and that the jobs and the benefits are returned to the 
people of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
have obviously heard, previously, the words of a sanctimonious 
socialist — I’d say at his best but obviously any sanctimonious 
socialist is never at his or her best. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to enter into the debate 
on ethanol. I’m a firm believer in the ethanol industry in this 
province. I think all of us are . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Hon. members, we have 75 
minutes, so I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Shall I 
start again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re all . . . we’re 
all very keen on the ethanol industry in this province. There’s 
many, many reasons; we’ve heard an awful lot of them here this 
afternoon. 
 
The greenprint, definitely an asset to have ethanol and ethanol 
blend in gasoline. However, when we start looking at the 
methodology that this NDP government wants to drive the 
ethanol industry, to me it is totally wrong. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as soon as you get government 
involvement in industry, it drives away investment. It drives 
away investment dollars. We are bound by this for the last 60 
years. That’s one of the reasons investments does not come into 
this province. 
 
And it’s very, very interesting to hear members opposite even 
talk about the cattle industry. I’m not so sure how much of the 
cattle industry the member from Regina Elphinstone really 
knows, but I’ve been saying this since my involvement in 
politics. We send 750,000 head of feeder cattle out of the 
province to be fed. Why? It’s because this province, under a 
socialist government, has been unable to develop the feedlot 
industry because of investment, because of government red 
tape. That’s the only reason the cattle are going out of the 
province. 
 
Now what we want to do is develop an ethanol industry in this 
province that is paid for by the private sector where you can 
draw investment capital in from the private sector. Why in 
goodness gracious does the government want to get involved 
other than through their ideological presence of they have to 
control? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s an article in the paper that I just 
received . . . 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — There’s an article in the paper here that 
really identifies an awful lot of the problems that we in 
Saskatchewan are facing and have faced over the last number of 
years. And the headline . . . the headline in the paper actually is 
very, very succinct: “Place proves socialism makes things 
worse.” Talking about Saskatchewan. Socialism makes things 
worse. 
 
And the author of this article, and I’m going to read a fair bit of 
it, says: 
 

Sixty years ago, Saskatchewan decided the only solution to 
the Depression was the CCF and the inimitable Tommy 
Douglas, Baptist preacher turned social gospeller decided 
the state was the only entity that could be trusted to fix 
things. 

 
The state is the only entity trusted to fix things. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is the problem we have today with the socialist 
government. They think that they are the only organization that 
can fix things. And in fact it turns it off. It changes. It makes 
things worse. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear comparisons 
to Alberta on a continuing basis. And I’m going to quote this 
article again. There’s a lot of merit in this: 
 

Today, Alberta has a population of three million, a GDP of 
$150 billion, and a lot of former Saskatchewanians making 
a lot of money for themselves and others in our province. 
(This is Alberta.) 
 
Saskatchewan, on the other hand, has a population of just 
over a million and shrinking, a GDP of . . . 25 billion, and 
an exodus of its best and brightest. 

 
Ah, you say, but Alberta discovered oil in 1947. Yes, I say, 
but Tommy Douglas chased the oil companies and 
wildcatters out of Saskatchewan in the 1940s, prudently 
arguing that Saskatchewan resources be left for future 
generations. As a result, some roughnecks went poking 
around Leduc with a rig that they had with them when 
ejected from Saskatchewan. 
 
And now — oh, the cruel irony of it (all) — Albertans are 
funding and pumping, finding and pumping oil in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The royalties from the oil and gas drilled from . . . 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Thank you. I’m 
interested in what the member has to say but the issue before 
the Assembly is dealing with ethanol, so I would encourage the 
member to start bringing it back to the main motion. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — . . . very much pertinent to the ethanol 
industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the reason I say it’s very 
pertinent, we’ll be driving the ethanol industry out of this 
province just like the oil was driven out of this province back in 
the earlier days of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation ) government. 

So much-needed revenue is what the oil companies are putting 
back into this province now. 
 

So, in other words, the industry created when Saint Tommy 
chased the evil wildcatting snakes from his socialist 
paradise is now saving Saskatchewan’s sorry skin. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the oil businesses were chased out 
of this province, that is the worry that I have and we have with 
the ethanol industry. If you get the government involved in this 
and start picking the winners and losers, where are the investors 
going to come from other than from within the government? 
And therefore you’re going to drive investors out. And where 
are they going to go? 
 
If this continues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 10 years from now we’ll 
be sitting in this legislature saying, boy, wouldn’t it have been 
nice if we would have got the ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan? Well we can’t have it both ways. We can’t have 
a government involved in picking winners and losers and expect 
the ethanol industry to stay here. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s an awful lot of pluses with the 
ethanol industry. And I want to go back to the cattle — why we 
don’t have the feed here for the cattle, or the feedlots. Again it’s 
a government bureaucratic red tape that has been hurting the 
feedlot industry in this province. 
 
One feedlot that I spoke to about eight years ago tried for seven 
consecutive years to get a licence in this province and failed and 
they ended up moving to Alberta. That’s progress. That’s rural 
revitalization under this NDP government. 
 
Now I look at . . . We have a feedlot that opened in my 
constituency in spite of the government — in spite of. Now 
their biggest problem . . . I was called on a fairly regular basis 
from this organization and usually it was a problem that they 
were having with government agencies. So now what we have 
to do is again make sure government gets out of the road of 
industry in this province, and specifically the ethanol. 
 
Another aspect of the ethanol industry I just want to touch base 
on is, we have a government here that introduced the ethanol 
Bill very much like ours except for one single item that was 
missing. We stated in our ethanol policy last fall that we would 
legislate a percentage of blend in gasoline — an ethanol blend 
in gasoline. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask all hon. members 
to give the member who has the floor the consideration to 
complete their speech. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — We would legislate the per cent of 
ethanol blend in gasolines. And now we have a government that 
brings out the policy but does not want to bring in the blend of 
gasoline until later. 
 
Well why, for goodness sake, would you want to do it later? 
Why not do it now so you would entice some private industry 
into this province and some investment? I believe now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the reason that it wasn’t included in the Bill is 
because the members over there knew all along that it was 
going to be a government-run ethanol industry. So therefore 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

 

they didn’t need to legislate ethanol if it’s going to be a 
government-run industry. The hypocrisy of it all is 
mind-boggling, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And we talk about, we talk about a 400-million-litre capacity in 
this province. Why for goodness sake would we limit it to 400 
million? If we let free enterprise run the ethanol industry in this 
province, if they find a market for it why not let them build? 
Why say only 400 million litres? 
 
My goodness, if it’s free enterprise let them find the level mark 
for it. Don’t let the government sit and say we’re only going to 
allow 400 million litres. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the value added for farmers with the 
ethanol industry is phenomenal, especially if it’s left alone 
without government influence. Choices, choices for farmers for 
product, what they can grow, where they can sell it. 
Ideologically again the members on that side of the House are 
Wheat Board people, and so now people can, farmers can grow 
grains outside of the Wheat Board and sell to feedlots or to 
ethanol plants. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the motion and not the 
amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to enter this debate today in the Assembly about 
ethanol and ethanol development. I think there’s a lot of 
misconceptions about what exactly it is that we are talking 
about here and some of the parameters that are naturally around 
the industry. 
 
I listened to the member for Wood River talk today and clearly 
he is confused about what exactly is necessary to build an 
industry. When we speak about a 400-million-litre industry 
being built in this province we talk about that after the 
economic studies have been done. It’s based on the amount of 
available wheat. 
 
Now the member opposite may understand that if you’re 
building a wheat-based industry there’s a certain amount of 
wheat that’s required here. To build a 400-million-litre industry 
we’re talking about 1 billion . . . sorry, 1 million tonnes of 
wheat, 1 million tonnes. 
 
Now what there is — and maybe you could loosely title my 
comments today economics 101 for the members opposite — 
what we have here is there is an exchange in terms of the 
amount of wheat that’s available and the price that you can get 
it at so that you can put it into the ethanol, so you’ve got a 
reasonable exchange value so you don’t inflate the price of 
gasoline. 
 
This is a basic, simple formula. What we are talking about here 
is the ability to build an industry that doesn’t see the price of 
gasoline inflate as you put in the blend. The member asks, why 
didn’t we introduce legislation with a specific 10 per cent 
blend? 
 
Well the reason’s very simple. We don’t have enough ethanol in 

Saskatchewan today to blend in 10 per cent. So what they 
would suggest instead is that we import it. What they would 
suggest instead is that we build in a market model which may 
inflate the price of gasoline. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what 
the consequence would be of that kind of a mandate. 
 
Legislation I’ve introduced in this Assembly allows us to put in 
a graduated mandate. As production comes on-line we have the 
ability to put it into the blend. Why the members wouldn’t 
understand how this works is I think somewhat mind-boggling. 
 
Clearly the member for Wood River doesn’t, as is given by his 
statement saying that he was going to move an amendment, that 
he wants to make sure we got the 10 per cent blend built right 
into the legislation. Well that’s foolishness. It’s bad for 
consumers, it’s bad for developing the industry. It is not a good 
sound policy and the member should understand that. 
 
Now I listened to the member for Watrous talking today and I 
think that she makes some very serious allegations, allegations 
that I think she should take outside of this Assembly so that she 
can be called to account on them. If she is alleging, if she is 
alleging that our policy around ethanol development is based on 
who we’re dealing with in terms of consultants, I want to tell 
her right now she is wrong. 
 
Listening to her today talk about a Saskatchewan company like 
Points West in the derogatory way that she did, I find very 
interesting when it was only — what? — two weeks ago that 
the leader of that party stood up bragging in this House that one 
Verna Thompson, Verna Thompson was going to run for the 
Sask Party. 
 
Well goldarn it, you know what? As I look at who’s on the 
letterhead of Points West, who’s there but Verna Thompson. 
What an unmitigated scandal. What a socialist operation that 
Points West must be to have that Verna Thompson there. Well 
there you go, there you go. 
 
So what we have here is another unfounded slur against 
Saskatchewan enterprise. Another unmitigated slur. I say to her, 
if she has serious allegations, make them outside of this House. 
Let’s just see what the people have to say about this. 
 
But substantively today, what we’re here to talk about is how 
do we build an ethanol industry. And what I think is interesting 
is listening to the members opposite trip over their ideology as 
they attempt to try and talk about investment. 
 
We have an opportunity to build a 400-million-litre industry. 
The amount of investment required for that will be in excess of 
$300 million just in infrastructure, potentially $500 million in 
infrastructure, not to mention the amount of capital that’s going 
to be required for the hog barns, not to mention the amount of 
capital that’s required for the cattle industry, not to mention the 
other value-added processes that might be built around it. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Speaker, I find very interesting is 
that now all of a sudden the members opposite have good 
investment and bad investment. When we talk about bringing in 
outside investment, private sector capital, they say, oh no, no, 
no, no. Please don’t bring that in. Oh, no, no, we can’t have any 
of that bad outside investment in our province. We have to 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

drive that off, they say; we just cannot have that. 
 
What is wrong with outside investment? What is wrong with 
capital coming into this province to help build our rural 
communities? And what is wrong with doing that in partnership 
— in partnership with the communities, in partnership with 
local investors, and in partnership, if they ask, with Crown 
Investments Corporation? What’s the problem with that? 
 
I don’t hear the members opposite complaining that we’ve got 
Weyerhaeuser in the province, a big American company out of 
the US. I don’t hear them complaining about the fact that we’ve 
got Cargill in the province. I don’t hear them complaining about 
that. I don’t hear them complain that we’ve got Esso and Exxon 
here in the province. 
 
What we’re talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is how we build 
an ethanol industry here and to do that we require capital. I sat 
in this Assembly the other night and I listened to the 
presentation by ACRE. And ACRE representatives that came 
before this House . . . maybe the members took notes, maybe 
they didn’t, maybe they listened, maybe they didn’t care. They 
said time and again that what we needed to do was attract 
capital into our province. What the proposals are that we’re 
looking at would do just that. 
 
And it’s not just American capital. We’ve been out talking to 
local investors. We’ve been talking to credit unions. We’ve 
been talking to other investors across this country to ask them to 
invest in here. 
 
You know, I just find it very interesting though that the 
members opposite seem to now all of a sudden be picking and 
choosing as to what kind of investment is okay and what isn’t. I 
think it’s time that they come clean with this Assembly. I think 
it’s time that they come clean with their constituents, and I 
think that they should explain to them why we would not 
welcome the investment into our province that can help build a 
clean, friendly, alternate energy source which is good for 
Saskatchewan. It’s good for our farmers, it’s good for our rural 
economy, it will allow us to diversify into cattle. 
 
These are the reasons we introduced an ethanol policy. These 
are the reasons we have pursued this kind of an investment 
policy and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that those members 
opposite should come clean and tell their constituents that it’s 
their ideology that they’re trying to protect. It’s their seats 
they’re trying to protect. It’s not their home communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a shame. That’s a shame that they 
are so caught up in the cheap politics that they cannot look 
beyond that in order to support the local investors and the kind 
of communities that we support. 
 
For the member for Wood River to stand up and say that we 
shouldn’t be looking at a partnership deal which may very well 
bring a plant into his constituency — into his constituency — I 
think is shameful. Isn’t that amazing? 
 
Well the members opposite say it’s pork-barrel politics. Well 
whose pork barrel? It’s not a riding I represent. It’s not an NDP 
riding. This isn’t a case that we’re trying to feather our own 
nests. We’re trying to build rural Saskatchewan. 

Goodness knows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we have an 
opportunity to bring in private sector investors and private 
sector capital and we can do that in partnership, and we can 
help work with communities, we should do that. Why wouldn’t 
we do that? 
 
The member for Watrous often talks about the role for the 
private sector. She says it should be all private sector. The 
government should invest. I’d be very interested to know 
whether or not she takes the same view with the ethanol plant in 
her own hometown? Does she now say that we shouldn’t be 
putting forward government money to support that? 
 
I’ll have a chance, I guess, in a couple of minutes to ask her this 
question directly. But this is, I think, one of the things that we 
really do need to get into a discussion about. If we can build 
this community, if we can build the ethanol industry, if we can 
build something here in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan’s rural 
communities that help Saskatchewan’s urban communities, that 
help Saskatchewan’s environment, why wouldn’t we go to all 
lengths to do it? 
 
Leave the ideology behind, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let’s move 
forward. Let’s get some agreement on this. 
 
And I ask the members again to join with us. Drop the ideology. 
Drop the politics. Let’s get on with finding the investors. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After listening 
to all that drivel, I think it needs a response. 
 
The minister is absolutely wrong. We need private involvement 
without government control. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. We 
shall now have a 10-minute period available to — order, order 
— we’ll now have a 10-minute time to allow members to ask 
questions and comment briefly to matters relevant to the 
contents of the speeches and allow members who spoke in the 
debate to respond to questions raised. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister of correction 
services, the member from Regina Albert South. 
 
His initial statements dealing with the ethanol industry were 
that it would be privately driven, Mr. Speaker, private 
investment. Then later he changes it to, well, it’s private 
investment with government investment as well. And now it’s 
going, Mr. Speaker, to the idea that there will be government 
investment through CIC plus one private company, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the question has to deal with, will that private company 
have exclusive manufacturing capabilities in this province, that 
you have to deal with CIC and that company if you want to 
manufacture? Will other people, who might be interested, be 
given permits to develop their own ethanol industry, Mr. 
Speaker. And will there be exclusive blending rights through 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

 

the co-op? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that 
if you have 60 or 70 per cent of that investment being private 
sector, that that would be a private sector driven initiative. I 
don’t know how else the members opposite would view it. 
 
If you’ve got that . . . a majority of ownership and you’ve got 
the control in the private sector, it would seem to be a 
private-sector-driven initiative. If this private sector is picking 
the locations, that would seem to be the private sector driving 
the process. 
 
Now the members opposite seem to have a problem with this. 
And I think that we should just get this out in the open. Let’s 
understand. Do they agree with having public-private 
partnership or do they not? Do they agree with the approach 
that we put forward, or do they not? 
 
Will there be room in this province for investors of different 
companies? Absolutely. Nothing is stopping anybody today 
from building an ethanol plant in this province. Nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker. 
My question is for the member from Wood River. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is simple. Would the member from Wood River 
proclude any ethanol plant development in his constituency if it 
required some percentage of public investment for the company 
to proceed? Or for that matter, any form of loan guarantee, 
which also puts it on the public debt load, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Would he proclude proceeding in his constituency if that was 
required? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
suppose a simple question deserves a simple answer, but I’ll 
make it a little bit more complex for the member. 
 
If you, if this government would allow private investment in my 
constituency — I have organizations that are working on fully 
private investments — would that government allow a fully 
privately funded ethanol plant any place in this province with 
. . . without exclusivity given to Broe enterprises? 
 
I would support any venture within my constituency, but I 
would definitely like to see the venture have the opportunity to 
be fully privately funded without influence from the 
government or without being co-opted or coerced by 
government. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is for the 
member from Regina Elphinstone. If we have a signature or a 
deal that’s made through CIC and a private company — and 
that could be any private company — that they have exclusive 
rights for manufacturing and producing ethanol in the province, 
if these are the two owners of all ethanol production in the 
province, how does that provide more money at the farm gate? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When it 

comes to, you know, taking questions from the members 
opposite based on hypotheticals, it’s a bit of a mug’s game, you 
know, so I’d prefer, I would prefer to judge them by what they 
have said on the record before. They promised the doom and 
gloom but it isn’t borne out in reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they referred to the last provincial budget as a 
fudge-it budget, as an example of jiggery-pokery. You know, 
those hard-headed money men at Moody’s were so impressed 
with their rhetoric that they upgraded our credit rating, Mr. 
Speaker. So when it comes to taking things on faith from the 
members opposite, I have a little trouble with that. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, now that the member for Wood 
River, has confirmed that they would in fact take public 
investments in the ethanol industry and did a flip-flop on their 
position, I would ask the exact same question of the member 
from Watrous. Would the member from Watrous allow, permit, 
grace us with any form of public investment or loan guarantee, 
public partnership in an ethanol plant in her constituency? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve 
already given a scenario in my constituency, and actually I’ve 
given two scenarios in my constituency — one of which is an 
ethanol plant that is already built on private sector dollars and 
one where a company has been working with the community of 
Watrous which is also in my community . . . or in my 
constituency that is using private sector dollars. So that’s two 
ethanol plants, one that’s in place and one that’s potential that’s 
happening in my constituency on private sector dollars. 
 
And I was more than . . . if anyone, if the member opposite 
would have been listening, I said very, very plainly and very 
explicitly in my speech that I feel that the only role that 
government has to play — and I was . . . they can go back to 
Hansard and check it out — is the lender of last resort. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask of the 
hon. member for Regina South whether it is the intention of his 
friends from Broe OmniTRAX to ship heavily subsidized US 
corn to our ethanol plants here — to use US corn with it’s 
heavy US subsidies as the raw material for the production of 
ethanol in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s helpful in this 
debate if we stick to the facts. The members opposite don’t 
seem to be able to understand this. 
 
We are interested in building a wheat-based, ethanol process 
here in Saskatchewan. Now if the private sector wants to come 
up and build itself a plant and import corn and then ship the 
ethanol back into the States, if they want to do their 
value-added processing in Saskatchewan, what would stop that? 
What would be wrong with that? We’ve been doing it the other 
way for 100 years. 
 
But I can tell you this: projects that the government is interested 
in partnering on are going to be wheat-based, they’re going to 
involve partnerships with the communities, and they’re going to 
help facilitate cattle development in this province. That’s what 
we’re interested in, is a grain-based ethanol industry and I 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

would ask the member just to support us on that. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that the member 
from Wood River has confirmed that they would take public 
investment in a ethanol industry in Saskatchewan; the member 
from Watrous has confirmed that they would take public 
investment in the ethanol industry and already has in her case, 
in her constituency. 
 
And now for the member from Redberry Lake. The member 
from Redberry Lake I asked the same question to. Would the 
hon. member from Redberry Lake accept public investment if it 
was required, a public loan guarantees to build an ethanol 
industry in his constituency, Mr. Speaker? Would he allow 
public investment? Would he support it if it was required to 
build an ethanol industry in his constituency, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Either loan guarantees or direct public investment, both show 
up on the public debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d be glad to 
answer that question. The people of Saskatchewan or the people 
of Redberry Lake want this government to get out of the way so 
that they can get back to their own projects. They don’t want 
the government sticking their noses into everything, every 
potential project and scaring away potential investors. People in 
Redberry Lake are ready and willing to invest in this province. 
They want this government to get out of the way and stay away 
so that they can do what they do best — and that is to grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is to the 
member opposite that just asked the last question. 
 
It has been said a number of times . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, I don’t. It’s been said a number of times on the other 
side of the House that there has been government, direct 
government investment into the ethanol industry in my 
constituency. 
 
I want them to outline where that government investment — 
direct government investment — that has been an equity 
position in the ethanol industry in my constituency came from. 
Let’s back this up. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 10 — Rural Economic Development 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to speak on rural revitalization. Rural 
revitalization is fundamental to the future of Saskatchewan. 
And we must keep in mind that if Saskatchewan is to grow into 
the future, that we have to work, both in the cities and in rural 
Saskatchewan to grow together and to encourage investment in 
our province to grow rural Saskatchewan for the good of all of 
the province. 
 
We have seen many examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of rural 

communities working on projects. And we’ve just finished a 
75-minute debate concerning the ethanol industry and we see 
that the people in rural Saskatchewan are ready, and willing, 
and able to do their own projects, to invest in their own projects 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can list many examples of investments that are proposed 
and are taking place in rural Saskatchewan. And they are doing 
it on their own and they want to do it on their own. The main 
one that people in rural Saskatchewan are looking at are 
building intensive livestock operations. That may be hog 
operations or chicken operations and feedlot operations. 
 
And there’s many proposals we see around the province where 
the community gets together, they raise funds, and they look for 
investors to invest in their projects. And different projects are at 
different levels and different scales of development and of sizes. 
But it’s very important that we encourage these developments 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The government has a responsibility and the right to create the 
atmosphere for investment in this province. And as we have 
seen in the government’s involvement in the ethanol industry, 
their way is not the right way. They are chasing away private 
investors, chasing away private money, and this is to the 
detriment of future projects that are coming on stream. 
 
There’s an example in Redberry Lake that a group of local 
ranchers and farmers and investors are proposing to build a 
feedlot neat Borden, Saskatchewan. And they are, initially, they 
are going to build a 10,000 or a 15,000 head feedlot, expand it 
to a 20,000 or 25,000 head feedlot down the road. 
 
They also have a proposal to build an ethanol plant in 
conjunction with this feedlot. They’re taking the approach that 
they’re going to build the feedlot first and expand later into the 
ethanol business. As we have seen now with the way the 
government is handling the ethanol industry, this proposal may 
be shelved because they are limited to their future expansion 
because of the pending deals that this government is making 
with companies as far as production and manufacture of 
ethanol, exclusive rights to one company. 
 
These projects are driven by the private sector. They know how 
the private sector works. They know how a business works and 
they will find the best opportunities and the best way to market 
their products in the future. And it should be left up to them to 
do that because they, at the end of the day, are experts in their 
future. 
 
This ethanol plan that the government is announcing with a 
company that is basically a real estate company, they have no 
expertise in developing ethanol plants and manufacturing . . . 
construction of the plants or manufacturing ethanol and 
producing nor selling the products anywhere in North America. 
And then one must wonder what is going on behind the scenes 
to eliminate or cut out the private investors, the local people in 
Saskatchewan and give these rights, exclusive rights, to a 
multinational company and to the detriment of the . . . to the 
rural areas in this province. 
 
As we see, other examples that the provincial government must 
work towards to encourage investment in this province is basic 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

 

infrastructure. We have talked many times about the need for a 
community to have adequate highways and roads. And in many 
areas and not only in Redberry Lake but areas all across the 
province, the highways are deteriorating to such a state that 
there’s many examples that are brought forward of damage 
done to vehicles. 
 
In Redberry Lake, as an example, Highway 40, year after year, 
has two areas, two stretches of highway that the whole 
pavement falls away. There’s huge potholes and the 
government does not fix them on a long . . . for a long-term 
basis. They only patch them. They patch them year after year 
and only do the patching after there’s been considerable damage 
done to vehicles, to stock trailers, to half-tons after they’ve 
fallen through the pavement and caused considerable damage. 
 
It’s not only just a damage or an economic factor, it’s a health 
and safety factor as well. There’s a high potential of accidents 
in this area whenever the pavement breaks away, and plus the 
damage of the increased insurance claims and concerns from 
the insurance company concerning the highways. 
 
Highways and roads are such a critical factor. The government 
has been underfunding RMs for a number of years and this is a 
critical factor when we look at investment in rural 
Saskatchewan to revitalize the economy in the province. 
 
Of course not only highways is very important. The cell phone 
access is also very important. Any business nowadays in a 
modern economy needs a cell phone; they use the cell phones 
quite a lot. 
 
Right now in many areas . . . I know up in the Blaine Lake area 
and Hafford area the cell phone coverage is quite poor. This not 
only affects . . . But when you have bad highways and I’ll speak 
at some length about the poor health care system in the 
Redberry Lake constituency in many areas, you need proper cell 
phone accessibility just for a safety reason, not only for 
business reasons. 
 
Now today farmers and ranchers are very in tune with the latest 
technologies and they are able to use the cell phone technology, 
if it’s available in their area, to keep up to date on markets and 
use the develop . . . the satellite systems as far as their crop 
rotations and activities in the field. 
 
The other area that is very critical in many rural areas is the lack 
of hospitals, lack of proper health care, lack of doctors. 
Redberry Lake is just one example of an area that has lost their 
hospital. They have a doctor that comes in once or twice a 
week. There’s a real need. 
 
There’s a senior centre in Hafford and no doctor that is 
available. This is not something that the area needs, they need 
adequate hospital and doctors in the area to attract investment 
and to develop the infrastructure that is needed to revitalize and 
grow this part of Saskatchewan. 
 
As we also know, Mr. Speaker, there’s many other potential 
businesses that can be developed in the province. And in 
Redberry Lake constituency there’s one area of huge potential 
value, and it’s the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve. And as 
I’ve talked to my colleagues from all parts of the province, and 

every constituency in this province has a huge potential for 
tourism, ecotourism, attracting foreign tourists. 
 
There’s different areas that have dinosaurs in their area or 
woolly mammoths, and the province is not developing these 
finds in a way that will attract investment and attract tourism to 
this province. And we must build on these attractions. 
 
(16:00) 
 
We certainly have in . . . not only in that area but we also have a 
huge potential working with the Aboriginal community to 
develop a tourism trade. As we know, the Europeans and other 
people from all around the world are very . . . are really 
attracted to our Native culture. And this is something that we’re 
really missing out on as far as encouraging investment, 
encouraging tourism into this province based on our, based on 
our natural beauties . . . beauty. 
 
And as an example, Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve and the 
Native communities that are in that area, I see a huge potential 
for tourism attraction in this area. But they’ve ran into so many 
roadblocks. And the local community has worked very hard at 
developing this. 
 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve is not that far from 
Saskatoon. There’s certainly a potential to, now that we have 
the Canadian Light Source, the synchrotron in Saskatoon, why 
not build on that? People are coming into Saskatoon for . . . to 
use the synchrotron or for other business activities, and why not 
have a package put together where they can go out to this 
internationally recognized biosphere reserve up at Blaine Lake, 
tour that area? 
 
People that are very interested in wildlife and birds and that sort 
of thing would have a great opportunity to spend a lot of time 
and spend valuable dollars in that area. It would encourage the 
restaurant trade and the other spinoffs that would be created 
around the biosphere. 
 
But also just north of the Redberry Lake Biosphere there are 
two First Nations — Mistawasis and Muskeg Lake. And what a 
great opportunity to put a part of that package, that tourism 
package together to encourage people from Europe to go into 
that area to see not only the Redberry Lake Biosphere, but also 
take part in First Nations powwows and look at their Native 
culture. There’d be a great potential that people could . . . could 
come to and develop the tourism trade in that area. 
 
As I’ve mentioned, every constituency in this province has the 
similar potential to develop in their area. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
not only can build on all those opportunities for investment in 
ecotourism and the Aboriginal peoples but we also must . . . a 
big part and the essential part of rural revitalization must be to 
continue to add to our agricultural base. 
 
Agriculture is still number one in Saskatchewan and we have a 
great opportunity, even though we are going into some bad 
times right now, we still have a great opportunity to build on 
our agriculture. And we must continue to develop our 
agriculture base, not only through diversification, but our crop 
production and diversifying in our crop rotations so that we can 
continue to develop our grain operations in this province. 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

And I’d just like to — there’s been much debate about the US 
farm Bill — and I’d just like to take a moment to outline what 
the Saskatchewan Party’s policy or position is on . . . 
concerning meeting with the premiers. As we know, they met 
. . . the premiers and the opposition leaders met last Friday. 
 
And the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, sent a letter to all the premiers and the 
leaders of the official oppositions in Western Canada. And I 
would just like to state some of the Saskatchewan’s Party’s 
positions: 
 

Saskatchewan Party supports the proposal outlined in . . . 
 
He’s referring to the letter of . . . the premiers’ letter: 
 

Namely the three Prairie provinces call on the federal 
government to provide a 100 per cent federally funded 
trade injury payment of at least $1.3 billion, that the federal 
government take aggressive trade action at the World Trade 
Organization or WTO to challenge the recent US farm Bill. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party would like to see the Western 
provinces take a number of further actions to reinforce or 
call for the federal government to live up to its 
responsibility to respond to these (US) unfair US subsidies. 

 
And it’s interesting when we speak of rural revitalization, we 
must keep in mind that agriculture is the number one thing that 
we need to build on. Build on our strengths, and agriculture is 
definitely our strengths. 
 
Watching CNN (Cable News Network) the other night, I 
noticed it was interesting to see that the US trade Bill is not well 
received in the United States either in many, many areas. 
Unfortunately it’s . . . the trade Bill is brought in basically for 
political reasons. And I don’t believe the US are actually 
attacking Canada when they bring in this trade Bill. I think the 
main concern is the European subsidies. The Europeans 
continue to heavily subsidize their agriculture sector. 
 
And they have their own reasons, as it’s been noted, that 
because of their past wars and lack of food that they will not 
ever find themselves in the position of being short of food 
again. But I believe that the Europeans are misguided in that 
concept. If they want to believe in the free trade around the 
world, they must open up their markets and trade like everyone 
else in the world — in a free market situation without 
subsidizing. 
 
But the US lawmakers have decided to fight the Europeans in 
the trade war by matching their subsidies. And unfortunately 
Canada’s been caught up in that. 
 
As an example of what the US subsidies are doing to the US 
businesses, they talked about the sugar industry in the United 
States. And the Americans subsidize their sugar industry, I 
believe, up to 27 cents per pound is what the farmers are getting 
for their sugar. 
 
And in Canada they are able to purchase sugar, I believe, at 

around 12 or 14 cents per pound. And Chicago is the centre of 
the candy industry in the United States. And I guess that goes 
back at least 100 years where Europeans immigrated to the 
United States and they were actually experts in the making of 
candy and using sugar products, and they settled in the Chicago 
area. 
 
And now they see because of this subsidy and the high level 
that they’re having to pay for their own sugar products in the 
United States, these companies are now shifting their operations 
to Canada because . . . The main reason is because of the . . . is 
the difference in the cost of their main product, the sugar, but 
also the difference in the dollar. And in Canada there’s a 
well-trained base for employees, and so they’re shifting many 
of their operations to Canada. 
 
And this just is an example of what this unfair . . . well, unfair 
subsidies can do not only to the country that imposes them, but 
to other countries around them. And hopefully, the Americans 
will see the light and reduce their subsidies to their agriculture 
sector. 
 
But I would just like to go on in the letter that Mr. Hermanson 
sent to the leaders. Your province should work together to 
clearly identify the total financial impact of the new US farm 
Bill on our provincial economies. And number two, the 
provinces should compile documentation to build a strong 
argument that the response to the US farm Bill is a federal 
responsibility. And I think it’s very important that we outline 
that. 
 
For example the federal government’s responsibility in this area 
was clearly identified in the recently released report of the 
Prime Minister’s task force on future opportunities in farming. 
The report said: 
 

Canadian farmers are among the most efficient producers in 
the world but they are unable to compete against the 
treasuries of the United States and the European Union. 
Canada’s level of foreign support as a percentage of gross 
domestic product lags all (OEDC . . . sorry) . . . OECD 
countries except Australia and New Zealand. 

 
The Prime Minister’s task force report also called for an 
additional short-term bridge financing for Canadian farmers. 
And this recommendation was made before the new US farm 
Bill was passed. 
 
The federal government has often argued that the agriculture 
subsidies could not be increased and in some cases needed to be 
reduced in order to avoid trade action against Canada under the 
WTO (World Trade Organization). However, this is clearly not 
a valid argument when you see the ever increasing size of US 
and European farm subsidies and the fact that Canadian 
subsidies are now nowhere near those same levels. 
 
These are just two examples of the kind of documentation that 
needs to be compiled to support the argument that the response 
to the international subsidy war is clearly a federal 
responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, it goes to the point about the subsidies in the 
United States that are indirectly hurting their own industries. 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

 

And as an example with the sugar industry, the Americans are 
losing jobs and investment in their own economy because of an 
unfair subsidy that they think are helping their own producers. 
 
The letter goes on to say, Mr. Chair: 
 

The provinces should compile information that clearly 
demonstrates how commodity prices and the number of 
jobs in the agriculture sector have fallen as international 
farm subsidies have increased. 
 

Again the Prime Minister’s task force report states: 
 

Subsidies lead to overproduction and flooding of rural 
markets resulting in lower world commodity prices and 
lower prices to farmers. This has resulted in a dramatic 
increase in the number of farmers and agriculture-related 
jobs in Canada. 

 
In Saskatchewan alone the number of jobs in agriculture has 
declined by over 22,000 people in the last four years. The new 
US farm Bill would drive thousands more producers out of 
agriculture if there’s not an appropriate response from the 
federal government. 
 
And we can see that not only statistics point that out, but it’s 
obvious that people are leaving Saskatchewan and leaving rural 
Saskatchewan. And it’s one of the factors that is hurting rural 
Saskatchewan and we must deal with this. 
 
Farmers are very good at looking for new opportunities. As we 
see, farmers have diversified into other crops, and now 
unfortunately, this US trade Bill is beginning to subsidize some 
of those crops that Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers have 
gone into. 
 
It creates many problems but also shows how innovative our 
farmers are, and given really a fair shake in this world, 
Saskatchewan farmers can out produce anyone in the world, 
quite frankly, and respond to the market conditions. But we 
have to get back to the market conditions where they can 
produce on a level playing field. 
 
And I have great confidence in Saskatchewan farmers to 
rebound and continue to produce excellent food for the people 
of Canada and the world. 
 
The letter also goes on, Mr. Chair: 
 

The provinces should work together to develop a 
post-trade subsidy payment mechanism. The provinces 
should work together to advocate a long-term response to 
the issue of international farm subsidies. Unfortunately 
this problem is not going away any time soon. The new 
US Bill enacts increased farm subsidies that will be in 
place for the next 10 years. 
 
The federal government must develop a long-term plan 
for dealing with this attack on Canadian agricultural. In 
addition to increasing the level of agricultural support 
from the federal government, this plan should consider 
various options for trade retaliation against the US if the 
level of farm subsidies is not reduced. 

The last item, Mr. Chair: 
 

The Western provinces should consider strengthening our 
position on international trade issues by developing a 
common front in other areas like softwood lumber and the 
Kyoto agreement. British Columbia also should be included 
in these discussions. 
 
The Western provinces may also wish to consider the 
appointment of an international trade representative to 
represent our common interests on these and other trade 
issues in Ottawa and other countries. And for too long the 
federal government has been able to ignore the interests of 
Western Canada because we did not always speak with one 
unified voice. By working together in the Saskatchewan 
Party, I believe that we can create a voice for Western 
Canada that is impossible for Ottawa to ignore. 

 
And that was our position and is our position concerning the US 
trade Bill. And as I said, not everyone in the US are very happy 
with the US trade Bill but they are into an election cycle. They 
have elections this fall, and it appears that even the President of 
the United States said he signed the trade agreement or the 
subsidy Bill and he wasn’t totally happy with it but he went 
ahead and signed it anyway. 
 
So it leaves room for considerable optimism that there can be 
some changes made in the future, with discussions with the 
United States. And we need to pursue all avenues in this, really, 
battle that we must fight on behalf of our rural constituents and 
the farming community in this country. 
 
(16:15) 
 
But there’s other things that the province of Saskatchewan 
should and could do. When we talked about — you know, 
we’ve talked about infrastructure, highways and cell phone 
service, telephone service, 911 service — we also spoke of the 
need for better quality health care in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And whenever a business is looking at an area to invest, if we 
want to go back to the ethanol debate, if a company wants to set 
up a ethanol plant, well, they need adequate water. They need 
adequate roads and highways; they need adequate telephone and 
cell service, the Internet service. They need schools. They need 
hospitals for the families that are going to come to that area to 
live and work. And so we must ensure that all these facilities 
are in place to attract these businesses to our communities in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And the other serious concern, as we have heard in this past 
year, is water, the quality of water, the access to water not only 
to the individuals living in the communities, but to plants — 
industries and manufacturing businesses need good quality 
water. 
 
Where I come from, in the area around Biggar and Perdue, there 
is adequate water. The problem is the infrastructure and as we 
know in the Perdue situation that the community has really been 
let down by governments of all levels. 
 
They realize the need to upgrade their sewer and water 
treatment facilities; and for three years running they’ve applied 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

to the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program and have 
been turned down three years in a row. And this is becoming 
quite a burdensome situation on the town. 
 
Now they have been given informal promises that if they apply 
again — they are to apply in July for the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program — that they will most likely get the 
grants involved. But there’s no guarantees, and they’ve already 
had a well go down and were lucky enough to get that well 
going again. But you just never know when the system is going 
to fail and this village of 400 people are going to be left without 
water. 
 
As we know, in many areas across Saskatchewan communities 
are digging dry holes. There’s no water because of the serious 
drought circumstances. 
 
And so it’s very . . . it’s a very serious situation, not only for the 
health and welfare of the individuals but to enable and attract 
investment into a community. The water is one of the essential 
ingredients that an industry or a potential manufacturing 
business will need and want to have in order to set up . . . to 
spend thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of 
dollars to invest in a project. And they need these fundamental 
resources in that community in order to have the wherewithal to 
invest. 
 
As I’ve mentioned in the Perdue situation it became a very 
serious situation as outlined by this letter that was sent to the 
mayor and their council from an officer from the environment 
office from the Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. It’s concerning the water treatment plant 
problems in Perdue. And the letter goes on to say: 
 

In my November 30, 2000, letter I recommended that the 
village hire a water treatment plant consultant to audit the 
plant, suggested ways to improve the potability of your 
treatment water supply, and apply and find the resources to 
correct the problems identified. It is my understanding that 
the village has followed through on my recommendations, 
but to date has not acquired sufficient funding to fix the 
problems. As a result the situation now has reached a 
critical level. 
 

And the letter goes on to say: 
 

By way of this letter I strongly urge council to use every 
means possible to acquire the necessary funding to correct 
your water quality problems. Failure to correct these 
problems immediately could result in serious safety issues 
for your citizens and libel issues for council. 
 

And this is a serious concern for local government. They are . . . 
and the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) also stated in question period a few 
weeks back that if the local government did not solve the water 
problem by the end of June, I believe the minister said, that they 
would have legal action taken against them. 
 
And this really was a chilling effect to small communities all 
over this province. The spectre of being charged with a problem 
that’s been growing and developing over 10, 20, 30 years, to be 
threatened with court action if there was any concerns. The 

provincial government obviously has a huge responsibility to 
help out the municipal governments deal with their water and 
sewage treatment concerns. 
 
And as we see in the North Battleford situation, that the 
government was really responsible for the bulk of the concerns 
there and the problems. And the judge that did the inquiry 
stated quite emphatically that the provincial government was 
responsible for most of the concerns there. 
 
And so unfortunately, when we talk about rural Saskatchewan 
and the small towns and RMs and the councillors and mayors 
and reeves, people have . . . come to me and say, well they’re 
scared to run for local office because of these concerns. 
Someone coming in as a mayor of a town that’s never been . . . 
never held office before now could be charged with a criminal 
offence if something went wrong as far as the water supply. 
And so it’s really a chilling effect, a dampening effect on 
drawing new people into local government. 
 
And again, this is not creating a atmosphere where businesses 
have the confidence to come into a community if there’s an . . . 
as in the Perdue situation and many other situations where 
there’s pending legal action or concerns about the quality of 
water or they’re . . . many communities are under a water-boil 
advisory. And so this is not exactly the environment that is 
needed to encourage investment into rural Saskatchewan and to 
help revitalize the rural economy. 
 
And in recent discussions with the local Perdue council, I was 
told that they’re hoping to get the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program. But they are having to raise their tax 
considerably now with the anticipation of having to fund at 
least one-third of the cost of their overall problems. And they 
have considerable . . . considerable costs that they will have to 
deal with. So initially they’ve raised their tax and they’re 
looking at raising their taxes later on. 
 
And of course this is not the way that we should be going in 
rural Saskatchewan. We need to lower the tax base right across 
the province. But unfortunately, because of lack of commitment 
from the provincial government and the federal government, 
local communities are having to bear the brunt of many of these 
costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I would just like to go on. The government 
members have always tried to portray the Saskatchewan Party 
as not having any plan for growth in this province. And I’d just 
like to, just like to go over once again — and I’ve done it a 
couple of times in the Throne Speech reply — I’d like to outline 
the Saskatchewan Party’s plan for growth in Saskatchewan. 
And I think the members, the members would have . . . should 
sit back and listen to what the plan is for . . . that the 
Saskatchewan Party has for growing Saskatchewan. And we’re 
going to . . . we plan on growing Saskatchewan both in urban 
and rural areas. 
 
And our main focus of our plan for Saskatchewan is to grow the 
population of Saskatchewan by 100,000 people over 10 years. 
And it’s fundamental to any plan in . . . to develop the 
economy. We need more taxpayers. We need to broaden our tax 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

 

base. We need . . . and by encouraging and by bringing in more 
people into the province, we will have more tax revenue for the 
government of the day. And I’m very confident the 
Saskatchewan Party will be the government of the day very 
shortly. 
 
And just to go back to some of the record of this past 
government. As an example, last year Saskatchewan lost almost 
15,000 jobs and that was the worst job loss record in the 
country and the worst job loss record in Saskatchewan since the 
Great Depression. And the workforce in Saskatchewan at the 
end of the year was 460,000 people working in the province. 
That was the smallest number of people working and paying 
taxes we’ve had in Saskatchewan for five years, Mr. Chair. 
 
And the problem with jobs isn’t that it’s confined to a 
struggling economy. Saskatchewan is losing jobs in every major 
industry except for the . . . for government. And again and again 
we’ve seen this government on the wrong track. And when we 
look at government’s expenditures, all we see is this NDP 
Liberal coalition growing government, not growing 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is not conducive to a future growth. It leaves a bad 
impression on future investment in the province and it’s 
certainly not the way to go. What we need to do is grow the 
economy of Saskatchewan, the private sector, broaden the tax 
base, and to have more people living in this province, have a 
growing economy, and growing families in this province. 
 
Over the past three years, Saskatchewan has suffered a net loss 
of more than 22,000 people to out-migration. Fact, our province 
has suffered near net population loss for 13 quarters in a row of 
the worst sustained period of population loss since the Second 
World War. This is not very encouraging, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Chair, the real serious part of losing people is . . . isn’t the 
people . . . the age group and . . . that we are losing in this 
province. The Canadian average indicates a greater number . . . 
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, the . . . What we have is a larger portion of 
younger people and this . . . and I’d like to speak about our 
youth and the future and potential of our youth. 
 
And we have a higher percentage of people older . . . in the 
older generation than the rest of Canada. But the problem that 
we have is a small workforce. We have a small . . . a smaller 
number of people that are actually working in this province, and 
that is a considerable problem to the future of the province. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy is shrinking, people are leaving and, 
as I said, the government is growing. And as we have said, the 
government was busy going from riches to rags. And last year 
the government was swimming in a . . . well two years ago the 
government was swimming in a budget surplus of $840 million 
and this year the NDP is now running a budget deficit of almost 
$500 million. 
 
But who really knows until we actually see all of the books. But 
definitely, the government is running a deficit. They are trying 
to hide it by taking money out of the Crowns, having the 
Crowns borrow money to pay for government to put in . . . to 
pay off the deficit. The Fiscal Stabilization Fund is now widely 
known that does not exist — there is no money in this fund. The 

government has had to borrow money to raise overall debt to 
pay off its deficit and really no hope of balancing the budget in 
the future. 
 
Now clearly Saskatchewan is on a path that is unsustainable 
and, if left unchecked, threatens the future of our province. We 
must, as a province, take steps immediately to stop our 
economic decline and grow Saskatchewan. And over the past 
eight, nine months, that’s why the Saskatchewan Party and their 
leader, Mr. Hermanson, is going around the province talking 
about how to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
And as I mentioned before, the plan . . . the goal of the game 
plan for growth is clearly stated — grow Saskatchewan by 
100,000 people in 10 years. That is the key. It’s a bold goal, but 
it’s also an achievable goal. Something that this government, 
coalition partners do not understand. 
 
It means, what it really means, is Saskatchewan must grow at a 
rate of 1 per cent per year — 1 per cent. And that’s about the 
annual growth rate for the whole country over the past two 
decades. One per cent is all we need to do to grow the province 
by 100,000 people. It’s a bold plan and we believe that . . . We 
are confident that the plan will be achieved here in 
Saskatchewan if we all agree on a plan to get there, Mr. Chair. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Harper): — Order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m glad to hear all 
the enthusiasm on the government side to hear about the Grow 
Saskatchewan plan. And the Grow Saskatchewan plan is going 
to grow all of Saskatchewan, both urban and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the game plan for growth, and I’d like the members to just 
listen very carefully, eight points: cutting personal income 
taxes; reducing taxes on growth and productivity; delivering 
smarter and smaller government; providing world-class 
educational and career opportunities in Saskatchewan; establish 
fair and balanced labour laws, something the Minister of 
Labour might want to look into; focus our Crown corporations 
on their core businesses; keying economic expansion in areas 
where Saskatchewan holds a natural advantage; building a 
strong social partnership for growth. 
 
And I’d like to now just go through each item. First, personal 
taxes, Mr. Chair. We think the best way to lower personal taxes 
is by increasing personal and family exemptions to be 
competitive with Alberta. Right now, in Saskatchewan a couple 
with two children gets to pay provincial income tax once their 
combined income reaches $20,000. That same family in Alberta 
pays no income tax until their combined income reaches 
$33,500. We must close this gap or continue to watch as 
salaries of our most productive young people leave 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, this is a very serious problem. As we know, 
rural Saskatchewan, the young people from rural Saskatchewan 
have been going mainly to Alberta, to other provinces — but 
around the world — to work, many in the oil industry. And they 
continue to come back to Saskatchewan to farm, but they have 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

to have that second income in order to survive in the farming 
industry. 
 
But unfortunately, many of these people now are taking up 
residence in other parts or other provinces. They’re paying their 
taxes in other provinces. So Saskatchewan is a net loser again 
when we, when we drive away the young people from 
Saskatchewan to live and work in other parts of Canada or the 
world. 
 
Now the second point, Mr. Speaker. We must reduce taxes on 
growth and productivity by eliminating the small-business tax 
and cutting the corporate capital tax in half. Small business is 
the largest creator of jobs in Canada. But Saskatchewan 
small-business tax is a major barrier to growth and small 
businesses also need private sector capital investment to grow. 
By making Saskatchewan a small business tax-free zone and 
reducing the tax on capital investment, we must take a giant 
step in creating the economic climate for growth and job 
creation. 
 
Now if we go back to the ethanol debate we had earlier, this 
government, instead of reducing taxes or eliminating small 
business tax, what they want to do is to take taxpayer money, 
invest in potential business ventures in the province, and chase 
away all the private investors. 
 
We need to attract private investors. We need to attract capital 
into this province. As the ACRE report said, we need 
approximately $1 billion dollars a year for the next 10 years to 
revitalize rural Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan. And this 
government now is chasing away that potential investor. 
 
Number three, we need to deliver a smaller and smarter 
government that gets rid of the current regulatory gridlock 
blocking business growth and new job creation. People expect 
their government to keep their taxes as low as possible and 
make the most effective use of every tax dollar spent. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party would review every activity of 
government to ensure that every tax dollar is spent as 
effectively as possible with the broad goal of growing 
Saskatchewan. And the key word is growing Saskatchewan. 
 
As we see, this government is in basically total disarray. They 
talk about reducing the number of civil servants. At the end of 
the day the government only spoke the words; they never took 
any actions to make smaller government. 
 
They talked about reducing to save money but at the end of the 
day, this government did not reduce; they did not make any 
cutbacks. And so they continue in the same free-spending ways 
that they always have with no hope of balancing the budget in 
the future. 
 
And again, this government has put on layers of regulation and 
red tape as any business or person moving into this province 
can see — that the red tape and regulation is overwhelming. 
And really another factor why businesses are not coming to 
Saskatchewan is because of really the way, the negative attitude 
this government has towards potential investors and potential 
investment in this province. 
 

Now this comprehensive review will examine every activity of 
government based on the following questions. Does it serve a 
compelling public interest? Is it affordable within the fiscal 
environment of the province? Is it being delivered or offered in 
the most efficient way? Is it accountable to the taxpayer? And 
most important, does it contribute to growing Saskatchewan by 
100,000 people in 10 years? 
 
No part of government will be left out of this exercise and the 
result would be a smarter, more efficient, and smaller 
government, the government that serves the best interests of the 
taxpayer in a way that is fully accountable to the taxpayer. 
 
And this is very crucial. As we see in the ethanol debate, the 
government is not accountable. 
 
We have the minister, we have the minister saying at one time, 
at one point that there’ll be no government investment in the 
ethanol business — none whatsoever. And we see less than two 
months later the head of CIC, Mr. Hart, announcing that he’s 
been negotiating a deal behind the minister’s back for over a 
year. And one must wonder, you know, like, who’s in charge, 
who’s in charge? The minister obviously had no idea what he 
was talking about. 
 
And now the government has come out with all these 
hare-brained schemes to get the . . . to have government 
investment in every project that has the potential of being 
developed in this province and bringing in rules and 
regulations, exclusive rights for a potential partner in this 
ethanol industry. For whose benefit? 
 
I mean what we want to do is encourage other potential 
investors in the ethanol industry and this exclusive right that 
they’re giving to this one company, which by the way a 
company that has no expertise in ethanol. They’ve never 
produced a litre of ethanol, never sold any ethanol. And now 
this government is going into a deal with this company that has 
no expertise and giving them exclusive rights to manufacture 
and sell the product. 
 
And again any other company . . . as I’d mentioned before, in 
rural Saskatchewan there’s many intensive livestock operations 
being considered and what does this say to those companies 
when they are missing . . . will be restricted to where they can 
sell the product? 
 
So it’s very important that the government is accountable to the 
taxpayer, and that’s another aspect where we can create the 
environment to attract investment, to attract jobs to this 
province. And right now the government’s just doing the 
opposite to that. They’re chasing investment away and they’re 
chasing the jobs out right behind them. Now Saskatchewan is 
losing 1,000s of young people every year to other provinces 
because they don’t see an opportunity for a future, successful 
future, here in Saskatchewan. 
 
A key component in the challenge of growing Saskatchewan is 
to provide world-class educational opportunities for our young 
people that are relevant to the new knowledge economy. But we 
must also take steps to encourage graduating students to stay in 
Saskatchewan with competitive tax rates, new job creation, and 
tax incentives for graduating students who stay in 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Now number five in our Grow Saskatchewan plan is balanced 
and fair labour laws. Saskatchewan needs a fair and level 
playing field when it comes to labour laws. Competitive, 
balanced, and fair labour legislation is fundamental to attracting 
new capital and business investment in Saskatchewan. 
 
And our game plan for growth includes implementation of 
legislation to make workplaces democratic in the process of 
certification or decertification of unions, a full review of 
Workers’ Compensation Board organization, governance, 
policies, and fee structure, an elimination of union-preference 
tendering on all government and Crown corporation 
construction projects. This fair and open approach to encourage 
new investment and remove another government-created barrier 
to growth in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’d just like to make the point about right-to-work 
legislation. The Saskatchewan Party has shown that we listen. 
We listened to the stakeholders of this province, we listened to 
labour. The right-to-work legislation was introduced in the first 
sitting of this session by myself as a private member’s Bill. 
 
But we listened to organized labour and organized labour said 
they did not like that piece of legislation. And so we’ve taken 
that piece of legislation, the right-to-work legislation, out of our 
platform. It’s no longer a part of the Saskatchewan Party 
platform and will not be introduced as a private member’s Bill 
in the future. So that’s an example of the Saskatchewan Party 
listening to organized labour and responding to their concerns 
and needs. 
 
The other part of our labour legislation is we also listen to the 
workers of this province. And what the workers of this province 
said, that they would like a secret ballot when it comes to 
certifying and decertifying unions in this province. And there’s 
much debate about signing cards, as if that’s some democratic 
process that is open and where coercion or intimidation would 
not take place. 
 
But at the end of the day, only a secret ballot is the way to go in 
any democratic institution where people vote to make their 
decision. And we believe what the workers of this province 
have been telling us. And they have said that they want a secret 
ballot when it comes time to certify or decertify a union. It’s 
only fair that a secret ballot is in place to make this very 
important decision in their lives and in their workplace. 
 
The other private members’ Bill that we have introduced in the 
past and will continue to introduce is freedom of information, 
again responding to the employers of this province. And the 
employers of this province said lookit, we need to have a role 
when it comes time for their workers in their . . . on their shop 
floor to make a decision whether to certify or decertify a union. 
And the employers said that we now do not have the right to 
discuss that issue with the workers in their operations without 
having unfair labour practices laid against them. 
 
So we have listened to the employers of this province and we 
believe a freedom of information Act which gives them a right 
to communicate with their employees is very important. 
 

So that’s the three fundamental parts of our platform. We listen 
to organize labour, we’ve taken the right-to-work legislation out 
of our platform and will not introduce it as a private member’s 
Bill, but we’ve also listened to the workers of this province who 
want a secret ballot when it comes time to certification and 
decertification. And we listened to the employers of this 
province who want a role and a say . . . a role to communicate 
their side of the story during a certification or decertification 
process. 
 
And the other part of our platform is to . . . concerning the 
elimination of union preference tendering in all government 
Crown corporation construction contracts. And it’s only 
common sense that every project should be awarded to the 
company that offers the . . . that gives the lowest bid, given that 
they’re a qualified company and do the work up to standards. 
 
And right now . . . and it’s this government obviously is doing 
this at the expense of the taxpayers of this province. If a 
construction project costs more, well who pays for it? It’s the 
taxpayers of this province pays for it. And it’s one thing to have 
friends in . . . this government has friends in the union 
movement, but it’s certainly another item to really abuse the 
taxpayer of this province for their own very selfish needs, 
basically to fund their re-election campaigns in the future at the 
expense of the taxpayers of this province. 
 
The sixth point is stop expansion of Crown corporations to 
compete with existing Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — And a very important part of achieving a goal 
of growing Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 years is to 
immediately stop the expansion of the Crown corporations in 
the areas that are not directly related to the provisions of the 
core services of power, natural gas, telecommunications, and 
insurance. 
 
It is worth noting here that the Saskatchewan Party is not bound 
to the continued government ownership or sale of our Crown 
corporations. What we are committed to is to ensure 
Saskatchewan taxpayers receive the best possible service and 
the best value for investment they have made in our Crown 
corporations. Getting them to refocus on their core business is 
the first step. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read into, I’d like to read into 
the record a couple of letters from constituents from Redberry 
Lake . . . how they’re being treated by the Crowns. 
 
As we see, the Crowns are investing in Australia and Chile and 
South America and they’re losing a lot of money in many of 
those ventures. But when you look at the past performance 
they’re really paying off these debts, these losses in foreign 
companies, by taxing the local Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I’d just like to read a letter from . . . (inaudible) . . . Ag 
Services Ltd. from Radisson. The letter reads: 
 

The name of my country is . . . (inaudible) . . . Ag Services 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

Ltd. and I am in the process of putting up a fertilizer 
facility near Fielding on No. 16 Highway. There are some 
issues that I would appreciate if you and your office could 
look into for me. 
 
First are the telephone lines. SaskTel has informed me that 
the first telephone line will cost me, the owner, $499 to 
install. (That’s fair and reasonable, $499.) An additional 
line will cost me $9,000 per line. 

 
SaskTel is going to charge this, this new business, who is 
willing to put thousands of dollars into an investment, build and 
refurbish buildings, and start up a new business, they’re going 
to charge them $9,000 for a second line. 
 

Two lines would cost me $9,499. Three lines would cost 
me $18,499. 

 
He said, this is totally ridiculous. And I have to agree. Today 
you need a telephone line, at least one telephone line. You need 
a line for a fax; you need a line for the Internet; you need at 
least three lines. That’s going to cost this business, for three 
lines, $18,499. And this is at the expense of this one individual. 
 
It goes on to say: 
 

They want $1,300 an air mile per line for the primary area 
which is Radisson, and since I am seven miles from 
Radisson it would cost me $9,000 per line after the first 
line. The pedestal that they have come (to) . . . from is 
about one-half mile down the road, one-half mile. The 
property that I’m building on has a telephone line already 
on the property. 
 
When I inquired about temporary service, because SaskTel 
does not plough in cable until after the long weekend in 
May . . . (Why is that? Why do they not plough in cable 
after the long weekend in May?) . . . they want $4,000 for 
two lines. When I asked a lady at SaskTel about when the 
line would be ploughed in, she said after the long weekend 
in May. 
 
She also said they did . . . why did I get them to plough the 
line in in August? 

 
And he goes on to say, well I didn’t know he was going to be 
building his new facility and starting up his business back in 
August. 
 
So this is the kind of reception that people get that are trying to 
build a business in this province. They get a smart remark — 
why didn’t you get the line put in in August? Well 
unfortunately again a Crown corporation of the government is 
totally out of touch with what’s going on. 
 
And it goes on to say: 
 

Secondly, Fielding is an unincorporated hamlet in the RM 
of Mayfield with a population of four people. 

 
Four people. And this family is willing to build, start up this 
new business in Fielding, which has four people in the town, 
and this government and this SaskTel, this Crown corporation is 

going to, for three lines, telephone lines, going to charge him 
$18,499. Now could you tell me where . . . where does this . . . 
is helping to revitalize rural Saskatchewan? 
 
I’d say that SaskTel is gouging this person and we should be 
encouraging this person to set up his business in Fielding, 
Saskatchewan, right on Highway 16. This is very important to 
this community and this area. 
 
And it goes on to say: 
 

Now I understand why business is staying away from 
Saskatchewan, especially rural Saskatchewan, when your 
own government gives you a hard time. When you’re trying 
to keep jobs in the rural sector, instead of helping you, you 
really want to say the heck with it and go someplace else 
where you are encouraged to build. 

 
And again and again, Mr. Speaker, we have seen that this 
government is really forcing people out because of their unfair 
treatment of businesses and families in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I have another example, Mr. Speaker, of a constituent from 
Redberry Lake. It says: 
 

Dear Sir: 
 

My wife Donna Nagus and myself are in the process of 
opening a store in the Pike Lake area. We have approached 
SaskTel to have the telephone reconnected (reconnected) 
and also to hook up a second line for a credit card machine. 

 
Need two lines; one for the credit card machine. 
 

I was put in contact with a lady named Jan in the Prince 
Albert office. The cost of reconnection for the telephone 
line was quoted at $99, which is reasonable. 

 
I have to agree, which is reasonable. 
 

The cost of the second line was quoted at (guess what) 
$9,100. 

 
$9,100 for the second line, even though the lines are already in 
the building. They just have to go over and hook the telephone 
line up. They’re going to charge this business $9,100 to hook 
that second line up. No ploughing they don’t have the excuse of 
digging . . . telling the people they should have it dug in in the 
fall. It’s there, it’s already hooked up. 
 

I was so surprised at the staggering amount quoted that I 
laughed, (this person said). I laughed, thinking this must be 
some kind of mistake. 

 
Well of course, of course they’d think it would be a mistake. 
 

I was assured that there was no mistake and that this is a 
tariff rate which they are required to charge. 

 
I asked her what the cost would be to have a separate line 
installed into my home for computer use and was told that 
it would be $475. 

 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

 

That’s in their home — $475. But if it was a business they’re 
going to charge them $9,100. What kind of a message is that 
sending any business in this province? 
 

Our government says they want to create employment in 
this province but it looks to me like they want to stifle it 
when this is the kind of policy that our Crown corporations 
are allowed to pursue. I would hope you can make some 
sense out of this because I definitely cannot. 

 
Signed by Harvey Pittman from Pike Lake area. 
 
These are two examples of this government driving businesses 
out of this province and two businesses in rural Saskatchewan 
— rural Saskatchewan. They’re having to pay exorbitant fees 
for telephone service. And it’s totally unfair and I believe there 
certainly have to be some changes made to the government’s 
policies in this area. 
 
And many of my colleagues have letters, similar letters from all 
over the province complaining about SaskTel. And this is while 
SaskTel is investing in businesses and ventures all over the 
world. And they’re not investing in their own people and 
they’re not investing in rural Saskatchewan where we must key 
on in order to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Number seven, key economic expansion to areas of natural 
advantage. We will: 

 
. . . focus economic expansion in those areas where we 
(already hold) . . . a natural advantage. 
 

Number one: 
 

value-added manufacturing and processing, particularly 
food processing. 

 
Intensive agriculture; tourism; technology; our natural resources 
industries, particularly forestry, mining, and energy; and the 
rapidly growing young Aboriginal population. 
 
And first thing, I’d like to speak about the rapidly growing 
Aboriginal population. It is a huge potential that we have in this 
province, that we harness this growing young families and 
children in this province. Saskatchewan has a great potential to 
grow this Saskatchewan hand in hand with the Aboriginal 
people. 
 
And one of my colleagues was down in the US, I believe it was 
Kansas. Kansas is losing people; they have an aging population. 
And they looked at our demographics and they said you have 
such a huge potential. You’re so lucky to have this huge 
potential of young people that will be coming into the labour 
force as workers. But also people that will be entering our 
educational system and also building businesses in which we 
need to harness to build and grow Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s fundamental and I think it’s critical that we harness our 
young people and develop policies and strategies that keep our 
young people in this province. And we must work hand in hand 
with the Aboriginal community to harness this huge potential to 
the benefit of all Saskatchewan, of all peoples in this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — The other point in our key economic 
expansion, and I spoke somewhat on it, is tourism — 
ecotourism technology. Mr. Speaker, in Redberry Lake we have 
a unique, a very unique area. 
 
And there’s been a committee that’s been set up — The 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve, a community’s plan for 
sustainability was prepared by Sherry Sian, an environmental 
planner on behalf of the community committee for Redberry 
Lake Biosphere Reserve. And they’ve done just amazing work. 
The community’s really gotten behind this project and they’ve 
developed this plan for sustainability in that area. As I’ve 
mentioned, it’s a great opportunity for that area and for the 
whole of Saskatchewan to capitalize on this unique area. 
 
And as I said, Saskatchewan’s opportunity to capitalize on the 
unique national and international recognition where United 
Nations recognize world biosphere reserves or world heritage 
sites in other provinces of Canada, but in Saskatchewan there is 
only one, and that’s the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
which was designated by the United Nations Education, Science 
and Culture Organization in January, 2000. 
 
And what is the UNESCO (United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization) world biosphere? It is not 
. . . the biosphere’s not a park, although Redberry Lake 
Biosphere Reserve includes a regional park. A biosphere 
reserve is not a town, although Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve includes the town of Hafford. A biosphere reserve is 
not an RM, although Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
includes parts of three rural municipalities. A biosphere reserve 
is not a wildlife sanctuary, although Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve includes a federal migratory bird sanctuary as well as 
provincial wildlife refuge and a representative areas network 
site. 
 
What a UNESCO World Biosphere is a centre of excellence for 
sustainable economic development. Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve is managed by a community committee comprised of 
elected officials from the participating municipal governments 
and community boards operating as the Redberry Lake 
Regional Economic Development Authority. 
 
A biosphere reserve is an internationally recognized centre for 
excellence in, and a resource for, conservation research and 
education. Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve provides an 
opportunity for high-quality research into the impacts of global, 
regional, and local environmental change, and human activity. 
 
This work is coordinated by a technical committee. Designation 
as a biosphere or reserve is a highly honoured status. Redberry 
Lake Biosphere Reserve is part of a worldwide network under 
the UNESCO of some 375 locations, 10 of which are in 
Canada. Redberry Lake is one of two designations for Canada 
in the decade leading up to 2000, joining high-profile 
Clayoquot Sound in BC. There are also biosphere reserves in 
Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, and in Alberta. 
 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve is the only one in Canada 
that resulted from local grassroots efforts, a matter of great 
significance to UNESCO. 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. It now being past the hour of 5 
o’clock, this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


