















































Hansard: July 04, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2515 
 July 4, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the government’s 
decision to transfer the surplus funds from the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund to the General Revenue Fund. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to refund the $1.6 million intended for the 
Saskatchewan Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and 
discontinue its present policy of using this money for other 
sundry government purposes. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Regina, Milestone, Pilot 
Butte, and Benson, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand once again today to present petitions on behalf 
of citizens from Humboldt and district who would like to see 
the Humboldt territory operations office for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority remain in the city of Humboldt. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt and the community of Carmel. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the closure of the operations office for the Housing Authority in 
Humboldt. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Humboldt 
and from Muenster. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the high cost of 
prescription drugs. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Tisdale and Crooked River, and I’m happy 
to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today, Mr. Speaker, from citizens concerned with overfishing at 
the Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge, Esterhazy, and Langenburg. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about the tobacco legislation and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by . . . I have 10 petitions, Mr. 
Speaker, to present today. They’re signed by residents of 
Tribune, Osage, Fillmore, Ogema, Glenavon, Glasnevin, 
Pangman, Regina, Radville, Yellow Grass, White City, Estevan, 
Tribune, Lang, McTaggart, Midale. And there’s several that are 
signed by residents of the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have new 
petitions today that were brought in this morning by retailers, 
and they’re from communities in Saskatchewan I didn’t even 
know exist — all over Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately rescind The Tobacco Control Act and make it 
illegal for minors to possess tobacco. 



2516 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. Thousands of names here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the regional 
health authority, Regina health authority, as opposed to the 
Saskatoon regional health authority. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signators to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Govan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with fishing on the Lake of 
the Prairies. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nation representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
Langenburg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of many 
more residents of Swift Current who are concerned with the 
hospital facility currently available in my hometown. The 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its 65 per cent share of the funding 
for a new regional hospital for Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners on this petition are from the 
city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 

have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 7, 11, 18, 23, 165, 168, 169, and sessional paper no. 174. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Well, members, I have two sets of guests to 
introduce to you. It’s my pleasure today first of all to introduce 
to you my youngest sister, Sonja Kindrachuk who’s seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery. She is here with her husband, Bob 
Kindrachuk who happens to be my wife’s brother and with their 
daughter, Sarah Kindrachuk-Kramer. 
 
Bob, Sonja, and Sarah’s family reside in Winnipeg. They are on 
their way to Prince Albert to meet with Bob’s two sisters — my 
wife and another sister, my sister-in-law. They’re planning a 
90th birthday party for Bob’s father — that’s my wife’s father 
too — my father-in-law, and my sister’s father-in-law, Sarah’s 
grandpa. 
 
So I’d like you to welcome my family to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Right behind them in the Speaker’s gallery, 
members, seated with my secretary, Linda Spence, is Linda’s 
brother, Stephen Scriver. Now Stephen, I believe, is the author 
of the books I’ve just been looking at, books about 
Saskatchewan hockey. 
 
And with them is his son, Jason Scriver, and Jason’s girls 
Marita and Kessa. And so would you please welcome the 
Scriver family to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Major Jill Purdy 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to today mention someone who has recently 
volunteered a great deal of her own time to help out a very 
important group of people in Nipawin. There’s been quite a lot 
of talk of firefighters lately and there are many people who 
work behind the scenes, Mr. Speaker, who deserve recognition 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of these people is Major Jill Purdy of the 
Salvation Army in Nipawin. Major Purdy has spent countless 
hours coordinating meals for the firefighters in Nipawin who 
battled the fire that resulted from the recent fire at Newfield 
seed plant. 
 
Many parish ladies worked over approximately a three-week 
period cooking turkeys, making sandwiches, and many of the 
other duties involved with feeding these 40 to 50 firefighters 
lunch and supper each day. 
 
In speaking with Brian Starkell, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
Nipawin firefighters, he expressed his gratitude to Major Purdy 
and all the people involved for all of their hard work and noted 
that they did this with no expectation of receiving anything in 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2517 

 

return. 
 
To show their gratitude for all the work provided by the 
Salvation Army, a group of firefighters spent the day recently at 
the Salvation Army helping with yard maintenance and cleanup. 
I would ask all members to join with me in recognizing the hard 
work of Major Purdy and the parish ladies from the Salvation 
Army who devoted so much of their time to assisting the 
firefighters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Student Part of Junior Team Canada 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the 
summer most grade 11 students occupy their days at the beach 
or working or hanging out with their friends. However, a young 
woman in my constituency will be spending her time in China 
and in the Philippines. Katie Kirkness will be learning about 
their cultures and explaining Canada to the hosts. Katie has 
already attended the Junior Team Canada training event held in 
one of 14 universities across the country learning about 
business and international trade from CEOs (chief executive 
officer) and experts in the field. 
 
In order to be chosen to be part of an overseas mission, Katie 
had to demonstrate leadership skills and an interest in business 
and communication skills. Katie’s particular interest is in the 
project of biotechnology and how it pertains to agriculture. And 
she feels that Yorkton is such a great home for agriculture and 
it’s something she’s really interested in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Junior Team Canada is organized by Global 
Vision, a non-profit organization founded in 1991 by business, 
government, and education leaders. The goal of the program is 
to present youth with the opportunity to learn about Canada’s 
role in the global marketplace and to promote the companies . . . 
our companies and organizations and their international trading 
partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of this House wish a very 
wonderful trip to Katie and . . . a very accomplished young 
leader, and very best in her future goals as she works to build 
business and industry in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Blaine Lake Sports Booster Honoured 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rodger Pederson of 
Blaine Lake received the 2002 Volunteer Recognition Award 
from the North Central Regional Recreation Association during 
a banquet held at Ed’s Inn near Prince Albert. Pederson 
received the award in the sports category for hours of 
committed dedication to the sports events within Blaine Lake. 
He has spent an enormous amount of time and energy preparing 
the racetrack, rodeo ring, cooking, hauling, and tending bar, and 
cleaning up after the events. Pederson has also organized ATV 
(all-terrain vehicle) and snowmobile rallies. 
 
Pederson has promoted the development of the Blaine Lake 
Community Association by becoming a member of the steering 
committee. He is a director of the Blaine Lake SnowDrifterz 

Club, director for the Blaine Lake and District Chamber of 
Commerce, and on the committee for the Annual Farmers’ 
Bonspiel held in March. 
 
Rodger Pederson resides in Blaine Lake with his wife, Leona. 
Although their three girls have graduated and moved on, the 
Pedersons continue to make Blaine Lake their home. The hours 
of committed volunteer work is invaluable and priceless. 
 
Blaine Lake is proud to have the . . . Pederson as a fine role 
model for the youth at Blaine Lake. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Rodger Pederson of Blaine 
Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Library in Pierceland 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The doors 
have opened on a new library building in Pierceland with the 
assistance . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — . . . of a $23,000 grant from the 
province’s Centenary Fund. The $45,500 project was cost 
shared by the village of Pierceland, the RM (rural municipality) 
of Beaver River, and the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is pleased to 
support the construction of the new Pierceland library. Libraries 
are extremely important to the quality of life for people, 
especially in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The new facility will provide space for an expanded collection, 
a community playground . . . a playschool, I should say, 
additional library programs, and public access to a new 
computer station. Town councillor, Maureen Curry said, and I 
quote: 
 

The Village of Pierceland and the RM of Beaver River are 
very pleased that the government of Saskatchewan has 
helped to make our new library a reality . . . Our new 
library has already been very busy and our circulation has 
greatly increased. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Centenary Fund was established to leave a 
legacy of Saskatchewan centennial for future generations. 
Leading up to the centennial celebrations in 2005, the 
government is funding projects that are of provincial or regional 
interest and develop municipal infrastructure. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Science Fair Winner 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in April of 
this year I spoke in the legislature of a young man, Sheldon 
Bowman, who attends school in Humboldt and who was 
selected to go to the National Science Fair with his bale 



2518 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

handling invention. 
 
Sheldon represented the Carlton Trail region at the National 
Science Fair held in Saskatoon recently. He won an honourable 
mention, placing fourth in the Junior Engineering category. He 
also won one of the two Junior Agri-Food and Agriculture 
Canada awards of $500 for his bale handler. 
 
Sheldon’s pushy bale handler is designed to transport bales to a 
feeding area. It is a spring-loaded system, which can be hooked 
onto the back of a tractor or a truck. It’s a very simple and 
cheap way to handle round bales. 
 
And I commend and congratulate Sheldon on his very fine 
achievement. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Great Western Brewery 
Truly Great at World Beer Cup Competition 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ve had a few 
hot days and we’re bound to have a few more. And there is 
good news out of my constituency in Saskatoon to help some of 
us get through the heat of the day, refreshed and satisfied. 
 
I am speaking, of course, of the Great Western Brewery, owned 
and operated by its Saskatoon workers, and the producer of 
some of the best brews on the continent. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, is not just empty boosterism. I’m happy 
to report that for the second time in a row, Great Western beers 
have done extremely well at the World Beer Cup competition in 
Aspen, Colorado, home of one of those big-time beers we hear 
about, but this time didn’t make the cut. Great Western’s light 
beer, Brewhouse Light, won the silver medal in the light beer 
competition — the toughest one at the Olympics — while its 
Premium Light brand finished third. 
 
To be open, honest, and accountable I should admit that the first 
place went to that football beer, Miller Lite. But second and 
third in a competition where 1,173 beers were entered from 379 
breweries in 38 countries is not bad at all. And a panel of 71 
judges from 38 countries made the choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the marketing slogan for the Great Western is 
Truly Great. And this is truly great news for a small 
independent quality product — another reason to celebrate what 
we can do here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Naicam Residents Show Community Pride 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All members are 
proud of the towns in their constituency. And today I’d like to 
acknowledge the community of Naicam for two special events. 
 
The town of Naicam researched the idea of a community-based, 

volunteer-run thrift store that would recycle items into cash for 
community-based recreation events. Volunteers renovated an 
empty building and encouraged residents to donate such items 
such as clothing, dishes, toys, jewellery, furniture, and other 
items. 
 
May 18 its door opened for business and on June 18 they had 
their grand opening. In the short term it has been running, the 
store has expanded its volunteer base and it will run with a 
profit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to acknowledge and congratulate 
another business in the town of Naicam. Shop Easy Foods 
owned by Dave and Helen Anderson of Naicam has for the past 
15 years given ice cream and pop to all school children on 
report card day in June. 
 
Over the past years, Dave and Helen have given over 200 
gallons of ice cream and 2,400 cans of pop to students excited 
to be out of school for the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating Naicam for pride in their community and in their 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Athabasca Health Centre 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Some more great good news from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Wednesday, my friend from Cumberland told the Assembly 
about building the roads in the North. Mr. Speaker, we’re also 
improving northern health care. 
 
The Athabasca Health Centre on the Chicken Reserve close to 
Stony Rapids in my constituency is more than half completed. It 
is called in Dene, Yutthe Dene Nakohodi which means a place 
to heal northern people. And it will be a model for northern 
health centres across Canada. 
 
The centre will be for northern people but also for the 
employees of Cameco and COGEMA, who together donated 
$200,000 for equipment. But as the name suggests, the centre 
will combine modern medicine with traditional practices. 
 
I also want to point out that Points Athabasca Construction has 
maintained a 60 per cent local labour force and is training eight 
apprentices. The completion of this good news story, Mr. 
Speaker, is this fall. The grand opening next spring. 
 
It will have 13 acute care beds, community health services, 
mental and public health services, and a child and family 
services, all in the same building. Also, Mr. Speaker, a staff of 
40 will include 10 nurses with four local young women in 
nurses’ training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more great news for Saskatchewan’s north and the 
province as a whole. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2519 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Keeping Young People in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the headline in today’s 
newspaper says, “Young adults fleeing Saskatchewan.” It 
should have read and could have read, young adults fleeing the 
NDP (New Democratic Party). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP continues to drive 
people and taxpayers of working age out of the province. 
Statistics Canada reports that Saskatchewan now has the lowest 
percentage of working age people of any province in Canada. 
Just 64 per cent of Saskatchewan’s population is between the 
ages of 15 and 64, well below the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers are in; the NDP is driving people out 
of this province. And worst of all, Mr. Speaker, they are driving 
working people out of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier answer the question: why is the 
NDP driving so many working people out of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
Leader of the Opposition and to his colleagues that the biggest 
driver of encouraging people to leave this province is the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party and his caucus. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from an article in The 
StarPhoenix just a couple of days ago. And the headline is, “Job 
opportunities abound in Sask.”. And the writer, Dwight Percy, 
said that: 
 

In the wake of the No. 1 activity of the past week — high 
school graduations — there’s a question that inevitably 
arises for families whose kids have hit this milestone. “Will 
they stay?” 

 
And he goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say that we have a 
responsibility to be encouraging our young people. 
 
But what do you hear from the opposition every day? You 
know what? The Saskatchewan Party stands up and says there’s 
no jobs in spite of the fact that, May over May, we’ve had an 
increase of 1,100 . . . (inaudible) . . . new jobs. He says there’s 
no opportunities for graduates, in spite of the fact that 90 per 
cent of the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) grads stay right here in this province. 
 
He says that their taxes are too high and that’s why people are 
leaving in spite of the fact we’ve got the fourth lowest tax rate 
in the province . . . in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Everyone 
knows that the minister has trouble standing up to the facts. Mr. 
Speaker, Statistics Canada says that this loss in population 

began in 1999, the year that the NDP-Liberal coalition 
government began. And the report says, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan has been losing population since 1999. The 
emigration of younger persons has a substantial impact on 
the proportion of working age persons. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce is more 
direct. They say the NDP is far behind in creating incentives to 
keep young people here. And that’s a big problem, Mr. Speaker, 
because we don’t have working people in this province to carry 
the load for important services like health care and education. 
 
So the question to the Premier is, the Saskatchewan Party has a 
plan to grow Saskatchewan. The NDP has a plan to shrink 
Saskatchewan. When is the NDP going to get with the program 
and put forward a plan to grow Saskatchewan and keep people 
here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party has had the opportunity to enunciate that 
plan that he talks about. Mr. Speaker, we find it on one 
headline, on one sheet of paper which says they’re going to 
grow this population by 100,000 people. No idea how they’re 
going to do it. They have told us nothing about what they are 
going to do, nothing about what their plan is, and we’ve had 
70-some days in this legislature of which they could have used 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, they have had day 
after day after day to articulate that plan and what have you 
heard? What have you heard? They have told the people, the 
young people of this province to leave this province, to find 
work elsewhere in spite of the fact that we’ve had 11,100 job 
increase, May over May, in this province. And they won’t talk 
about that. 
 
They tell the people of Saskatchewan that there’s no 
opportunity for graduates, in spite of the fact that 90 per cent of 
the SIAST grads stay here and find employment. 
 
And they tell us that our taxes are highest. We have the fourth 
lowest tax rate in this country. 
 
They say this economy is stagnant, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the 
fact that we’ve got the third highest GDP (gross domestic 
product) growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well you know 
the minister didn’t join the hundreds of Saskatchewan leaders 
who came to our Grow Saskatchewan meetings throughout the 
province and were very excited about our plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister can’t read; perhaps we have 
to draw a picture for him. The fact is the picture that 
Saskatchewan people see is very clear and they’re leaving . . . 
 



2520 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, members. Order. I 
would ask the members to tone it down so the questions can be 
heard. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is some 
good news in the report. Saskatchewan has the highest 
percentage of children in the country. And when these children 
become young adults, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have a new 
Saskatchewan Party government in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
with a plan to grow this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will keep our young people in Saskatchewan. 
We will grow our workforce. Obviously the economic policies 
of the NDP are not working. The statistics are clear on this fact. 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have continued to drive people, 
including working age and young people, from this province. 
 
How can the NDP, and how can the minister, how can the 
Premier stand up in their place and claim that their policies are 
working when the facts beg to differ? People are leaving the 
province under their watch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by 
saying that the young people he speaks about will be voting age 
before that member and that government ever has a chance to 
form government in this province. 
 
And I want to tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
tell you why. These are supposed to be . . . these . . . if they 
would just listen . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — These are supposed to be leaders of 
our communities. These are supposed to be leaders of 
communities in rural Saskatchewan for the most part, Mr. 
Speaker. And what do you hear from them? They tell young 
people of this province to leave because there’s no future in this 
province. They tell them to go to Alberta and seek employment 
in Alberta, and they tell them to go to the States. They tell 
nurses to leave this province and go to the States and find 
employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, never, ever do they talk about the fact that we’ve 
got the lowest unemployment rate in this country, and that 
people in the manufacturing and processing industry are 
looking for welders and pipefitters, and that they’re looking for 
people to work in those jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I want to quote further from Dwight 
Percy’s column. And he goes on to say: 
 

. . . I think we perform a disservice, mostly to our kids, if 
our sole focus is (on) what’s wrong here at home. 

 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s wrong here at home is we’ve got an 
opposition with no vision for the future, no plan, no policy, and 
no faith in this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we are telling young people 
to stay in Saskatchewan because we’re going to have a new 
government that’s going to grow this province. We are asking 
young people not to follow the NDP example of Dwain 
Lingenfelter, not to follow the NDP example of Doug Anguish, 
not to follow the NDP of Ned Shillington and desert this 
province, because we believe in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I say to the NDP, why don’t they step 
aside and let somebody govern this province who believes in it, 
and who will grow the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, members of this 
coalition government will never stand aside to allow that party 
to govern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I will tell you why, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to share with you why. Because they have 
been trying since they formed that party to disassociate 
themselves from the former Progressive Conservative 
government in every way they can, even in spite of the fact that 
some of them worked in that very government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to tell you why people don’t trust that Leader of the 
Opposition. This is the same guy who claimed he didn’t even 
know Grant Devine when he was asked about his association 
with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a lack of faith and a lack of belief that 
these people know how to tell the facts from the fiction. They 
are nothing more or nothing less than a throw off of the former 
Progressive Conservative government. People of this province 
know it and they ain’t going to buy that snake oil again. 
They’ve had it once and they won’t do it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Safety Net Program 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, for weeks the Saskatchewan 
Party has been asking the NDP what the government plans to do 
for the producers of this province. Now Saskatchewan has 
announced that it will not sign on to the federal government’s 
inadequate agriculture package. 
 
Farm families are well into another season and for many it’s 
shaping up to be another financial disaster. To add to their 
worries, Mr. Speaker, farm families have not heard one word 
from the federal government or about . . . from the NDP 
government about the plans that are being made to replace the 
CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) program, a program 
that failed farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP government going to do to 
address the growing farm crisis in Saskatchewan, given that the 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2521 

 

province is not signing on to the new federal policy agriculture 
framework, and the old program CFIP is quickly coming to an 
end? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The members opposite know full well 
what the provincial government’s role has been in building a 
new safety net for Saskatchewan and for Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
And we presented that plan, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I tabled it for 
this Assembly during one of the question periods not more than 
about two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, tabled the documents that 
showed what this government is going to be doing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the better question that we should be asking 
and what Saskatchewan people are asking is what is, what is the 
Saskatchewan Party doing in terms of building an agriculture 
policy in this province. Well I’ll tell you what they’re doing. 
The member of the opposition stood up in his place on May 1 
and said, do you know what? We tabled for Saskatchewan 
people on May 21, Mr. Speaker. And I have his Hansard right 
here where he says: 
 

We engaged in policy for Saskatchewan people today. 
 

On May 21, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people and agriculture producers in the 
province know where this government is at, Mr. Speaker; 
working for producers and working for agriculture. But they 
know where they’re at, Mr. Speaker, which is abandoning 
Saskatchewan farmers on every occasion that they’ve had an 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
did look at the documents that he tabled and they’re very 
lacking in detail, Mr. Speaker, considering they’re the 
government. 
 
It appears now that there’s $500 million per year in the next 
five years allocated by the federal government to a new farm 
program that has been used in the budgets prior to fund CFIP. 
The Saskatchewan Party has learned that after the inadequate 
CFIP program ends, potentially the funding will be used in the 
new . . . for a safety net program. 
 
Will the minister share with the legislature and the farm 
families of Saskatchewan today what position the province is 
taking in negotiating a replacement for the failed CFIP program 
beginning in 2003? And will the minister share with the House 
whether the NDP has even begun negotiations for a replacement 
with CFIP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We went to Halifax and suggested to the 
national government that we should have, in Saskatchewan, a 
stronger crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker. We said to the 
national government that we should have enhancements today, 
Mr. Speaker, on the trade injury. Should not be $1.2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker; we said that they should be $1.3 billion annually. So 
our position for . . . on agriculture for Saskatchewan people has 
been clear. 

And it’s also clear, Mr. Speaker . . . well, what Saskatchewan 
people and farmers are saying about the Saskatchewan Party. 
And I have here, Mr. Speaker, a quote from a member, the 
Saskatchewan Party member from Fillmore, Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and he says this: 
 

I have been a . . . 
 
And he says: 
 

I have been a Saskatchewan Party supporter since I was old 
enough to vote, my family has supported it and its 
predecessors even longer. However, given the fact that 
Elwin Hermanson (Mr. Speaker, he says) and the 
Saskatchewan Party have been conspicuously silent (Mr. 
Speaker) during the farm crisis, our support is faltering 
quickly. 

 
We know, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan producers know 
who is working for them. It’s this government and this Premier 
working for them. And the member from Rosetown and his 
party, absent on agriculture, Mr. Speaker — absent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the problem is that NDP 
government has never been at the table when they’ve been 
designing new assistance programs and they’re not at the table 
now. 
 
They refused to be at the table when the AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) program was being designed 
because the NDP Agriculture minister was too busy sunning 
himself on the beaches of Mexico. And the NDP was not at the 
table when the federal government replaced AIDA with CFIP. 
So it’s no wonder that both CFIP and AIDA have failed the 
families of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we go again. Does the NDP have a plan for 
replacing the CFIP program, a plan with details, or is the NDP’s 
intention to do what they’ve always done which is stand around 
with their hands in their pockets and leave the farm families of 
this province high and dry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member from Watrous stands up 
today and she should have read the Hansard from her own 
leader, Mr. Speaker, because the Hansard clearly says that their 
party has not engaged in agriculture policy until May 21 of this 
past year, Mr. Speaker, is what the member said. That’s in the 
Hansard, Mr. Speaker; that’s what he says. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we have 
provided for Saskatchewan producers, agriculture producers, 
farm organizations, a farm plan for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
in totality. 
 
Yes, we want to see an enhanced crop insurance program; we 
want to see a stronger, a NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) program, Mr. Speaker; we want to see greater 
enhancements today for the long-term safety nets, Mr. Speaker; 
and we want to see injury protection for our farmers. That’s 



2522 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

what we want; that’s what we’re working for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But where’s the opposition, Mr. Speaker? Are they AWOL 
(absent without leave), or are they lost, or have they deserted 
Saskatchewan farmers in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll remind 
the minister that he’s the one that slashed this province’s 
Agriculture budget. So what is he doing for the producers? He’s 
the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The federal government’s recent 
announcement appears to have two separate components. One 
component is a six-year program which begins to unfold the 
new ag policy framework. The second component is a two-year 
fund that the NDP are calling a trade injury payment but yet the 
federal government is insisting in calling it bridge funding or 
transition funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the province need to sign on to the entire 
agreement in order to be eligible for our share of the two-year 
ad hoc program or . . . Also will the federal government pay our 
producers their portion of that program, even if we do not cost 
share? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That is precisely, Mr. Speaker, that is 
precisely the response that we’re waiting for the federal 
government to provide to us. We said to them, we’ve said to the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker, both in Halifax and in 
correspondence that I’ve issued, Mr. Speaker, to the federal 
leader, saying to him that we need to have a concise response, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of what happens with the $600 million 
annually and how much of the money, Mr. Speaker, will be 
going into trade injury for Saskatchewan producers and when 
will it be delivered. 
 
That’s the plan that we’ve delivered, Mr. Speaker, for 
Saskatchewan farmers. That’s the request that we’re making 
today, and we anticipate that we’re going to hear that within the 
next several days, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Quality in Last Mountain Lake 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Environment minister. The people around Last Mountain Lake 
continue to be very concerned about the water quality in their 
lake and the story in today’s paper isn’t going to make them 
feel any better. 
 
Last March this NDP government allowed the discharge of 
untreated effluent water into Wascana Creek that contained 18 
times the normal acceptable amount of fecal coliform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from April to October the sewage must be treated 

and the province regulates that, but up until April 15 basically 
there is no regulation and untreated sewage was being released 
into Wascana Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: what impact did the 
discharge of untreated sewage have on the water quality in Last 
Mountain Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is no question that this 
is always a very serious exercise when we talk about the quality 
of water throughout the province and we’ve always maintained, 
Mr. Speaker, that we have personnel on site. We have personnel 
that are working towards finding some resolution to many 
longstanding issues. 
 
And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is very clear that we’ve 
always maintained if you operate, if you operate your systems 
to the optimal level that you should in both your water 
treatment and your waste water treatment then we should have 
minimal problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are now in discussions with the city to make sure that the 
disinfection process is one that is up to date and to make sure 
that we have the right technology in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can report today, Mr. Speaker, that during the winter 
months when the bacteria counts are low and the cold water 
helps kill the bacteria, that is when we allow the discharge to 
happen. 
 
And it is not raw sewage, Mr. Speaker. It is not. It is treated 
effluent, Mr. Speaker. And during the summer months when we 
have some process where people have to go swimming, they 
obviously have to treat that water then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Alberta Environment 
department requires sewage to be treated year-round. And a 
biology professor with the U of R (University of Regina) says 
releasing untreated sewage in the spring may be harmful. He 
said that the warm spring temperature would mean more 
bacteria could survive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does it really make sense to allow the discharge of 
untreated sewage until April 15? My question is, to the 
minister: why don’t you do what Alberta’s doing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again there’s some 
fearmongering going on from that member and from that party. 
The city of Regina takes very seriously their treatment of their 
waste water that they ultimately allow to flow . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. Order, members. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that 
member and that party to stop fearmongering. It is very 
important that we take a very pragmatic approach to the 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2523 

 

treatment of our waste water in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the pragmatic approach we’re taking here today, Mr. 
Speaker, is we are in discussions now with the city to look at 
year-round ultraviolet treatment to reduce that potential impact. 
And if there’s some greater gains to be made, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to examine that. 
 
But again as we’ve mentioned before, as time goes on, there’s 
better methods. There’s probably ways that we can improve the 
system. We’re going to examine that, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
going to take a very serious, pragmatic approach to that. We’re 
not going to play politics with the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this was 
to have been the ethanol session. It commenced with the 
minister of Energy saying that Saskatchewan was open for 
private enterprise ethanol development. 
 
Then Frank Hart reversed the cabinet announcement and said 
that the province was close to signing a deal that would see the 
province pump 100 million into a US (United States) company 
that specializes in nursing homes and short-line railroads. 
 
Then we went a few weeks with the government appearing to 
alternately confirm and deny the Broe deal. Recently we’ve had 
silence. 
 
So what’s the situation? Why has this fallen off the radar 
screen? Is the Broe contract going to be signed or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to today encourage the member from North 
Battleford, from Battleford, to continue to support ethanol 
development, as I know he does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say to that member that there will be 
agreement signed. I can say to that member that there will be 
ethanol production in this province. And I can say to that 
member that it will be open to Broe and Commercial Alcohols 
or any other private sector company who wants to come to this 
province and invest in this province. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that member today — getting close to 
the end of the session, he’s going to have some time on his 
hands — to focus on talking to his federal cousins with respect 
to agriculture, which is damaging this province in the position 
they’re taking. I would ask him to talk to his federal cousins 
about mandating ethanol in this country for environmental and 
economic reasons. 
 
I would ask him to support this government’s ethanol . . . this 
government’s initiatives to bring a brand new industry to value 
add and diversity agriculture in rural Saskatchewan, instead of 
playing silly political games that he continues to do. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, accusing, accusing me of playing 

political games with this issue is nothing but bovine excreta. 
That minister’s tirade certainly shows why the two of us will 
never sing a duet of “Together Again.” 
 
The NDP government in Manitoba announced an ethanol 
strategy similar to the one first announced by the then minister 
of Energy. The government had a plan for smaller plants on the 
Minnesota model with ancillary feedlots. We see this in 
Minnesota. Agrivision recommended it. Now Manitoba 
recommends it. 
 
This plan was overruled by CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and Points West. 
 
I ask again, are we or are we not going to sign the contract for 
100 million bucks with the US conglomerate that specializes in 
nursing homes and short-line railroads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member 
who has visions of flying around the world sponsored by Frank 
Hart, let me say this to that member. 
 
We will be designing and are designing and have in place an 
ethanol policy that allows for private sector involvement, not 
only Broe but other companies, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
program that will allow for the development of the livestock 
industry in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m saying to you 
that we are working with the cattle industry. We are working 
with communities around this province, and we are going to 
develop this industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that member should spend some time 
working with his federal counterparts, with Ralph Goodale and 
the federal government, to be developing and designing a 
federal mandate for ethanol for this country. That’s what he 
should be working on. 
 
He should not be too worried about what we’re doing in terms 
of putting the program together in this province. We’re well on 
our way. It’s going to work. There’s going to be lots of private 
sector investment. There’s going to be jobs. There’s going to be 
value added in agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would ask the . . . 
Order. I would ask, I would ask the seatmates over here, the 
seatmates from Prince Albert and from Moose Jaw to hold the 
. . . just to help hold order in the House. And we can use some 
help. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand on behalf of the 
government to convert for debates returnable questions 414 to 
435. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 414 to 435 inclusive have been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 



2524 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to members here in the Assembly, in 
the west gallery several members of the Coalition Against 
No-Fault insurance. 
 
I see, I believe Lorie Terry’s there, and Dr. Daryn Mintzler are 
also there. And I’m not familiar with all the names but members 
will know the coalition works hard not just in general terms on 
the issue of no-fault but on behalf of accident victims as well. 
 
And I just ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Regional Health Services Act 
 

Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’m pleased to have with me 
this afternoon, to my left, Glenda Yeates, who is the deputy 
minister; and to my right, Jim Simmons, who’s the manager of 
special projects and transition team. Directly behind me is 
David Smith, who’s a consultant in the district management 
services branch; and to his left is Mick Grainger, assistant 
deputy minister. And behind them is Rick Hischebett, who is 
legal counsel for Saskatchewan Health, and Jim McLellan from 
Saskatchewan Labour. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome, Minister and officials this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re talking about Bill No. 61, and I guess a lot 
of the same things that we comment on 61 will apply to Bill No. 
62 which are the consequential amendments, so I won’t spend a 
lot of time with 62. And please consider the general comments 
applying from this Bill as applying in some respect to 62 as 
well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m certainly not going to go into a repeat of the 
debate on the second reading and talk about the philosophical 
things, but I think it’s fair to say in general introduction that this 
is a rather significant reorganization of the way health services 
are provided across the province of Saskatchewan. Moving 
from the former district situation to these regional authorities is 
a pretty significant change in the way services are delivered. 
 

It’s also I think fair to say, Minister, that there is a 
reorganization of responsibilities and authority, and I think as 
well that it’d also be fair to say that there is a clear definition of 
the responsibilities and role of the department and of the 
minister. And there are those that would argue that it actually is 
consolidating many of those decision-making functions within 
the department. 
 
Minister, first of all I’d like to ask you what consultative 
process you used in determining that this, the details of this 
centralization of responsibility and authority was the best way 
to go? What consultation was there with the former and I guess 
legally existing district health boards in coming to the decision 
of the legislation that we have in front of us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think the key point here is 
that in a process that has taken a couple of years the . . . We 
ended up retaining Mr. Ken Fyke to look at the issues around 
the organization of health care in Saskatchewan in a broad way, 
and that was a start of consultation which clearly included all of 
the health boards, the various professions, the public, and others 
in the community, business people. And he provided a report 
about a year and, I guess, three months ago. 
 
And that report was then used to have further discussions which 
took place and included the Standing Committee on Health 
which was meeting in this room about a year ago from now, 
where people presented various positions and ideas. All of that 
information was taken by department officials, members of the 
staff, and worked at in various ways to look at a total plan 
which became the action plan which was released in early 
December of last year. 
 
Then this legislation was developed out of the direction and the 
plans that were set out there, and effectively this implements the 
. . . many of the policy things that were described in our action 
plan. In the process, a number of the health board . . . existing 
health board people were involved in various ways and some of 
the discussion and . . . but it’s part of an overall major 
discussion. And that’s kind of how the process worked. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, in receiving comments about this 
legislation from various stakeholders in the province, there have 
been a number of common themes that have been articulated 
from a pretty wide variety of individuals. One was from people 
who have been involved and, I guess again, currently are 
technically still involved with district health boards, that there 
really was no process of consultation and meaningful input 
from them in regards to this legislation. 
 
I’ve been told that they received or saw copies of this but . . . 
and were asked to comment but nothing changed — that the 
decisions had been made by the time they actually had an 
opportunity to comment on this legislation. And they’re feeling 
as if their input was ignored by the department. Is that the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In any process of consultation you work 
with many different people. The specific health boards were not 
always consulted in full but there were representatives from 
various health boards that worked on the process. I think that 
what we tried to do was look at all of the various issues and the 
concerns that were there, and some of them related to the 
organization of the district health boards as they were and the 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2525 

 

recommendations from Mr. Fyke and then from the standing 
committee as to how we should move forward. 
 
(14:30) 
 
I think that what we tried to do then was figure out how those 
things could be implemented in the legislation, and at a point 
where we actually had legislation that would . . . could be 
discussed as far as the concepts and the terms. There were 
meetings with various representatives of health boards, maybe 
not every single person on every health board. 
 
But my sense is also that as part of this process, we also set up 
planning committees for the new regional health authorities. 
The members of those planning committees or approximately 
half of them are existing health board members and those 
people were involved in dealing with some of the processes, 
some of the issues, and some of the things that were happening. 
 
I think what you see in this legislation is that it’s enabling 
legislation. It allows us to move forward. And we will continue 
to work with all of the people involved in the process. But it’s 
very clear that we want a province-wide system that’s focused 
on the patients and makes sure that we’re all working together 
as a complementary system that provides care for people. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
referred to the action plan and even before that to Mr. Fyke’s 
report. In both of those, first of all the recommendations from 
Mr. Fyke, and then I detected a very strong commitment to the 
concept of primary health care in the action plan and the idea of 
collaborative primary health care teams that are going to be 
involved in a much more proactive way at a community level. 
And I would define community as not necessarily meaning a 
small rural town or village, but a community of people and that 
could be in a large urban centre as well. 
 
And it seems to me in the literature that I’ve read that this 
concept is certainly pretty well universally accepted as a 
proactive and an appropriate way to go in the delivery of 
primary health care in the collaborative team approach. 
 
And certainly I sat on the committee referred to that met last 
summer, the Standing Committee on Health, and representation 
was made from a variety of people that talked about the 
importance of collaborative health practice. 
 
Mr. Minister, as well, it is indicated in the literature that in 
order for these primary health care teams to really function at 
their most optimum opportunity, that there has to be a real 
strong buy in by the community they’re serving and a great deal 
of support by that community for these primary health care 
service delivery models. 
 
And, Minister, I’m wondering in light of the fact that that seems 
to be a universally agreed to basic set of principles that I’ve 
tried to articulate, in light of that, why has there not been 
provision for meaningful elected representation on the health 
authorities in order to connect that community involvement 
with this authority who is going to be involved with the 
decision-making processes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the question that you’ve asked here 

goes right to the heart of the issue of how one develops 
community agencies and develops public health policy around 
that balance between making sure things work in a coordinated 
fashion and making sure you do have the buy in from the local 
community. And at this particular stage we’re obviously 
recommending that we go to appointed boards from a broader 
area so that we can end up with that kind of representation and 
not elected boards. 
 
There’s a number of reasons around that. Some of it relates to 
the issues where we have elected boards. They usually have 
some taxation ability where the other part of it is that in the 
elections, there were not . . . we didn’t get a huge participation 
in the elections the way they had been organized over the last 
number of years. 
 
I think the key part though, in what we’re doing here, is that as 
we move to some of the bigger areas, we are going to be 
developing a very clear system of community advisory boards 
which will be organized not so much around geography but 
around various kinds of issues, whether it’s seniors’ issues, 
whether it’s the issues around the Kids First program, whether 
it’s some of the kinds of things that relate to particular problems 
of a particular part of the province. And we’re quite, I guess, 
enthusiastic about the kinds of opportunities that are there to 
allow for the kind of community participation that you’re 
asking about. 
 
What we also have, I think, is a good sense that the boards that 
we will be having in place when this legislation is in place, that 
they are receiving support from their communities that are part 
of their regional health authority, and that we will still be able 
to capture the enthusiasm and the hopes and the dreams of the 
people in a particular area as we develop the health plan. 
 
But practically, there are some other ways of doing it. And I 
know that suggestions have been made by, you know, the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale around some other ways to do it. 
When we looked at all of the various ways of organizing this, 
this is the one that we think makes the most sense for 
Saskatchewan and for the health system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you talked about community 
advisory bodies and things of that nature. But, Minister, through 
this legislation the wording seems to be fairly consistent. For 
example it says time after time that the minister is responsible 
and may do things. So there is a great deal of discretion and 
responsibility placed in the office of the ministry. 
 
In many instances the wording that happens at the regional 
authority is such that the regional authority shall comply. That it 
is very much a weighted system that the authority is there to 
deliver services on a regional level under the pretty clear 
direction of the minister, and that the Department of Health is 
going to set health policy and direction, and the regional 
authority shall comply with those directives. 
 
Now, Minister, my question is this: you talk about 
community-based advisory groups, and that’s all well and good 
if you’ve got a real sense of empowerment of the local 
community people so that there is a real meaningful two-way 
flow of authority and listening. It can’t be just all one sided. 
 



2526 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

And when all the authority and responsibility is being 
consolidated in the central registry and I hear the minister 
arguing that that is a decision that was made in order to ensure 
that there’s some standards and that there’s an effective 
planning process and all the rest of it, then I don’t know how 
you’re going to on a realistic basis expect community 
volunteers to get involved in a very one-directional kind of a 
process. 
 
I think that it sounds great on theory and it looks pretty good on 
paper but in a practical sense, unless there is some real 
meaningful, valued input, people are going to quickly say, well 
what’s the point of this; the decisions are being made in Regina. 
And while there is the appearance of meaningful dialogue and 
input, in a real de facto way the decisions already have been 
made. So I think the way you’ve set it up, Minister, is fraught 
with danger in terms of not realizing your stated objectives of 
real meaningful input. 
 
Minister, the other part of this . . . or there’s many parts to this 
Bill, and the one is of course the provision of funding. And one 
of the stated purposes when you spoke about this Bill on a 
number of occasions and certainly when you introduced it in 
second reading, I recall that you talked about the fact that this is 
going to create a platform or a vehicle for more stable, 
long-term, predictable funding relationships that should be of 
great benefit. 
 
And I think that we have been saying that and suggesting over 
the years and before you as the current minister accepted the 
portfolio we were even more articulate about saying that health 
districts simply cannot go through 75 or 90 per cent of their 
budget year and still not have their budget approved. It’s an 
impossible situation to be sort of so far behind the eight ball in 
terms of meeting the needs and exercising their responsibilities 
appropriately. 
 
So minister, how does a change in this legislation . . . other than 
saying you may provide this funding, the funding is being 
centralized, where’s the commitment for long-term predictable 
funding in this legislation, other than in your stated 
commitments? But is it in the legislation and specifically 
stated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That particular issue is not dealt with right 
in this Act because it basically relates to the Department of 
Finance and how we organize the expenditures out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
But our commitment is very clearly there. And what this Act 
does do is it allows for some of the processes of basically joint 
co-operative planning for the province with 12 districts plus the 
one in the North, that then gives us the ability to move forward 
all of the financial planning. So that our goal is that we would 
have multi-year plans and we would also have approvals of the 
budgets before the start of the budget year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, minister, and I appreciate your 
clarification that it isn’t in the legislation. And I certainly very 
much do take you at your word when you’re saying that’s your 
intention, but as you know ministers come and go in many 
portfolios and Health is no exception over the years. 
 

So do we have to get the commitment for the long-term 
predictable funding that you are saying in principle you 
certainly support. And you indicated that it is the Department of 
Finance ultimately and Treasury Board that determines what 
funding is available for the Department of Health. But do we 
have to get this kind of commitment from the Finance 
department or for the Premier in his estimates, so that we can 
actually end up with somewhere on the public record, in a 
long-term basis, from your government that predictable 
long-term funding is going to become the norm rather than a 
promise that has not happened to date at all. Because I think the 
minister would even agree that there hasn’t been any of this in 
recent memory. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The commitment that you speak about is 
very clearly set out in the action plan that we provided in 
December. And our goal obviously is to work towards that 
particular plan of having the multi-year funding and having it 
approved prior to the budget year so we don’t run into the kinds 
of problems that you talk about. 
 
So that’s . . . so the commitment is there. It’s part of what we’re 
setting out to do. And what we’re doing now with this 
legislation — and then having the new health authorities come 
into effect by the fall — is allowing us to improve the process 
as we move into the next budget year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, when I’m on funding — and we’ll talk about how the 
regions were brought together or how they were brought 
together — but in essence there have been essentially three 
districts brought together to form a region. And I think there 
may be exception to that in numbers, but that’s the general rule. 
 
Minister, so in each of those districts in many cases they have 
established trust funds. They may have certain trusts or funds 
that were assumed by the district from individual acute care, 
long-term care facilities that were very much conditional gifts 
and bequests that were now under the custody of the district 
health board. And you’d recall, I’m sure, and recognize that 
there were a lot of concerns about . . . some of these trust funds 
were attached to a specific facility in the past. It then moved 
over to a conditional kind of trust fund on the district level. 
 
And, Minister, how does this now move into the regional 
authority? Because now you have amalgamation of districts and 
a much broader uniting of communities if you like. How are the 
issues of these trust funds going to be treated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the time that the district health boards 
were established, there were local trust agreements put into 
place to ensure that funds that were raised for local purposes 
could be retained for those purposes. So any trust funds that are 
still held under those agreements will continue to be held for the 
local purposes. And under this legislation the new regional 
health authorities are obligated to respect the terms and 
conditions of those local trust agreements negotiated by the 
previous boards and communities. 
 
So all of those kinds of agreements will just continue forward in 
. . . and keep in place the kinds of terms that were set up when 
the funds were set up. 
 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2527 

 

(14:45) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Minister, staying 
on funding for a moment, I’d like to talk about capital funding 
if you like and community contributions to capital funding 
projects. Currently the general rule if you like, especially in the 
non-tertiary care centres, is 35/65 funding ratio — 65 per cent 
contributed by the Department of Health and 35 per cent 
supported by the local community. 
 
For example, Mr. Minister, I’ll look at my corner of the world 
as an example, where you had the North Central Health District 
that just under . . . has part of an undertaking, a very major 
long-term care facility in Parkland hospital. The existing health 
district was responsible for their share of local contributions and 
because of the regional nature that that was adjusted. But 
irrespective, there was a significant local contribution to that 
project. 
 
Now with the amalgamated and the regionalized services, if 
there would be a similar significant project that would be 
generated in one of the other communities that now are part of 
the regional authority, what mechanism is there in place now to 
provide for the local community input? Argument could be 
made that a community that has just put a massive amount of 
money in a significant project would be probably not all that 
crazy about putting in their now share of the bigger issue in the 
larger health authority. 
 
So how has this legislation provided for making adjustments 
and consideration in the local community contributions to 
capital projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In this area, these . . . the kinds of 
contributions that are raised in the local area are voluntary 
contributions in the sense that they are locally raised. And so 
the idea is clearly to allow the regional health authorities the 
kind of flexibility they need to deal with the projects that may 
arise in their particular area. 
 
And at this point there wouldn’t be any kind of a sense that well 
the whole regional health authority has to contribute for one 
particular area or that it’s only the local area. It would be what 
could be worked out in that particular area. 
 
But the goal is not to discourage or stifle the local kinds of 
fundraising things that happen, but also to make sure that all of 
the planning and the kinds of things that happen happen in a 
way that makes sense for the regional health authority but also 
makes sense for the total health system in the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, in a practical way, of course, that 
sort of creates some difficulties and uncertainties in the lack of 
a clear policy, if you like, in that regard. Because there’s going 
to be, you know . . . One of the challenges, that I think the 
minister would also agree, is to get these divergent communities 
now really truly thinking and co-operating and participating on 
a regional vision when indeed there’s going to be certain very 
community-specific needs that aren’t necessarily equally felt 
across the whole region. 
 
And as regions get larger, I think that’ll be increasingly, you 
know, a fact of life. And so I think it’s important that someone 

comes up with a policy about what the real expectations are 
other . . . something a little more specific than work it out. 
Because there’s going to be potential for a fair bit of internal 
pressure and tension I would think, as you start thinking as a 
regional authority and priorize community projects, if you like, 
and then deal with the whole issue then of the expectation of 
local funding and where it’s going to come from, because the 
local funding comes from fundraising and that’s easy because if 
someone wants to voluntarily contribute to a project, that’s very 
easy. It creates absolutely no expectations or tensions. 
 
But by and large, Minister, you know of course that a lot of the 
local contribution comes by way of municipal levy and that is 
established by rural municipalities and urban municipalities that 
contribute on behalf of the taxpayers in their communities for 
this health project. 
 
And now we’re going to have much more of a greying and a 
blurring of where those municipal authorities, especially in rural 
areas, have a responsibility to. Is it community A’s project or 
community B’s project, or somewhere in between and in what 
order? If community A’s project is going forward this year and 
community B’s is planned for two years down the road, what’s 
the situation and the arrangement? 
 
And I think that there is a great deal of potential tension that’s 
going to be created in leaving this policy that vague as you’ve 
described, Minister. And I think that there has to be a real effort 
made to try to figure out how this is going to work, particularly 
when the ratio of contribution is as high as it is. Thirty-five per 
cent is a very significant contribution in a local community and 
potentially in this economy is putting a lot of pressure on 
municipal authorities to come up with that capital cash. 
 
So I wonder if you may comment on the concerns I’ve 
expressed and is there some thought about looking at this issue 
and establish a mechanism to deal with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I very much appreciate that example 
because in many ways it’s an answer to a previous question you 
had about the centralized control from the middle and basically 
saying, well in this area we want to see how things develop. 
Now one of the advantages of our new plan is having both a 
minister’s forum, where I meet with all the chairs of the 
regional health authority boards, and also a leaders’ forum, 
where the deputy minister meets with the CEOs from the 
various parts across the province. 
 
And it’s exactly this type of an issue that you’ve raised here that 
goes to that kind of a discussion. And what we hear then is the 
examples of how some existing health districts have dealt with 
that problem in a smaller microcosm and how it might translate 
into some of the solutions on a broader basis. 
 
But I think at this point, if we came in with some kind of rigid 
rule around that, we may create a solution in one area but a 
problem in another area. And this is something that I suspect, 
just like you suspect, that within a year or two or three, we’ll 
have a clearer policy overall. 
 
But at this stage, we want to, I think, allow for the kind of 
flexibility and the ideas that could come from the various parts 
of the province. 



2528 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, how are 
projects that are in the various stages of the planning process, 
again speaking about capital projects, going to be rolled into 
this new regional authority? 
 
I know . . . And we’ll speak more about this in estimates, about 
more specific projects but, at this stage, I’d like to just . . . more 
in concept. Where there are projects that communities under the 
current structure have set aside their contribution, that there’s 
proposals have been forwarded to the department in terms of an 
addition to a facility, a change of structure or whatever, that are 
underway — and I know that you know in general what I’m 
talking about in terms of projects in various stages of 
development — how are those going to be rolled into, 
particularly the ones that are maybe in a little earlier stages — 
once construction is underway, I know that the commitments 
are made and all those contracts and all the rest of it are being 
respected and honoured — but in the planning process, how is 
that going to be now assimilated into the regional authority? 
 
Are those plans going to be reviewed by the regional authority 
and resubmitted or verified or is there a delay in the process? 
How are they going to be sort of rolled over to . . . from the 
district responsibility to the regional authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simplest way to answer that 
question is to say that those projects will continue. The assets, 
the liabilities, and obligations all move from the health districts 
to the regional health authorities. 
 
But it’s also a time, when you do this change to be a time, when 
you examine all of the various projects that are there. And so 
that will happen as it does on an ongoing basis, as we try to fit 
all of the demands within the resources that we have. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, another area of this Bill talks 
about surgical waiting lists and a surgical registry. As part of 
the action plan, I think there was a commitment. And I guess, in 
fairness, I would more categorize it as a recommitment because 
there’s been discussions about the need to standardize and 
codify a surgical registry and waiting list for some time. 
 
And it sort of seems to get talked about, a committee gets in 
place to do it, and then all of a sudden it gets lost and there’s 
another study and we sort of recommit ourselves to the task. 
 
This is the first time I believe that there actually has been a 
legislative commitment and some standards set in legislation as 
to how this is going to happen. 
 
Minister, I know that you, as a result of the action plan, 
appointed a task force I believe — or I’m not sure what the 
right word is — to work on this project, and I wonder if you 
would describe how that work is coming in relationship to the 
clauses in this legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m very pleased to explain what’s 
happened. And having this surgical registry right in this Act, as 
section 12, is actually part of the consultation that we’ve had 
with our surgical registry group. 
 
They’ve met a couple of times; they have developed some 
subcommittees. For example, some of the doctors are working 

around standardized assessment tools for putting names on the 
waiting lists, and others are working on some of the 
administrative things that relate to how you keep track of the 
surgeries across the province. There’s quite a number of things 
that are happening. 
 
The legislation clearly gives the authority to set up what they 
are recommending that we do, and I know that they will be 
reporting on their work as they proceed because it is important 
to all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
would also, in the establishment of the regional authorities, they 
are going to, I am assuming at least in the legislation, assume 
the relationships that existed between the districts and the 
districts and affiliates, that that relationship is going to be 
honoured and rolled over. 
 
Is there any expectation, while honouring current agreements, 
that there’s going to be a change in the relationship of affiliates 
to the regional health authorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think this is an area where we’re quite 
pleased to have both the ability to have the affiliates be much 
more a part of the planning, and that includes budget planning 
but also service planning and also the accountability, basically 
reporting on what’s being done with public dollars through the 
use of the various affiliates. 
 
And so what you’ll see in this legislation is a clarification of 
that role with the various affiliates, and it kind of depends on 
what kind of affiliate they are. But the net effect is that we think 
that they will be much more part of the overall province plan. 
 
You know, they will be able to get their budget requests into the 
regional health authorities and into the provincial budget 
request through a more timely process. And we’ll also have a 
better understanding of some of the concerns and the needs and 
also the kinds of positive things that they will be able to provide 
for the overall health system in the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in your 
establishment of the authorities, you’ve decided — and we 
talked about it briefly — about going to appointed authorities 
rather than elected, but you also decided to make the 
appointments as to who shall act as Chair and Vice-Chair. Will 
the minister explain his rationale for making those 
appointments as well, rather than allowing the board to make 
those decisions from among themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that you will see across 
government, when there are government appointed boards, the 
usual policy is to appoint the Chair and the Vice-Chair. And 
one of the reasons that that’s done, after many years of 
experience, is the fact that people may be willing to sit on a 
board but they may be not necessarily willing to be the Chair or 
the Vice-Chair. And if they go on to a board and then through a 
process in that board become the Chair and the Vice-Chair, they 
don’t necessarily always end up having the same kind of a sense 
of, this is what I really wanted to do. 
 
So this comes out I think of many years of experience in how 
the government has appointed people to work on all kinds of 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

 

boards. It isn’t necessarily related to the health area; it’s just 
based on long experience. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s equally 
long experience in school boards and things of that nature 
where they’re all elected as equals and from among themselves 
they collectively establish and agree to who is going to chair 
and vice-chair their entity. And so you can quote one long 
experience and there certainly are others that would talk about 
the other issue. And again I think it speaks to the whole issue of 
you sort of making sure that you control the process. 
 
Because it’s not as if these Chairs are non-consequential to the 
process. I believe you set it up that there’s a minister’s advisory 
group that are made up of the Chairs. And so the local 
authorities don’t even have the right to be able to decide who 
they want to represent that regional authority on . . . as a local, 
regional board. But they also then, by definition, do not have 
any right to choose who is going to represent them on your 
advisory group that’s ongoing. So I think that that is a 
philosophical difference that we’re just going to have. And I 
recognize that. 
 
Mr. Minister, as well as that, there is I believe clauses within 
this to provide for out-of-pocket expenses and remuneration for 
the regional board people. Is there a provision for out-of-pocket 
expenses from the community advisory groups? Or is there any 
possibility of covering some of their incidental costs within this 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — For the community advisory boards there 
is a provision for the expenses, but there is not a remuneration 
or per diem for that board. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, there have been the . . . I think it’s 
a provisional appointment, or I’m not sure exactly the technical 
wording for the regional authorities as they exist, because 
there’s kind of a parallel, overlapping kind of responsibility 
right now. Because until this legislation is proclaimed, the 
system has to function under the existing district health 
legislation. And so people that have been appointed to the 
regional authorities have been operated . . . operating on a 
provisional basis of some sort. I’m not sure of the technical 
wording of it. 
 
Minister, how have their expenses and decision making . . . or 
decisions that they’ve made — and there’s been two key areas 
where they’ve been mandated to make decisions; one is in the 
selection of the administrative centre of the regional health 
authority and the second has been the selection of its chief 
executive officer — under what authority process have they 
been making these decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay. That’s a good question. I’m happy 
to explain it. Basically what we’ve done with the regional 
health authority planning committees is that these committees 
are appointed as minister’s committees. So therefore through 
that process we can provide the per diems and the expenses. As 
far as the decisions that they may have made, they are basically 
in a planning committee mode and any of the kinds of things 
that they are working on will have to be confirmed at the point 

that they become official, which will be the date of 
proclamation. And so we’re in the process of having all of that 
happen. And then the kinds of things that they’ve been working 
on. 
 
As far as the CEOs, I have effectively, as through the minister 
and the department, have ended up retaining them to take these 
positions prior to the coming into the existence of the new 
regional health authorities. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, if I’m not mistaken, I think the 
process has been a twofold and in this order. That the first was 
for these provisional boards to . . . or authorities, to establish 
administrative centre of the new regional authority. And then 
secondly, to make a decision about the selection of a CEO. And 
I believe that that is generally the way the process has gone in 
most if not all of the regional authorities. 
 
The question I have is, given the importance of this decision 
about, firstly the administrative centre — because there’s all 
kinds of community and logistical decisions that surround that 
— the boards or these provisional boards have had to make that 
decision in the absence of having a CEO on board to advise 
them. Is this correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — First I’d like to say that it’s not true in 
every case that the process was as you said. Some places they 
worked with getting a CEO and then worked out the centre that 
would be the administrative centre or some places they have 
multiple administrative centres. 
 
But basically what we did right at the very start was to make 
sure that each of these planning commissions had the resources 
available to hire somebody to work with them. And often it was 
a retired CEO or somebody who has some experience but who 
had no interest in becoming the new CEO for the new regional 
health authority. 
 
And I think we’ve had some very good service and advice from 
capable people right across the province who have provided that 
kind of a role working together with the people from 
Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Minister, in 
general, I would have to state on the record, as I have in the 
past, that this concept of logical regional provision of health 
care services is a step in the right direction. We’ve had 
discussions and you know by my comments that I have some 
conceptual difficulties with some of the way things were done. I 
certainly have given you two amendments that we will propose 
to make at the appropriate time. 
 
In the meantime, Minister, I have some colleagues that have 
specific questions that impact on how this legislation is going to 
impact on health care delivery in their particular jurisdictions. 
So, Mr. Chair, I would like to yield to my colleague from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as you are 
no doubt aware I have been presenting petitions on behalf of 
communities that are currently in the Health Region No. 6 that 
would like to move to Health Region No. 4. And when I look at 
the Act, there is a section in the Act, section 21, that deals with 



2530 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

that process. 
 
But it is quite vague, Mr. Minister, and I was wondering if you 
could outline the process that communities and rural 
municipalities would need to follow to move from one health 
region to the other. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that what I would emphasize is 
that we wanted to make sure we got the regional health 
authorities established first. We knew that there were some 
areas like the area that you’ve talked about, and there’s some 
other parts of the province that have some of the same kinds of 
challenges where the trading areas don’t fit with the boundaries 
of the health districts. And every area has its own history and 
reason for that and that people kind of know, and now they 
would like to get that fixed. So that’s exactly why we put 
section 21 in here. 
 
But our goal is to get the new regional health authorities in 
place, and then effectively the regional health authorities will 
apply to us to make those boundary changes. And that can be 
done, I think, in a fairly straightforward manner in the sense 
that I know, for example, in the area that you’re talking about, 
the regional health authorities involved know that this is an 
issue and they are quite willing to try to fix it. 
 
But we just want to make sure we get everything established 
and then we’ll do this, hopefully, within the next year. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I should perhaps indicate for the 
record that the area I’m talking about is that area from Govan 
down to Strasbourg/Earl Grey and those communities and the 
RMs affected. 
 
So if I understood what you were saying is that first of all you 
want to establish the boundaries of the new regional health 
authorities and then there will be a process, but it sounds as if 
you haven’t quite defined that process yet. And I guess what I 
would ask, Mr. Minister, is that once that process is defined, 
that those communities and RMs that have written to yourself 
and have sent me copies of their letters and also to the CEOs of 
the two health districts involved, that they be informed of what 
the process is and be provided with all necessary information, 
whether it be forms or what have you, so that they can then act 
as soon as possible to start the process, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would agree that that’s exactly what we 
should do. And my anticipation is that would probably happen 
by September or October. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I thank 
you for agreeing to answer some questions this afternoon and 
also would like to welcome your officials here today. 
 
Mr. Minister, on June 10, I sent a letter to you asking you if you 
could give me some information as to the process of the 
transition from a board to an authority. And as well, I was asked 
to inquire whether or not it would be a conflict of interest for 
the same person to sit on, to be the chairperson for the health 
board, the planning committee, and the health authority. As of 
today’s date, I haven’t received a reply from you, so I ask you 
that now. 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d have to say the answer is no, that it 
isn’t a conflict of interest. In fact, it’s actually what we wanted 
to do, which was to have the continuity. And about half of the 
members of the new regional health authority boards are 
members of existing health boards and then half of them are 
new people. 
 
And so this has provided a fair bit of continuity for the 
operations of what has happened and has meant that people 
understand some of the old issues, but also you have some new 
people who are able to add some new advice into the whole 
process. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I also have a memo 
here from a person that was on the health board of the South 
East Health District. And this is what he has written to me 
about: 
 

The Region 1 Planning Committee has refused to meet with 
our board, meaning the South East Health (district) Board, 
to discuss the selection of the location of the Head Office. 
The justification they appear to be giving for their decision 
now is that they are building Administration Offices (with 
room for expansion) into the new (long-term care) facility 
that will be constructed in Weyburn. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

It appears to me that they don’t want to be questioned about 
or held publicly accountable for the decision. I hope this is 
not a sign of things to come, but the fact that they will not 
allow press coverage of their meetings until they become a 
legislated body makes me wonder. 

 
So, I mean, in the South East Health District they obviously 
aren’t having any input. And I’ve talked to people that were on 
the health district board, and the Chair of the transition team — 
or the planning committee I guess it’s called — is also the new 
authority Chair and he was the Chair of the South East Health 
District Board. And he called a meeting to discuss the process 
for the transition from a board to an authority. However 
according to the people at this meeting everything was cut and 
dried before the meeting even started. The decisions were made 
regarding where the regional office would be located. 
 
Now these people obviously are not very happy with this 
decision and the way the process took place. And I’m 
wondering again if you could outline the process and what these 
. . . Do these people have any appealing process or anything 
they can go through to make it a fairer process? I mean, they 
want a voice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that, as we discussed earlier, 
there are always challenges when there are changes and some 
people will end up having a different perspective on how things 
should be done. But clearly the goal is to have the regional 
health authorities and the planning committees that are doing 
these kinds of things try to address the particular issues that 
arise when you have three health districts coming together. And 
will you get 100 per cent agreement on all of that? I don’t think 
so. But you can get substantial agreement. 
 
And I think that practically the kinds of decisions that are being 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2531 

 

made, they’re trying to make them with the best possible 
inclusion of the people right across the whole situation. And I 
understand from your perspective in Estevan . . . The member 
from Weyburn maybe is a little more pleased with, kind of, how 
some of the decisions have gone. And it becomes, you know, a 
challenge. And I know that that happens in other parts of the 
province. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But what we’re hoping is that the balance of the experience of 
the old board members with some of the new people adding 
some new ideas, that they will get the right kinds of decisions 
for the regions and that people will have an ability to participate 
and be part of that particular process. 
 
But whether we’ll get 100 per cent agreement, I don’t think 
that’s true. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. But some of the 
. . . some of the people that have told me this were also on the 
. . . on the new authority board, the . . . for the new authority, I 
should say. And these people feel that they did not have a voice. 
It was just steamrolled through, the Chairman was on a mission. 
And I guess that takes me to the next thing. 
 
It seems like what some of my constituents have been saying to 
me about these health boards being appointed rather than 
elected or even if they were set up like the old health boards 
were where the majority of the people were elected, we all 
know that when we’re elected, we’re accountable to the people 
that put us in the position because when the election process 
takes place next time, if you haven’t been a . . . if you haven’t 
done your job, you’re not going to have one. If you’re 
appointed, you’re still accountable to the people that put you in 
that position. 
 
But in this case, it’s the government. And these people feel that 
they didn’t . . . the public feels that they did not have a voice. A 
couple of the members of the new authority feel that they did 
not have a voice because, I mean, they figure that it was a 
totally politically, the board was . . . is just a political 
appointment, basically. 
 
And they feel that they have no input. They say we’re paying 
tax dollars. We don’t have a voice. And frankly, Mr. Minister, 
they are fed up. And they are taxpayers and they want some, 
you know, voice in the decision-making process. 
 
And this . . . like I say, some of the members on the new 
authority are just not happy with what has taken place and they 
want to know what can they do, what is their . . . what actions 
can they take so that they do have a voice because it seems like 
it’s just a political motivation and it’s just steamrolling ahead 
and the people that are on the government side are just 
steamrolling and making all the decisions and everyone is left 
out in the . . . else is left out in the cold. 
 
And again, I mean, I do not like appoint . . . appointments. 
Again, you’re accountable. You’re a smokescreen for the 
government, I feel. 
 
And I can remember, Mr. Minister, when the health boards 

were first formed and the process for the returning officers 
handling the nominations for people seeking election and 
people seeking appointments were totally different. And I know 
that for a fact because I was a returning officer for some of 
those elections. And I was not happy with the way it went then, 
and I’m certainly not happy with the way it’s going now. 
 
So I’m just wondering if you could give me some information 
on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’m not quite sure where to start, but 
I think I’ll just say simply this. When the previous government 
was here, the Devine government, those were all appointed 
health boards, except that the municipalities often put an 
alderperson or a councillor onto the health board. But the 
boards were appointed by . . . for the Regina General, Plains, all 
those. Those were appointed boards from the government. 
 
The first time we had elected boards was when we had half of 
the people involved in the last five, six, seven years. Of those 
people, usually over half of them were ended up being 
acclaimed because there were no contests in these various 
elections. 
 
Where you usually will have elected boards or elected positions 
is like where we are elected now, where we actually have 
taxation dollars that we’re responsible for. And what we’re 
basically saying in this kind of a situation is that we are trying 
to find that balance, as I talked to the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale before, that community involvement, but also 
the accountability. 
 
And we have to be part of showing how 40 per cent of our 
provincial budget is being used, and so we have in this process 
attempted to have a system that deals with a lot of the 
accountability issues as well as trying to have the community 
buy it. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And my interpretation 
of that is that the boards are accountable to you and not to the 
public out there that are paying the tax dollars. And also I mean 
I’m not here to talk about the way things were in the ’80s. I 
know your government dwells on that and I mean we can also 
go back into the ’70s. 
 
But my question is, and I would like an answer, what line of 
recourse do my constituents have? They want an answer from 
me. I am elected, and I’m accountable to them. So I would like 
an answer from you as to what recourse they can take so they 
have some input into this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that the simple answer to 
your question is that the people who are concerned would need 
to work with the local board members of the planning 
committee, which will become then the board members of the 
regional health authority because those are the representatives 
from those particular areas. And they have a role of being 
representative from an area, but also to be in charge of a whole 
regional health authority and deal with all of the issues there. 
 
And as we all know, there are challenges when you’re a 
member from Regina Lakeview versus what is best for the 
whole province of Saskatchewan. And we end up having to 



2532 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

figure out how to deal with those kinds of conflicts and end up 
trying to create policy which is best for the whole province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that the regional health authorities have been dealing 
with a lot of . . . the planning committees have been dealing 
with quite a number of challenges, and for the most part, 
they’ve been doing a fairly good job of dealing with those 
things. They have to talk with people. They have to try to figure 
out how to make all these things work. And they have to 
operate within some of the rules and structures that we’re 
setting for them. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, I guess it 
depends on whose opinion it is that when you feel they’re doing 
a good job. 
 
But I would just like to say that your government and your 
department is responsible for 40 per cent of the provincial 
budget. And I think in creating a policy that is fair to all people, 
the taxpayers of this province should have some input because, 
like it or not, there’s only one source of income for the 
government and that’s through the people in this province. 
 
And we all know with the out-migration of people that we have 
a very small tax base, and I think that these decisions just 
poison people against coming here. And I think that we should 
all look for ways to attract people, to let people have a voice. 
 
If we have elected health boards and not everyone seeks to run 
— if they get it by acclamation, so be it. But the choice has 
been there. And I think that people should have a choice not just 
have something dictated to them that this is who it’s going to be 
and, you know, a political appointment or whatever and 
answerable to the government. I think people have to be 
answerable to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
So with that, Mr. Minister, I’ll let my colleague from 
Kelvington-Wadena have a few questions for you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials, I have just a couple of questions today. 
 
My constituency actually is within three of these regional areas 
no. 5, 6, and 8. And the concern from a number of people that 
have talked to me is the fact that when in the middle of these 
areas, which is basically my constituency, if there is hospital 
closures or cut-backs to facilities, it’s going to mean that we’re 
going to have a long way for a number of my constituents to go 
to reach a facility that will be within the golden hour or within 
driving range, that it’s actually going to make sense for them if 
they are in an accident or they need care. 
 
With the different districts, if there is closures, I’m wondering 
is there some way that these districts are going to work together 
to say if Porcupine Plain or Wadena Hospital is closed and 
Kelvington is closed and Foam Lake is closed, which is right in 
the centre of it all, we’re going to be going 150 miles before 
you get to a facility. 
 
I know the boundaries have to be somewhere but my colleague 
from Kelvington-Wadena . . . from Melfort-Tisdale talked about 
the fact that they really aren’t based on anything that is a 

regional trading area or anything that’s really based on trading 
patterns. And this is something that is a concern to many 
people. 
 
How are we going to make sure that these areas are functioning 
together so that even with these districts we don’t have a spot in 
the middle of the province that’s going to be without services? 
And there will be no place to go because we’ve got an 
appointed board in three areas that are going to be responsible 
to the government. They’re going to have no place to go to say 
hey, if all these three happen there’s three different boards who 
really don’t care. That’s not fair to say they don’t care but 
they’re not going to be accountable to one group of people. 
 
When I live in the centre of this area they’re going to be able to 
say, do I have to go to all three boards and convince all three of 
them that this is a concern here if we do some cut-backs in this 
area? What kind of set-up is in place to make sure that areas 
who are on the fringes are going to be able to have the kind of 
services available to them that the ones that are right in the 
regional . . . in the dead centre of the area or the one with the 
big facility will actually have the same amount of services 
available to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think you’ve hit right to the heart 
of our action plan and this legislation and why we’re doing this. 
And that’s because we need to make sure that those three new 
regional health authorities that are in your area will work 
together in a way that does not diminish the services that are 
available to the people in that particular area. 
 
So that can be done in quite a number of different ways. I mean 
we’ve actually seen some very good co-operation with the 
health districts and our new regional health authorities really 
based on the kinds of co-operative arrangements that those 
health districts had set up previously. 
 
What our new system will allow for is all 12 plus the Athabasca 
Health Authority to do . . . is to work together and so if there 
ever is a question about a change in the kind of service available 
in a particular area, that has to be assessed as it relates to the 
particular health authority involved. But also, how does that 
affect the tertiary centres, the bigger centres, where some of the 
work may go? How does it also affect some of the smaller 
places around that and it has to be done in a way that goes 
across the boundaries of the regional health authorities. 
 
So that will be done clearly at the minister’s level with the 
board Chairs, the deputy ministers with the CEOs, but very 
certainly also with the consultants who work with all of the 
regional health authorities. 
 
So the question you’ve asked and the problem that you are 
foreseeing is the kind of thing that we’re actually trying to 
address and make sure that when decisions are made, they may 
have an impact in a particular area but how does it impact the 
whole province. In fact some of them, how does it impact the 
whole Prairie region because that’s the nature of health services 
these days is that a decision in one area can affect right across. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then if a local . . . 
a regional board has decided that there’s going to be a closure 
of one facility, before they can actually do that they’re going to 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

 

have to get an approval from your department which would 
mean then it’s all . . . all the decision making is really still in the 
hands of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the process is that each of the 
health authorities will set out their operational plans which 
includes — well what are the services that they’re going to 
provide. 
 
If included in that operational plan there is a reduction or 
change of services that has an effect on the total services in the 
province or on some of the neighbouring health authorities, then 
that will be the kind of thing that Sask Health would be 
involved with in saying okay, this makes sense. Your 
operational plan makes sense so that there’s approval there. Or 
not approval, but it would still be the local people who work 
and grapple with how does some of these things work in our 
particular area. 
 
But it has to be very much a co-operative relationship because 
of the interconnectedness of a health system. The person who, 
you know, lives in Kelvington wants to know that they can have 
access all the way through the system without any problem, 
even if there are regional health authority borders. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m hoping that if a decision like 
that comes forward to your government in a forward-looking 
plan — a five-year plan — that it is something that can be 
looked at and accepted or approved in a short time because . . . 
Not like the planning that we’ve looked at in . . . or the financial 
plans that these health districts have looked at over these couple 
of years — it takes 10 months or a year to actually be passed. 
 
My last question, Mr. Minister, is on places like reserves. I have 
one in my constituency that’s looking at a diabetes centre, and 
dealing with health issues in my certain area. Are they going to 
have to get approval from the regional health centre or from 
your department? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If your question relates to a program on 
reserve funded by the federal government, we would have no 
say in how that’s organized. But what we have, and what we 
hope will continue to be there, is a co-operative relationship 
with the federal government and with the First Nations health 
issues to make sure that the kinds of things that are set in place 
can be coordinated on a province-wide basis again. 
 
And I mean one of the good examples of that in Saskatchewan 
is the Athabasca Health Authority, which includes First Nations 
and federal government people, provincial government people, 
and some of the local communities who are all working 
together so that there is a common purpose and a common goal 
in the planning. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and good afternoon to your officials. Mr. Minister, I 
just wanted to mention to you — I think I brought it up to you 
once before — about the number of appointees for the new 
regional health authorities. And in the Saskatoon regional health 
authority there are 12 appointees, as I understand, on that board. 
 

I didn’t really have a satisfactory answer the last time I talked to 
you, but we were assured at a meeting in Humboldt by the CEO 
of the Central Plains Health District that most likely there 
would be six of those members from the Saskatoon . . . existing 
Saskatoon Health District, and two members from each of the 
other three districts that are now coming into the one big 
Saskatoon regional health authority. 
 
As it turned out, there are nine appointees from the Saskatoon 
Health District and only one from the other three health districts 
— Central Plains, Living Sky, and Gabriel Springs. And I’m 
wondering what the rationale for that was for that decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’ll repeat the answer that I gave to 
you before. And I don’t have all of the figures that I’ve given 
you before around population, but the net effect is that the 
Saskatoon district I think has over 80 per cent of the . . . and 
closer maybe to 85 per cent of the population in that whole new 
regional health authority, and they will have 75 per cent of the 
seats that come out of the existing Saskatoon District Health. 
The others will have one each, because there’s four coming 
together in that area which is the most in the province and it’s 
big in that sense. And so it is then primarily based on the 
numbers of people involved. And so that’s the simple answer 
there and that’s I think the same answer I gave a few weeks ago. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, and that 
was the . . . that was what I had mentioned was most likely 
going to happen when I attended that meeting in Humboldt. 
And still the CEO of the health district certainly tried to 
persuade the people that were there that that would not be the 
case. 
 
I guess the concern from that comes — and I think if we 
realistically look at an operating regional health authority that 
has three-quarters of the members, 75 per cent, on a board from 
a certain area — then it follows that that area would probably 
get a lot more funding, a lot more focus on the needs in that 
area going to that area; and it would leave the other three health 
districts, Central Plains for instance, Gabriel Springs, and 
Living Sky, out in the cold because they don’t have the voice, 
they don’t have the money, they don’t have the representation. 
 
So this concerns a great number of people in the outlying areas. 
And we were told that that would not be the case. And I just 
want to have it written on the record that in fact the decision is 
made according to yourself, that this . . . these members are 
selected according to population. And, Mr. Minister, does it 
follow then that the . . . that population . . . I mean there would 
most likely be funding that would be allocated in the same way. 
In other words the Saskatoon area would probably get a great 
deal more funding for population and therefore the services 
would be concentrated in Saskatoon, more so than in the 
outlying areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think we can think about the health 
system that way. Because effectively being part of Saskatoon 
regional health authority for the other three districts to become 
part, they will end up having more direct access to services that 
are actually available to people from Regina, people from 
Weyburn, Estevan, all over the province. 
 
And so I think the key here is to look at how we’re organizing 



2534 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

these things is in a way that provides a province-wide system so 
that any individual person will have access to the best resources 
across the whole system. And then the goal is to make sure that 
those are accessible to people in communities like Humboldt or 
like Rosthern or wherever, other places you might have, in a 
way that is most appropriate for those people. And how we do 
this is something we have to do all together. And that’s what 
we’re trying to do. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Nutana on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, 
I note in the Speaker’s gallery are two guests from Saskatoon, 
Barb and Dan Danaher, who obviously are visiting the 
Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
For those who don’t know, Barbara’s father was a member of 
the legislature from . . . in 1944 during Douglas’s government, 
for the city of Saskatoon. And the provincial government 
building in Saskatoon is named after her father, Arthur Stone, 
so Sturdy Stone. 
 
Barb also is a well-known provincial champion golf — 
women’s golf player. I’m sure she could give a lot of people 
here who are interested in golfing a few tips. Barb and — 
particularly the member from Swift Current — Barb and her 
husband Dan have recently retired. They had the Irish Shop in 
Saskatoon. 
 
I know that they’ll find the proceedings interesting and I’d ask 
all members to join me in welcoming Barb and Dan Danaher to 
the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Regional Health Services Act 
(continued) 

 
The Chair: — Hon. members, the Bill before us is quite 
lengthy. Is leave granted to deal with it in part . . . by parts? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would like to move an amendment that 
establishes a new way for establishing guidelines for creating 
the regional authorities. And I would like to acknowledge in 
moving this the difficulty of inserting amendments into a 

pre-described Bill sometimes creates some challenges. 
However, I would like to move: 
 

Clause 13 of the printed Bill 
 

The following section be added after Clause . . . before 
Clause 13 of the Printed Bill: 

 
“Guidelines for establishing Health Regions and 

Regional Health Authorities 
12.1(1) Notwithstanding sections 13 and 14, the 
following guidelines must be taken into account when 
establishing Health Regions and Regional Health 
Authorities: 
 

(a) existing jurisdictional boundaries that include, 
but are not limited, to the boundaries of: 

 
(i) economic development authorities; 

 
(ii) school divisions and the conseil scolaire; 

 
(iii) urban, rural and northern municipalities, 
including the City of Lloydminster; 

 
(iv) ambulance districts; 

 
(b) historic and current trading patterns in the 
region under consideration; and 

 
(c) the number, type and location of hospitals, 
facilities and affiliates in the region under 
consideration. 

 
(2) Where the guidelines in subsection (1) result in a 
boundary that is different from that set out in sections 
13 and 14, the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
 
(3) In the event that there is no agreement with respect 
to the application of the guidelines, the provisions of 
sections 13 and 14 apply with any necessary 
modification”. 

 
I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Part III, clause 13 through 18. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
again, I acknowledge the difficulty of inserting amendments 
into an existing piece of legislation. But I’d like to move: 
 
Clause 16 of the printed Bill 
 

Clause 16 of the Printed Bill is amended by striking out 
subsections (3) to (8) and substituting the following: 

 
“(3) A regional health authority consists of not more than 
12 elected members. 

 
“(4) Each member of a regional health authority holds 
office for a term of not more than three years. 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2535 

 

“(5) The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall designate 
one of the members of a regional health authority as 
chairperson and another member as vice-chairperson. 

 
“(6) A majority of the members of a regional health 
authority constitutes a quorum. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my motion is also a section 16.1 and I 
believe perhaps should be voted separately. 
 

Elections 
16.1 The Local Government Election Act and 
Regulations apply with any necessary modifications for 
elections pursuant to section 16.” 

 
Which lays out the methodology for conducting an election if 
those following sections are indeed approved. 
 
I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Chair: — Hon. members, we’ve opened part III for 
amendment so I think it would be appropriate to deal with 
clause 13, 14, 15 before we deal with the motion that was 
moved by the member for Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Clauses 13 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — And now we’ll go to the motion moved by the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
The Chair: — And on the second part of his proposed 
amendment, which is dealing with elections. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clauses 16 to 113 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I have an amendment to section 24 
where I would add another section there and change section 124 
to section 125. So I suggest that we deal with 114 to 123 and 
then I’ll propose my amendment. 
 
Clauses 114 to 123 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 124 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I propose an amendment 
to this clause 124 by striking out clause 124. And effectively 
what this amendment is — which I’ll propose at the end of my 
brief remarks — is required and related consequential 
amendments to The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Act which is the Dorsey process that was followed previously. 
 
And what this House amendment does is sets out a process 
whereby the employee representation issues can be dealt with 
by the new regional health authorities in a way that allows for 
an appropriate process. And so that’s what’s set out here. 
 
I would move this amendment and I would ask leave to have 

the amendment taken as has been distributed to the opposition 
and to the Chair so that . . . or if leave is not granted then I will 
read the long amendment. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Chair: — Again for procedural purists, it does appear that 
there are two questions to be put. So one is amending clause 
124 . . . pardon me, adding clause 124. And the second is 
renumbering clause 125. So on the first question which is 
adding clause 124, is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — On the second amendment which is coming into 
force, renumbering clause 125, is the committee ready for this 
question? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 124 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Health Statutes Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur la santé 
 
The Chair: — And I see that the minister does not have 
additional officials. 
 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And just before I 
make that motion, I’d like to thank the members opposite for all 
of the questions and also their participation last year in the 
process with the Standing Committee on Health which this 
Regional Health Services Act and then this particular Act were 
the result. 
 
I’d also like to make a special point of thanking all of the 
officials within Saskatchewan Health, within all of the districts 
across the province, all of the various professional groups that 
were concerned, and many members of the community who 
contributed to the work here. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Health Quality Council Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m pleased to have with me this 
afternoon Pauline Rousseau, who’s directly behind the deputy 
minister, who’s the director of central support in the policy unit. 
And right behind me, Patrick Fafard, who’s the executive 
director of the policy and planning branch. And they will be 
assisting on this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 



2536 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Minister, welcome to the new officials who join us this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, I won’t take a great deal of time on this piece of 
legislation. I’ve spoken in favour of the concept and certainly 
think that the idea of focusing more of our health care service 
delivery on quality rather than quantity is a philosophically 
important initiative and an important way to go. 
 
I have a couple of questions and certainly one amendment that I 
would like to have considered by the House. And they deal 
from . . . I’ll deal with the amendment first and the reason why 
I’d like to introduce it. 
 
I think that in many times the whole issue of the quality of 
health care service delivery in many instances becomes too 
easily in the small “p” politicized in the health care current 
service delivery, and that it’s important that there be a ability 
for people to vent their frustrations and perhaps seek address of 
their issues by something other than the political process — 
either through the opposition offices or the minister’s office. 
 
And to that end, we think that this Quality Council could be 
served well by including a health care commissioner in its 
structure and mandate. And certainly that’s the concept that we 
will be pursuing in the introduction of our amendment. We 
think that we could readjust the components of the Quality 
Council by actually having this Quality Council be even more 
impartial than an agency of the ministry or of the political 
process by having it chaired by an independent health care 
commissioner who would be mandated, similar to what an 
ombudsman would be in terms of adjudicating and really being 
seen by the public as that independent officer of the legislature 
rather than of the health system. 
 
But, Minister, a few questions in the existing legislation as it’s 
structured. The legislation provides for up to 12 members in . . . 
to sit on this Quality Council, and there are really no particular 
limitations other than time as to who these people can be. Does 
the minister envisage that they would be experts in the field of 
medical service delivery in Saskatchewan or are you looking 
actually to have people appointed from outside of the province 
as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate that question because I think 
it goes to the heart of the value of what we get from this 
particular initiative. And so our board will be obviously 
composed of respected individuals with experience and 
expertise in a wide range of areas. It will include clearly clinical 
research, health services, some outcomes research and 
evaluation, health system organization and delivery, quality 
improvement. So it will have the health care expertise, but we 
also expect, you know, to have some people who have some 
other particular interests. 
 
Our goal is to have the majority at least, who are from 
Saskatchewan, but we are also looking for people from other 
parts of Canada and indeed the world who may be able to 
contribute and provide another perspective on the kinds of 
issues that this particular council is going to deal with for all the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I believe it’s 

set out in here that the council shall meet at least two times a 
year. 
 
Has there been some thought, if we’re seeking this expertise on 
a national and international basis, is there provided for in this 
legislation whereby experts or individuals could be considered 
to be in attendance at the meeting by a means other than 
physically present at a meeting? I’m thinking of electronic 
hookups or things of that nature, because it might be quite 
expensive to cover the costs of flying someone in from a remote 
location. 
 
Irrespective of the fact that the expertise is important, does it 
provide for the possibility at least of people being considered in 
attendance for quorum in meeting purposes from a remote 
location hooked up electronically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There would be nothing preventing that 
type of meeting and, in fact, in some cases that may make some 
sense. But practically, that would not be a limitation on this. 
And it would depend on the particular issue. But I can see your 
point. There may be some grouping of people that they would 
need in a meeting that they could do electronically as opposed 
to having everybody gather together. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, under section 5 there are the 
objects of the council. I wondered if that was objectives or 
something. I’m not sure of the legal language. But one of the 
sections, (e), is: 
 

to develop and implement training and . . . (educational) 
programs and activities to promote improvement in the 
quality of health care; 

 
I’m assuming that those are special programs over and above 
the current educational training programs that are provided 
through the professional institutions like the College of 
Medicine, College of Nursing, the various professional medical 
colleges. I am assuming that this is over and above that. And if 
it is, is there any conflict with what course criteria, etc., there 
would be in professional colleges? And is it envisaged that the 
Quality Council in these educational initiatives would work 
very closely with the professional, medical colleges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Clearly the goal here is to work with the 
existing professional colleges with the universities and the 
people who would be there and other particular institutions 
within the province, and to be something that’s complementary 
and co-operative with as opposed to replacing it. But there may 
be some kinds of issues that come out of this particular 
committee whereby they would be able to add another aspect to 
some of the training. But clearly it would be done in 
co-operation and together with existing operations. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Section (a) talks about 
. . . I’m sorry, section (b): 
 

to research and evaluate prescription drug prescribing 
practices, (etc.) . . . utilization (etc.) . . . 

 
Is it envisaged that this Quality Council would take over the 
responsibilities and functions that are currently being used 
under the Formulary and drug advisory committees? 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2537 

 

(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s a simple answer that is, yes. But 
it’s got some explanation. And the reason I say that is that over 
time we think that a lot of the kinds of things that we’ve done 
just in Saskatchewan will be done on a Prairie-wide, or a 
Western Canadian-wide, or a national, or even a North 
American-wide basis. As the sophistication required in 
assessing some of the drugs increases, we may be doing it in a 
co-operative fashion with other jurisdictions. 
 
So that kind of thing will be part of this in the sense that this 
would be a co-operative effort there. But we’re working on this 
now. The ministers’ meeting in St. John’s, Newfoundland last 
year actually addressed some of these issues on a Canada-wide 
basis. 
 
And our goal is to be co-operating but to make sure that we 
build a better system than what we have now. So we’re not 
going to give up what we have but we’re going to make sure 
that it fits in with the broader perspective. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, as well I 
believe that this Quality Council will take over the role and 
function of the current HSURC (Health Services Utilization and 
Research Commission) organization. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, they’ll take over a large part of it 
except for the research part which will be going into the 
research foundation which is the next Bill that we will be 
looking at. 
 
But practically a lot of that work will be transferred over to the 
new Health Quality Council. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, and I know we should try not to 
sort of blur the two Bills together, but in terms of acting as a 
catalyst or at least an initiator of research projects, would they 
be initiated or potentially be initiated in both the research 
foundation individually or on their own? But would there be the 
possibility of requests for research initiatives to be coming from 
the Quality Council and then they may actually go over to the 
research component, or how is that going to work and avoid 
duplication? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer is that the 
research foundation will be a funder and the Quality Council 
will be a doer. So in other words one has the money and the 
other one actually does it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Was there any thought given to giving the 
Quality Council then the funding possibilities as well and avoid 
the duplication of two entities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This discussion took place and the 
ultimate decision was to do it this way. And I think a big part of 
it was that the Quality Council idea was to get at the system and 
the kinds of effective outcomes that we would have and 
effective use of our dollars. Some of the kinds of health 
research funding decisions might include that, but it also might 
include some of the pure science kinds of things or others that 
are working in the medical kind of faculty. 
 

And so we thought it would make more sense to have people 
who would deal with some of the decisions around the funding 
of issues, deal with that and not have to be involved with the 
Quality Council. So that’s the rationale, it’s kind of . . . they’re 
related purposes most of the time, but there are some points 
where it just makes more sense to have two separate groups do 
it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, as you’re undoubtedly aware, one 
of the challenges of the health system is that there are many 
individual professional groups that very often have a rather 
narrow focus in terms of making sure that they meet their own 
objectives and the needs of their professional group or 
association. And secondarily look at the bigger picture in terms 
of the overall quality delivery of health services. 
 
Minister, what is the relationship between the Quality Council 
and the professional health organizational . . . organizations, 
both the professional colleges? You said there would be 
collaboration on the, you know, the university training 
programs and those colleges, but I’m thinking of the colleges of 
medicine, the Registered Nurses Association, the professional 
associations, and indeed their union groups if you like and all 
those other sorts of things. What is the relationship between all 
these health organizations and the Quality Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s another good question in a string of 
a whole great number of good questions. But basically the issue 
here is that in a profession, whether it’s the medical profession 
or the nursing profession or the physios or the dentists, their 
role is to regulate and make sure that the appropriate individual 
in that profession does their job. 
 
There isn’t a body that we know of that has the role that this 
Quality Council has. And that’s why we say it is a first in 
Canada, and I think the way it’s structured, probably first in the 
world, that actually says the role is to look at the quality of all 
of the players and the resources and how they’re used as it 
relates to the ultimate result for people — you know, the 
patients, the health care that we’re talking about. 
 
And so the role will not be that we consider . . . be worried 
about the individual problem that a particular nurse might have, 
or a particular doctor, but how is it that the structure is set up 
and how is it that these different professions and the 
administration work together to either provide good quality or 
provide not so good quality and how can we fix that. 
 
So it’s to try to get at the total system as opposed to an 
individual. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One final question. 
While we recognize those differences that you’ve described and 
I’ve alluded to in my question between the people that actually 
implement health policy on the field and the philosophical 
direction established by the Quality Council and judged to be 
important, it’s also important that a meaningful relationship 
occur in a meaningful way. And one of the ways that it would 
strike me is that the council consists of 12 members appointed 
by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Have you provided or thought about the possibility that the 
various health participants, the stakeholders, could bring 



2538 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

forward names, in nomination at least, for the minister to 
consider in appointing these 12 people? Because, again, I think 
it’s important that we bridge the we and they kind of 
relationship and that this might be an important policy decision, 
if it’s not in legislation, that engages the stakeholders in health 
care by at least asking them to provide . . . place names in 
nomination to sit on this Quality Council? 
 
Have you considered that? And if you have, would that be a 
thing that you may undertake in terms of at least a policy 
direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically, what has happened is that there 
are many people who have self-identified, who said I have some 
particular expertise and I’m interested. We’ve received some 
nominations from district health boards. We’ve received some 
from some of the professions. 
 
One of the challenges in health is that I think we’re at 27 
professions right now and maybe a few more that are interested 
in becoming professional groups. And so, to actually have a 
representative of each group is a little bit hard. 
 
But we are very open to people suggesting names or 
volunteering themselves and we have been looking around and 
gathering names over the last year, ever since Mr. Fyke 
recommended something like this as an appropriate 
organization. So if there are people that have suggestions, we’re 
happy to take them. And we’re working at trying to get a group 
of experts in an area where we haven’t had a group of experts 
working in a very sort of dedicated way like this, and so we’re 
being very careful to hopefully get the right mix of people so 
that we can accomplish positive things for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In being 
consistent with what I’ve discussed and mentioned earlier and 
while I’m on my feet, I’d like to thank the minister and officials 
for their attendance on this piece of legislation. I certainly am 
supportive of the structure and direction, and I think it is a 
unique initiative and have spoke favourably about it. 
 
But I think it can be improved by the following motion. I would 
like to move: 
 

That Clause 10 of the printed Bill is struck out and the 
following substituted: 
 

“Health Care Commissioner and other officers 
10(1) The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall 
designate one of the members of the board to be the 
Health Care Commissioner and chairperson of the 
board and another to be vice-chairperson. 
 
(2) Where the Health Care Commissioner is absent or 
unable to act or the office of the Health Care 
Commissioner is vacant, the vice-chairperson shall 

exercise all the powers of the Health Care 
Commissioner and shall perform all the duties of the 
Health Care Commissioner. 
 
(3) The board may appoint other officers of the board 
from its members.” 
 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 11 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Saskatchewan Health Research 
Foundation Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce any 
new officials that may have joined him. Seeing none . . . 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, we’ve had some discussion on this Bill so I won’t 
belabour it in terms of the Quality Council, and I recognize 
from the wording of the legislation and your comments that the 
research . . . Health Research Foundation is really created to 
establish a mechanism for funding of pure health research in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I think that that is an important 
initiative. 
 
Minister, one very general question is that in the Fyke report 
there was certainly a recommendation of increased funding 
coming from the provincial government on health research. And 
I believe that the general recommendation was 2 per cent of the 
Health budget as the target for funding. Perhaps it was 1 per 
cent, but I know there was a target of 1 or 2 per cent of the 
Health budget should be designated for research funding. 
 
I also recognize that there has been some improvement in the 
funding from the department this year. And I’m wondering first 
of all, is your department making the commitment to move to 
an appropriate and increased level of research funding? It’s the 
first part of the question. 
 
The second part, one of the real advantages of research and 
medical opportunities is the synchrotron in Saskatoon, and is 
part of that funding going to be available to potentially make 
available one of the light beams to be designated for medical 
research at the synchrotron institute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I think what I 
would point out is under section 5 the research is about health, 
but I think we need to emphasize that it’s research into matters 
associated with the health sciences, the health-related social 
sciences, and other health-related fields of study. So it has that 
broad nature. It’s not just sort of the pure sciences in the sense 
that it relates to a whole broad field. 
 
Clearly the goal with the research foundation is to identify and 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

 

emphasize the importance of research for the total health 
system. There is a goal that we would like to reach to, which I 
think is 1 per cent. We’re on our way there. We were able to 
increase quite substantially the amount of money coming out of 
the Department of Health for health research in this year’s 
budget. And we’re working towards seeing what we can do for 
next year. 
 
I think the question around the synchrotron and the related 
health issues that would be part of that process will clearly be 
part of the discussion as our foundation board identifies the 
kinds of research that are Saskatchewan based and make some 
sense. 
 
So I think that the answer to that is yes, and the more money we 
can get, well then the more kinds of opportunities that we will 
have. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to 
note for the record that we are very much supportive of 
increased medical research and research of this nature, so we’re 
in support of this legislation. And I would like to take this 
opportunity to again thank your officials for supporting you and 
answering the questions we’ve proposed this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d just like to also emphasize the fact that 
in our action plan we have a health research strategy which 
answers some of the broader questions that the public may have 
about health research. This particular Act is part of that, but it 
also will include obviously our Department of Learning and all 
of the things that happen there and some of the other parts of 
government. Because this is a broad based strategy that will 
include all of the various partners — including the regional 
health authorities when they come into existence. 
 
And I would also like to thank you for some very good 
questions here too. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to move that the Bill be 
reported without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. Just before I make that 
motion, I’d like to thank the officials who are here plus others 
within Saskatchewan Health and within the health system in 
Saskatchewan who have worked with us on both of the Quality 
Council Bill and on the health foundation . . . Health Research 
Foundation Bill as this has been an effort that includes many, 
many people 
 
And with that, I would move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Seated immediately to my left is the president of SGI, 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) Larry Fogg. To his left 
is the vice-president of claims, Earl Cameron. Immediately to 
my right is the assistant vice-president of injury, claims, and 
rehabilitation, Sherry Wolf. Seated in the back row is the 
assistant vice-president of driver and vehicle safety services, 
Bernadette McIntyre. The legislative advisor, Elizabeth Flynn, 
directly behind me. And Penny McCune is the manager, auto 
fund underwriting services, right beside, directly behind the 
president. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And just before I 
begin with some very specific questions on Bill 57, for the 
minister and his officials, I’d like to welcome those officials 
here to the Assembly today. And we certainly welcome their 
presence here because we have a number of very detailed 
questions with respect to this particular Bill and how it’s going 
to impact auto insurance in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d just like to start off with some general questions, specifically 
the awareness that SGI has about any similar sort of dual 
system offered anywhere in North America. I think I’ve heard 
the minister say from time to time that there . . . this would be 
the first dual PIPP/tort (personal injury protection plan/tort) 
system in North America, or maybe he was referring to Canada, 
I’m not sure. But I just wanted to ask if you would clarify 
whether or not there were other systems that SGI looked at 
similar to this across the continent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There, I guess there will be . . . there’s 
degrees of differences but generally it would be our view that 
this is the only jurisdiction in North America where you have a 
choice between sort of what I would describe as pure tort and 
no-fault. Other jurisdictions in the US that we looked at are 
really tort and a modified tort. That’s the choices; it’s not really 
a choice between tort and what we would describe as straight 
no-fault. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess we could 
get into a long discussion of this, but I think it bears a few more 
questions because I think those who would . . . those who 
promoted and proposed the premier option would characterize it 
. . . some of them would characterize that as a modified tort 
system with a strengthened no-fault component, and then access 
to the court. 
 
So is that what you’re referring to? These other jurisdictions 
that you mentioned in your first answer, they would be, they 
would have a product similar to the premier option, or would 
their no-fault component be even greater than the . . . than what 
the premier option proposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The difference is, as best as I can 
describe it, would be that under the premier option that is being 
recommended really is a, what I would describe as a tort option. 
 
The modified tort that we were making a comparison to would 
be what has been described to me by my officials as a threshold 
system where only under circumstances where you would be 
severely injured could you then sue for pain and suffering. Not 



2540 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

under every circumstance, as is recommended under the 
premier option, could you actually sue for pain and suffering. 
So there would be a threshold, and it’s described apparently as a 
threshold system. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Did the officials at SGI 
look at those kinds of modified tort systems that are in place 
when they were . . . before they came to the conclusion that we 
could have this dual system in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer to your question is yes, and 
let me expand on that a little bit. What we were trying to 
provide to the public of Saskatchewan was a clear choice 
between two very different products, one that is essentially the 
system that we had, which is a full tort, and the no-fault which 
is what a lot of the public also prefers. 
 
So it’s to really provide a very clear choice for . . . to groups of 
individuals who want two very different products. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the course of the due 
diligence that SGI did before recommending or proceeding with 
this dual system, did they come across insurers or jurisdictions 
in North America that had looked at a dual system but then 
backed away? In other words what I’m asking, I guess, Mr. 
Minister, is SGI aware of other jurisdictions that have looked at 
the dual system that’s being proposed here in the province and 
rejected it for whatever reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: —As far as we are aware, there’s no other 
jurisdiction that has a product like this. And even for those who 
had the tort and modified tort, as I would describe them, as far 
as we know they’re all still being offered as a choice. 
 
Mr. Wall: — What consultation occurred prior to proceeding 
with this system with other insurance companies that operate in 
the province and might get involved in various, you know, in 
different automobile products, automobile insurance products? 
Was there any consultation that occurred with other insurers 
that currently offer, offer their services in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We did not consult prior to the 
announcement of choice. But subsequent to the announcement 
of the choice, we did consult with the major insurers in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And what was their 
feedback? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There were certainly some concerns 
expressed. I think that needs to be acknowledged. The major 
insurance writers though, we’re confident they’ll be staying 
here in the province and offering the product. Clearly it is a 
more — I mean and I fully acknowledge this — it is a more 
complex system to offer to the public. I don’t think we’ve ever 
denied that. But again, we want to offer the choice to the public. 
And while I don’t need to repeat the answer that the insurers 
expressed some concerns, but we’re confident that they are 
prepared to offer the product. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The minister indicated he was confident that was 

the case. Did the insurers indicate that clearly, notwithstanding 
their concerns that they intended to continue in full operation as 
they are now in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, they did with the exception of one 
insurer who indicated that they would reserve their decision 
until they had apparently more time to look at it, but they may 
not want to offer that product and stay in the province. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well that’s reasonably 
significant, I think. And I think it goes to the heart of the 
concerns that people have about this particular initiative, 
whether they’re insurers or whether they’re the general public 
now trying to decide what might be best for them. 
 
And I’m alarmed that the government has not consulted, didn’t 
consult with these companies in advance of introducing this, but 
rather that they would go ahead with this Bill and introduce it 
here in the legislature and announce it without prior 
consultation. And I wonder if the minister could explain for 
members of the committee why the government wouldn’t have 
had them on the A list to consult with prior to going ahead, to 
going in this direction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think it’s safe to say that it was a 
policy decision that government made. And our focus was 
clearly the public of Saskatchewan. We had considerable public 
dialogue on this when no-fault was originally introduced. And it 
was clear to us as SGI did their focus group testing and did 
polling, that there were still people who wanted the tort system. 
 
And as a result of that, government simply made the policy 
decision and made the decision that governments have to make 
. . . they have to make. They have to make decisions around 
policy. And that was that we would offer a choice for the people 
of Saskatchewan and it was, as I described, it was after that then 
that we made the decision . . . not made the decision, but it 
flowed from there that we would talk to the insurance brokers 
and consult with them to see how . . . what mechanisms we 
would put in place for implementing the choice. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But if the public is the 
. . . was the main concern, the desire to offer them choice, then 
the fact that this Bill may result in insurance companies leaving 
the province is actually going to diminish people’s choice — 
not with respect to the two systems, but certainly with respect to 
carriers. And I give the minister the opportunity to clarify again 
— in light of the fact that this particular initiative could, in the 
end, take away choice people have between different carriers 
for various products — why in that context then wouldn’t the 
government see fit at least to consult with those insurance 
companies who offer that choice to people in terms of the 
carrier they wish to use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all let me describe . . . Maybe it 
would put it in a bit of context if I described for you what the 
concern of the carriers were, and that was the ease with which 
the public could move from one system to the other. And so it 
was the ease of mobility — that was their concern. And I think, 
having said that, once we got past that in the consultations there 
are . . . there isn’t much else in the choice option that they 
would be strongly opposed to. Because there will be a number 
of mechanisms that . . . where individuals will want to top up 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

 

their insurance and provide obviously additional revenues to the 
agents who are selling the product to their customers. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How did you placate 
those concerns by carriers about the ease with which people 
might switch? When they raised those concerns with you, what 
was the response of SGI because certainly SGI would face . . . 
if the concerns are valid, then SGI would also share them as a 
major carrier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — What we agreed to do was to offer the 
extension policies at exactly the same price from one . . . from 
the no-fault system to the tort system so that people could easily 
move and there wouldn’t be changes, as an example, in the 
extension policies. And that, as I’m advised, improved the 
concern . . . or I should say, at least addressed the concerns of 
the insurance brokers to a large degree. 
 
Mr. Wall: — And is there a financial case, a pro forma case or 
a business case, that SGI has or could . . . relied on to make that 
decision with respect to extension products that the price 
wouldn’t change? 
 
In other words, what sort of due diligence did the corporation 
do to placate whatever concerns it might have had about the 
ease with which people could move back and forth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As it pertains to the extension benefits 
or the extension policy that would be offered through SGI 
CANADA, the intent is to package the . . . package the benefits 
identically under both the tort option and under the no-fault to 
make it easier for the brokers to sell that product. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I understand that, Mr. Minister. But the question 
is, when SGI was looking at this system, does that fact have in 
SGI’s, in the estimation, cost implications for the Crown, for 
the Crown corporation with either different system? Is there 
cost implications to making that decision to have that pricing 
being the same for those extension products? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — SGI CANADA’s analysis of it is that to 
package it this way, the analysis that they’ve done suggests that 
they are able to price it identically with . . . I guess without any 
difficulty. 
 
Mr. Wall: — On that same vein, when SGI was considering 
this dual system, did it rely on the significant due diligence 
done on the premier option as outlined in the Kroll Lindquist 
Avey study and . . . or did it do some independent analysis of 
the cost of the premier option? 
 
The minister will remember that those who did a lot of work on 
the premier option had difficulty filling in all of the blanks in 
terms of, you know, projecting the costs of this new system, 
simply because they couldn’t get some data from SGI. 
 
So when SGI then looked at this, at the premier option, did it 
. . . was it able to fill in those gaps? Did it do that in fact or did 
it rely on Kroll Lindquist? Or what sort of due diligence did 
SGI do on the premier option? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Please follow this up with another 
question, which I’m sure you will, if I’m not clear enough. 

What we’re really talking about is the Auto Fund. And what 
SGI essentially did is they relied, I won’t say exclusively, but 
primarily on the information as provided by the individuals who 
recommended the premier option, period. That we essentially 
relied on the information that they provided. 
 
And there isn’t . . . what I meant to say was in addition to that, 
supplementary to that, is that there isn’t any system, again 
going back to what I said earlier, that we are aware of that is 
anything like this. So we will have to establish some history to 
determine whether or not there should be price differences into 
the future, and it would be inappropriate to price them 
differently until we have that information. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Were officials then 
comfortable that the due diligence done by the coalition on the 
premier option was solid? That the . . . I would guess if you 
relied almost exclusively on the work they’ve done, it’s frankly 
a bit of an endorsement for the costing of the premier option 
and their indication of course in that Kroll Lindquist was that 
the premier option could arguably save drivers on rates if we 
went that direction. 
 
I heard the minister say they relied almost exclusively on that 
study and on their business planning if you will, on their due 
diligence. And if that’s the case, the minister then . . . is the 
minister saying the information they believed was reliable 
based on their own information that they have access to with the 
Auto Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The information that was provided to us 
by the people that recommended the premier option, I mean we 
believed them to be reputable and quite knowledgeable in that 
area. We had again no history on a system like that and 
therefore had no reason to doubt the information that we had. 
 
So my response would be essentially the same, is that we relied 
on the information that they provided for us primarily. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, we’ll move on a bit but I’m just . . . it’s 
interesting because I don’t think I’ve ever heard SGI, to be fair, 
I don’t think I’ve ever heard SGI officials say that they couldn’t 
provide all of the information to those doing the Kroll Lindquist 
study for example, the information they needed to be confident 
of their projections. But that’s the clear impression you get 
when you read the report. That’s certainly the impression I have 
from others who looked at it who were even . . . were 
independent of that. Because we certainly looked at that and 
had some outside input on that work as well before we 
announced our position a year ago yesterday. 
 
So I guess I’m a little confused because if there were some gaps 
that SGI could fill, then certainly in presenting this proposal 
they could have filled those gaps and even been more 
comfortable that in fact the projections were right and that the 
premier option as presented would be . . . would both work and 
be affordable. 
 
And I’ll let the . . . if the minister wants to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I’m advised that the information 



2542 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

that you’re I believe specifically referring to was information, 
competitive information, that SGI CANADA had and it was 
difficult for us to release it. But in terms of other information 
that they requested, I mean I signed off a number of letters that 
included a substantial amount of information, and I know that 
SGI directly provided other information. The only information 
that I’m aware of that we did not provide was that information 
that was competitive. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I understand that as well, Mr. Minister. What I’m 
saying is, and maybe I’m not being . . . making my questions 
clear enough; that could well be the case. The premier option, 
the support for the premier option, can be found in the due 
diligence that those who offered it as an option completed and 
prepared. But you quite rightly pointed out there were some 
gaps in the information. SGI, as you say, couldn’t provide it for 
competitive reasons. But now SGI is the one that’s proposing 
the premier option as one of the alternatives in our new choice 
system if this Bill passes. 
 
So when they are doing . . . when SGI then is doing their due 
diligence, certainly they have no competitive . . . they have no 
competitive qualms about releasing information to themselves. 
This was their information; they didn’t want to release it to 
those doing the report, but now they are going to do . . . they are 
going ahead with the premier option — they being SGI. And so 
SGI then could fill in those blanks or could at least check with 
the data they couldn’t release previously for reasons of . . . for 
competitive reasons. 
 
They now can check that data internally without releasing it, to 
be even more comfortable that the premier option is affordable, 
can perhaps come in at a discount or at a bit of a discount for 
drivers, depending on the projections you look at in their due 
diligence. 
 
And that’s my question. Since SGI had access to the 
information they wouldn’t release to someone else doing an 
analysis of the premier option, did they themselves plug in this 
data before they came to the minister, before they came to the 
House and said, we believe we can have two systems operating 
side by side for the same price? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The information that you’re talking 
about with respect to SGI CANADA, or that I’ve referred to, I 
should say, with respect to SGI CANADA in developing this 
product, this choice for the public of Saskatchewan, we in fact 
didn’t believe it to be relevant to this product. So while it was 
competitive information and we couldn’t release it, even in 
determining what product we would offer, didn’t believe it to be 
relevant at all. 
 
Therefore that is why we relied pretty much on the information 
that was provided to us by the individuals who were 
recommending that we provide the premier option to the public 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well those who drafted the . . . Mr. Minister, 
thanks. Those who drafted the premier option and especially the 
due diligence, and in fact a third party that we contacted to 
evaluate it, so we could have some surety before we proceeded 
with our decision as a caucus, seemed to indicate that that 
information was important. 

I’d like to move on to the administration if I can. It’s my 
understanding . . . how will the administration for the two 
systems work? They are, just to confirm, we’re going to have 
two different administrative systems when this Bill is . . . comes 
into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We actually have both systems 
operating right now here in the province. 
 
Mr. Wall: — And are there two system . . . are there then two 
different branches, two distinct administrations arms if you will, 
or teams that deal with those pre-’95 and post-’95 cases, if 
that’s what you’re referring to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think generally the answer to your 
question is yes, there are two teams. But I should supplement 
that answer a little bit by saying that the tort team, if I can 
describe them that way, are essentially focused on 
out-of-province claims. The pre-’95 would be essentially dealt 
with . . . the same group of individuals that deal currently with 
the . . . No, that’s essentially dealt with by the lawyers, I should 
say, from pre-’95. 
 
Mr. Wall: — With the advent of this dual system then, what 
are the projections at the Crown for the costs associated with 
these two different administrative functions? When you 
obviously have more than just out-of-province cases on the tort 
side, you’ll have the Saskatchewan drivers who choose that — 
who choose the tort — also creating some administrative 
functions, certainly for the Crown. 
 
What projections did you do . . . did the Crown do for those two 
different systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They wouldn’t expect a huge increase in 
administration, largely because, as I’ve described, the two 
systems currently exist and unless there were some reason for a 
huge number of . . . huge increase in claims, the claims numbers 
by any projection would be essentially the same. It would just 
be a matter of where they were, would it be in the no-fault 
system or would it be in the tort system. So for that reason there 
isn’t a presumption that there would be a huge increase in 
administration and we were projecting very little increase in 
administration. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Is there then a projected increase of any scale or 
scope in administration with the new dual system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In terms of internal administration we’re 
not projecting really increase . . . any increase at all. Now let me 
qualify that a little bit by saying in the coming year under 
administration there will show an increase. It will be though 
related to education of the public and education for the brokers 
because clearly this is a new system that we need to provide 
information to those two groups of individuals. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And how much has 
been budgeted for those costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Right now we have budgeted $750,000 
for education of the public and brokers. I should again 
supplement that a little bit by saying it will . . . I think in a little 
bit the waters will get a bit muddied because there is currently 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

 

negotiations taking place between SGI and the brokers on how 
they should be compensated, and not just how they should be 
compensated, but how much they should be compensated. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. An accounting question 
that becomes quite important: there’s a lot of concern — and 
it’s shared by myself — that the government that’s proposing 
this dual system has a clear bias in favour of the no-fault 
system. I think the president, to be . . . I mean to be fair, on a 
personal level, the president has indicated that and I think you 
have as well, Mr. Minister. 
 
So there’s this abiding concern that the premier option part of 
the dual system is going to be set up to fail, that the accounting 
for the implementation of the new system is going to be set up 
such that costs like this three-quarters of $1 million training is 
going to be somehow attributed in the final analysis to the fact 
that we now have a tort system running alongside the modified 
no-fault . . . the no-fault system as modified in the Bill. 
 
Where will the 750,000 . . . How will that $750,000 and all the 
attendant costs of this new dual system, how will they be 
accounted for in any review? And I do want to get into what 
reviews that will be in place in terms of which system seems to 
be working the best, but in any review of this, internal or 
otherwise, how will these costs be accounted for? 
 
(17:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me say first of all — and I’ve said 
this publicly a number of times but I have to say that I’ve never 
seen it in print anywhere — that as long as the two products are 
offered by SGI, it is really largely irrelevant to us which 
product the public decides they want. They’re based on cost 
recovery and some profit, obviously. And so if one of the 
products in the end of the day is determined that it’s more 
expensive and the public is prepared to pay for that, that’s fine 
because both products are offered by SGI. 
 
So as an individual I’ve clearly stated which option I prefer, but 
if the majority of the people of Saskatchewan determine that the 
premier option is the best option for them then who am I to say 
that they’re wrong? I would say in answer to the specific 
question about how these costs are . . . how they will be 
allocated, they need to be, first they need to go through a fairly 
clear process. 
 
Our auditors, KPMG, will do an evaluation of it. The Provincial 
Auditor does an evaluation of that. And then we believe in the 
end of the day the rate review panel might well have comment 
on it as well. So it will be a very transparent process. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you touched on 
a concern, actually. Because if, for whatever reason, costs like 
the $750,000, for example, are allocated to the tort side of the 
dual system, and other attendant costs, something similar 
happens with other attendant costs, and as you say SGI will be 
operating on a cost recovery basis and somewhere down the 
road therefore has to increase the price of this particular 
product. 
 
So you’ve got to, let’s say — and granted it’s a hypothetical 
question but this is exactly where we need to go, I think — so 

you’ve got a higher price for the tort, for the premier option, 
and a lower price for whatever reason for the no-fault, for the 
PIPP. And SGI says look, we’re going to simply have to charge 
more. 
 
I think the concern is that costs like this are going to be 
attributed to the tort side and therefore one day drive up the 
rates and the government would be able to say well look, these 
are our costs. One is more expensive for us as a company than 
the other. And others would question whether or not those 
underlying costs should be . . . have been fairly allocated 
between the two systems. 
 
And that’s what I’m getting to. I understand what you’re 
saying, Minister, but the concern is that the final cost to me as a 
consumer, there might be a differential there but will it be 
representative of claims, of actual claim costs or will there be 
. . . what potential is there for those costs to be higher because 
of how these things have been allocated by the Crown? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m advised we have a fairly elaborate 
cost allocation process that needs to be followed now. So before 
we would do any cost allocating, based on the question that you 
asked, our auditors need to approve that. 
 
It is again, I think, thoroughly reasonable to assume that if 90 
per cent of the population chose one of the options, that’s where 
90 per cent of the cost would remain in. The remainder would 
go wherever the other, wherever the other individuals chose to 
buy their insurance. 
 
So I think that’s fairly clear. If it’s 90 per cent with . . . if 90 per 
cent stayed with the no-fault system, that’s where 90 per cent of 
the cost would be, and 10 per cent would go to the tort option. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I want to ask the minister and, through him, the 
officials then: just as an example, this $750,000, how would 
you see that, how would you see the auditors encouraging that 
cost to be allocated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just as an example for this year — 
unless our auditors tell us to do something different — since 
there is no one currently in the premier plan, the full amount 
will be allocated to the no-fault plan this year. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And you mentioned 
that this $750,000, for example, is a one-time . . . will be a 
one-time cost. Or do you envision an ongoing need for this sort 
of education, these education and corporate affairs or publicity 
costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Right now it’s essentially viewed to be a 
one-time cost. But like with all of the products, we continue to 
provide education to the public, so I think it’s also fair to say 
that there probably will be some additional costs into the 
ongoing years. But it might well be blended with other products 
that we’re promoting and advertising. 
 
Mr. Wall: — When SGI was considering the case that was 
made to it by the Coalition Against No-Fault and others — and 
obviously it gave some consideration to that because we now 
have this Bill before the legislature — it would have also heard 
concerns from people about some sort of access for those who 



2544 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

are particularly aggrieved under the no-fault system and who 
desperately want to have still to this day, even though their 
accidents may have been six years ago, still today would like 
some access, some remedy in the courts. 
 
What consideration did you give, Mr. Minister, to those cases 
and how are those addressed in this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think it needs to be pointed out that 
individuals do have access to the courts right now, to the Court 
of Queen’s Bench. But in addition to that, under the changes 
that we’re proposing, the mechanism that we would suggest 
would make it much easier and friendlier under the panel that 
we’re proposing for individuals to appeal and find resolution to 
the problems that they might have, and thereby I guess find 
some compromise between what SGI’s position would be and 
what the claimant’s position might be. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That opens up a broad 
area of discussion I think we need to have about that panel 
process. If you would just take a few minutes to outline that, 
comment on the whole issue of retroactivity for those victims 
who still feel aggrieved, and what they could find in this new 
panel process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well the member may not like the 
answer. There essentially is no retroactivity clauses in the 
amendments that we’re proposing here today, with the 
exception of the one that I think you’re aware of which will 
increase the coverage from 500,000 to 5 million I think it is. 
 
And I think it needs to be said though, as well, there will be 
cases where individuals pre-1995 would say to us that if they 
had been offered the benefits under no-fault they would be 
much better off. So to determine that we would put in place 
retroactivity for individuals who would argue with us that they 
had better cover under the old tort system, and not also afford 
benefits to individuals pre-1995 and give them the option of 
opting into the no-fault system, we think would be 
inappropriate. And that’s why there’s no retroactivity other than 
the one clause that we’re currently recommending. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Did SGI do any costing 
of what liabilities it might have from a cost perspective if it did 
allow for a greater scope in terms of retroactivity in this panel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’d be very difficult to answer that 
question because it would essentially say it would assume that 
we would know what the outcome of each case would be and 
what courts may or may not award. So did we do an analysis? 
The short answer is essentially that no, we did not, for the very 
reasons I’ve just described. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well I think in the improvements that are here to 
PIPP — and many, many improvements were needed — the 
retroactivity for that one element that you mentioned was one of 
them. And again I’m not sure, on behalf of the opposition, why 
there wouldn’t have been a much more detailed look at 
extending that to the group of people out there whose cases are 
extremely compelling. 
 
I don’t care what side of the argument you come from on this 
whole no-fault thing, there’s so many cases that are very 

compelling and I believe, and we believe, it would warrant 
turning over every stone to try to determine if some sort of 
retroactivity could have been provided. 
 
In addition to some of the other changes to PIPP, the PIPP side 
of this Bill, I wonder if you could comment about how the panel 
may or may not be able to perform some function in regards to 
impasses that victims have, car accident victims have, with 
adjusters? I think we’ve all heard from victims of no-fault one 
of the big problems that they have, and one of the problems that 
the medical profession has highlighted — in fact we heard it 
earlier today, you and I did on the steps — is the authority 
that’s given to adjusters who certainly have a very important 
function. 
 
And we’re not demeaning in any way the work that adjusters do 
and have to do on behalf of any insurance company, including 
SGI. But the way this system is set up, the way this system is 
set up and even under the new system, they really have 
exclusive authority over people’s benefits. 
 
And even when treatments that have been recommended by SGI 
are not . . . they’re not in agreement with doctor’s 
recommendations, people are facing the prospect of having their 
benefits cut off. So that is in our view a great shortfall in the 
PIPP program. And I wonder, Minister, if you could highlight 
how this Bill addresses that? 
 
(17:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Certainly you raise, I think, a legitimate 
concern. It was one that was identified by the PIPP review 
committee. It is one that I think it’s fair to say that we will 
continue to monitor, but one of the recommended changes is 
that individuals be allowed to work much more closely with 
their family physician or their chiropractor or whatever the case 
may be to rehabilitate themselves. And again it’s something that 
we will continue to monitor, but that’s one of the changes. We 
want to be much more sensitive to the claimants’ concerns 
about how they would be personally rehabilitated. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would that change 
apply to victims of accidents prior to when this Bill comes into 
force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer to your question is yes. 
 
Mr. Wall: — And what efforts will SGI make to notify victims 
then . . . or customers, victims of accidents, that this is now . . . 
this change is going to happen, and what they can expect as a 
result of the change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me try this: first of all, the changes 
have really been in place for almost . . . the changes have been 
in place for almost a year already. And I don’t think it’s a 
change that the public are going to see as sort of, this is the way 
we did it one day, and this is the way we’re now doing it now. I 
would describe the changes as more subtle than that. 
 
We’ve certainly talked to all of our adjusters. They know that 
they need to work with individuals . . . in much greater concert 
with that individual or that claimant’s physician. We’ve never, I 
guess, claimed to be medical experts. The adjusters have never 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

 

claimed to be medical experts, but at the end of the day they 
have to make some decisions and still will, even under the new 
structure that exists. But they have clearly been instructed to 
work much more closely with the claimant’s personal 
practitioner or personal chiro or whatever the case might be. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s what I 
understand. But you’re clarifying now, the way you’re . . . this 
change you’re talking about is a policy change that’s been in 
place for some time at the Crown. There’s nothing in this Bill in 
particular that would address the ongoing concern — by the 
way it still exists — that people have, victims especially have, 
with the power and authority given to their adjusters. 
 
Again we just heard on the steps of the legislature today that 
there’s current cases . . . And these are doctors coming forward, 
and I think the doctor today was pretty fair. The doctor began 
his talk at the coalition’s rally by saying that he believed that 
SGI had every good intention when they brought PIPP in, in 
1995. Then he went on to detail the horrors though of situations 
where adjusters — and it’s still happening today, even in light 
of this change you talk about — where adjusters are basically 
wading in on the medical side of what’s best for the customer 
and overriding the wishes of family physicians. 
 
So to be more to the point, there is nothing in this Bill that 
further addresses that concern with respect to the PIPP program. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — What the adjusters try to do is look at 
what I described as, I guess, the preponderance of medical 
evidence. Because quite often you’ll have a claimant who will 
have a number of medical analyses that have been done that 
disagree. So all the adjuster can do is to take the information 
and make the best decision that that adjuster can make given the 
amount of . . . given the medical information that that adjuster 
has. And at the end of the day, if the individual disagrees with 
that, they certainly have the appeal process that they can go 
through. 
 
But again I say that the adjusters have never claimed to be 
medical experts. But we have clearly instructed them to be 
much more sensitive to the individuals . . . I should say, 
instructed them to be much more sensitive to the concerns that 
the individuals have, but also to work much more closely with 
those individuals’ personal physicians and chiropractors, and 
whoever they might be working with. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Minister, thank you. I can tell you that, 
notwithstanding those instructions, our casework at our office 
indicates that the problem still exists in a significant way. We 
heard this morning from a doctor who believes the problem still 
exists in a significant way. 
 
And were there no other reason to oppose this Bill, the fact that 
some steps aren’t taking . . . were not taken to ensure that the 
advice of a family physician was always priority over the 
assessment of an adjuster — you know, Crown corporation or 
otherwise — were that the only omission in the Bill, we 
wouldn’t be able to support it because it’s just . . . it’s an issue 
of fundamental fairness. 
 
And I understand what you’re saying. I hear what you’re 

saying, and instructions, I have no doubt, have gone out to 
adjusters. But trust me when I tell you that the occurrences are 
still occurring where family physicians, the advice of family 
physicians is being overrode, overridden if you will, by 
adjusters who are making their decisions on behalf of the 
corporation as well as the customer. Whereas, the doctor of 
course is making their recommendations on behalf of the 
customer only, of the individual. So I just find that to be a 
glaring error. 
 
I have another question. SGI went out of its way in terms of 
supporting, financially, studies to support the contention that 
no-fault is actually a help in terms of people recovering. And 
we went through this in detail at Crown Corporations 
Committee and certainly officials will remember that. Now that 
you’re offering a dual system, are you going to continue with 
these kinds of studies? And what is the status of the study, by 
the way, that as of January when we met at Crown Corporations 
was not complete yet, the second study? What is the status of 
that study? And secondly, will SGI be continuing to support or 
fund these sorts of studies now that it’s offering two products? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There isn’t a contemplation of any 
further studies right now, but the study I think that you 
specifically refer to — that is, what is the best processes for 
treatment for individuals? — we believe will be available 
sometime next year, and it’s still not yet completed. We have 
not been able to move that along I think as quickly as we would 
like to have. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Minister, why is that study delayed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, I am advised that there was 
more data to analyze than apparently was originally anticipated, 
and we are not in control of when the doctor will compile the 
report and make it available to us. Again I mean as far as we 
know, it will be available sometime in ’03. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The introduction of PIPP had a built-in review 
timeline; I think it was five years. And I wonder if you could 
comment on the existence of any built-in review for the new 
dual system in this piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There isn’t any contemplation of any 
built-in review under the model that we’re proposing before you 
today. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Can the minister comment why that is the case in 
light of the fact that this is — as the minister and officials have 
characterized it — a first ever, as far as we’re aware in North 
America certainly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all we had a system that existed 
for 50 years so we know roughly how that worked. The PIPP 
system we have 5-years experience on that and we’ve reviewed 
that, or more actually. So we don’t think that it’s necessary to 
build in a costly mechanism to do a review. Obviously there 
will be ongoing review of the choice option for the people of 
Saskatchewan but we don’t think it’s necessary that we build in 
a costly sort of forced review right into the legislation. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect, I think, that’s 
probably where we would disagree again for a number of 



2546 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

reasons. I understand what you’re saying about a history for tort 
and at least a brief history for PIPP. Of course they’ve never 
been offered side by side anywhere as you have indicated. 
 
And now we are going to be doing that here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and what better system to review than one that 
has never been tried; what better one to set up an 
institutionalized review and one where you’re ensuring that a 
third party is doing it to alleviate those people who are 
concerned that one may be, rightly or wrongly, the concern is 
one may be set up to fail. 
 
So I think that we would agree to disagree there that this is 
perhaps the perfect one to indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we’re going down this road but because it’s 
so new we essentially believe that it has to be reviewed and the 
review would be right in the legislation. 
 
I have some very specific questions and I’ve heard Mr. Fogg 
clarify, your officials clarify, some specific cases and I’ve 
found that helpful. And I have others that I’m not sure if it has 
been clarified. I haven’t heard it so I think they’re worth getting 
on the record. 
 
If a person who has no car and has chosen, well I guess perhaps 
they’re a joint driver and they’ve chosen tort, and while they’re 
sitting in let’s say for example a sidewalk café, they get hit by a 
no-fault drunk driver who doesn’t get hurt. Would it be the 
drunk driver’s premiums that would be allocated to no-fault and 
the claims would be allocated to tort? 
 
(17:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ll try this. The premiums that . . . for 
those individuals who choose tort . . . would go into the tort 
pool. And for those individuals who have chosen tort, the claim, 
the claimants, who are tort claimants, that would come out of 
that pool. And the same would hold true, exactly the opposite 
though, for those individuals who chose the no-fault system. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So if this was the only 
collision in that year, then the no-fault drunk driver could 
potentially be charged very low premiums next year as no-fault 
has no claims in it. No-fault wouldn’t have any claims, of 
course, and the tort would have it all, in terms of the claims side 
of it. But no premiums or car would be attached to that. 
 
That’s very . . . I mean I’m looking . . . We’ve looked, poured 
over these questions, and they are confusing to say the least, 
and there again is the underlying concern, I think. But the point 
can be made I think — unless we’re wrong — is that there’s 
only the collision of the year, and the no-fault drunk driver 
could be charged very low premiums because the claims . . . the 
no-fault . . . the claims didn’t come out of the no-fault pool; 
they came out of the tort pool. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me first of all say that, conversely I 
guess, if a tort individual ran down a no-fault person, as an 
example, in a crosswalk, the entire claim would come out of the 
no-fault pool. But in the example that you provided, if there 
were an ability to do so, SGI would go after the drunk in that 
particular case, and if they were successful, would refund any 
proceeds that they were able to secure and put it back into the 

tort pool. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. They would, under this 
Act, be able to go after the impaired driver. But of course under 
the previous . . . if that change hadn’t been made to this PIPP, 
you’d have a situation where even SGI couldn’t go after the 
impaired driver because he can’t be sued under the old . . . prior 
to these changes to the PIPP. 
 
What would happen in a one-car . . . what happens in a one-car 
family where there’s two adults and the husband chooses 
no-fault and the wife is tort but the car is in the husband’s 
name. Does the product follow the vehicle? Does it follow the 
. . . I guess it has to follow the vehicle based on automobile 
insurance. Is that correct? What does happen in the case of joint 
ownership? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To try and keep it simple, I think the 
answer is that it follows the individual and not the vehicle. 
 
Mr. Wall: — So if it follows the individual and the . . . It 
follows the individual to whom the car, the vehicle, is 
registered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In this particular case it doesn’t matter 
what the circumstances. The husband would always get no-fault 
benefits and the wife would get tort benefits. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’ve heard the officials talk about what happens 
with out-of-province drivers. Alberta’s a tort province. 
Someone just driving through the province, if they’re involved 
in an accident, my understanding is they automatically fall 
under the no-fault regime. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, you’re correct. 
 
Mr. Wall: — So then if a tort Saskatchewan car with no 
injuries hits a car from Alberta who just is, let’s say, just 
passing through the province and is forced to take no-fault by 
default, would the claims be charged then to no-fault and would 
the premiums . . . would they go to tort but no claims? 
 
Tort. You’ve got a tort Saskatchewan car. It hits an Alberta 
driver who’s travelling through the province. There’s no 
injuries involved. But the Alberta driver’s taking no-fault by 
default. Would the claims be charged to no-fault and the 
premiums would go to tort but no claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In the case that you described, the 
Alberta driver’s claims — because he’s in a no-fault province 
— would be taken out of the no-fault pool. And the tort driver 
would have had the premiums gone into the tort pool. 
 
Mr. Wall: — These questions just . . . they do give rise I know, 
they do give rise to this . . . to the concern about the confusion; 
not just for the drivers, but for the Crown corporation. Although 
the answers are coming, they also make a layperson who 
doesn’t understand the workings, the inner workings of SGI, 
wonder about how the administration costs are going to be 
impacted. 
 
But it does seem — and maybe you could outline clearly how 
this will be prevented, Mr. Minister — if we have half-and-half, 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2547 

 

half people choosing no-fault and half of the people choosing 
the tort, and they’re involved in these accidents, we’re going to 
have these, you know, this whole issue of where the premium’s 
attributed to and where the claim’s attributed to. And you know, 
what assurances can you give people that these things can be 
tracked in a reasonable manner, in an effective manner, for the 
drivers and for customers of SGI out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think the answer to the question is how 
we allocate the costs may be complex, but those are largely 
internal. And the important thing to . . . the important point I 
think to make is that for those individuals who choose the tort 
system, they will be covered under the tort system, and for 
those individuals who choose no-fault, they will be covered 
under the no-fault system. So from that perspective, it makes it 
a little less complex. 
 
And again I’ll say something here that I’ve said on the record a 
number of times. We will rely obviously to a large degree on 
our agents and brokers who are selling the services, much as I 
do right now personally for my house insurance. 
 
And I have a number of options and choices, albeit it may not 
be quite as complex as this in terms of the allocation of costs, 
but I rely on my broker right now to ensure that I have good 
coverage, although ultimately I know it’s my responsibility. So 
the same, I would argue, is going to hold true under this 
circumstance as well. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hear what you’re 
saying. But the fact though that where the Bill . . . we’re also 
having to provide protection in terms of liability for brokers is a 
clear indication that this is very significant. It’s very serious and 
I think a little bit of a stretch to compare it to other insurance 
purchases somebody might make. We all do rely on brokers but 
this is so significant that we’re having to protect them. 
 
And I guess there’s a concern out there that since under the 
no-fault system people who are at fault, involved in an accident, 
but they receive the same compensation. Some would say in 
fact it would seem that the worse driver you are, the more you 
should choose no-fault because . . . especially since the tort part 
of the claim of perhaps better drivers that you might hit is going 
to go into the tort pot for determining rates for the tort package. 
 
So in effect some are concerned that you’re . . . there’s not an 
incentive because no one’s going to go out and look for vehicle 
trouble, but there is this inherent perhaps unfairness for poorer 
drivers and the cost they might generate on the tort side. So you 
may wish to comment on that. I know my colleague, the 
member for Humboldt, has some specific questions as well and 
I’ll give her that chance to do so now. And if you want to 
comment on the other, that’s fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think, to the member, there isn’t much 
I can add. I think you are essentially right in the point you 
made. Nobody wants to be injured whether it’s under the tort 
system or under the no-fault system, and I think the concern of 
the public is that they have adequate coverage under whatever 
mechanism they choose. And again there will be obviously 
varying and differing opinions about which provides them the 
best coverage. And that’s largely why we’re here today. 
 

(17:45) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and good afternoon to your officials. They’ve had a 
lengthy sitting time here, and I’m sure that they need to be 
commended for their patience. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to just refer to the part of the new 
legislation that speaks of the $5,000 deductible if you should 
choose the tort system. Could you explain to me how that’s 
going to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The deductible is applicable only to 
pain and suffering. So as an example if you were injured in a 
motor vehicle accident and the courts awarded you $20,000, the 
deductible 5,000 would come off and you’d be essentially 
15,000 in pocket. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, what if in the event that a person loses that court 
ruling, if for instance it was myself and I lost the ruling, then 
that would mean I’d have to try to come up with $5,000 from 
somewhere. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No, you wouldn’t have to come up with 
the 5,000. If they awarded you nothing, you would get nothing, 
and there would be no deductible. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then, Mr. Minister, who 
would be responsible for paying the court costs? Where would 
that come out of? I mean you’re still going through courts, and 
there are court costs, so who would be responsible for paying 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That decision is made by the courts, and 
generally it goes to the individual who’s successful in the case. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes and I recognize that, Mr. Minister. I just 
wanted that on the record for people who may be asking that. 
 
And what it brings to my mind is when people are going to be 
making a choice as to which one of these packages to choose, 
they may be resistant to choose the tort package just simply 
because of that. If they should lose, you know, if they are then 
awarded the court costs, whatever they may be — not knowing 
quite what they may be — it might deter people from choosing 
the tort system. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to just go back for a moment to the PIPP 
system. As you’ve heard I’m sure over the past few years, some 
of the complaints that have come across from people that were 
dealing with this system was that the adjusters, the medical 
personnel that are adjusters, were basically making some 
determinations that people were not happy with and that there 
wasn’t the word of their personal doctors being listened to very 
well, I guess. 
 
And I know that my colleague from Swift Current has brought 
this aspect of the whole thing up. But I’m wondering why when 
you determined that you were going to have new legislation so 
there would be a choice for customers out there, why you didn’t 
fix that part of it? Like why you didn’t have some wording in 
the legislation that would have assured all of the clients, 



2548 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

customers out there, that there would be the doctor’s word and 
determination about the progress and process of their patient’s 
healing, that that determination by their personal family 
physician would override anything else? Why would you not 
have placed that in the Bill? 
 
Because I think if that had been placed in the Bill and there was 
some wording to that effect . . . There are many people that felt 
that the personal injury protection program could have been a 
good program. It’s because of the frustration and confusion 
surrounding that, that issue, that many of them brought forward 
complaints. 
 
So could you explain why you didn’t fix that by placing some 
wording in the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me try this. First of all, I think it 
needs to be said that in the vast majority of cases, certainly, the 
people who are in the process of being rehabilitated are 
satisfied. But there will be a number of cases where, after a 
period of time, there is no progression being made in terms of 
rehabilitation of that individual. Quite often then they’re sent to 
an expert or a series of experts for further medical analysis. And 
it’s in those circumstances that you often find a difference of 
opinion from the so-called medical experts. 
 
The adjuster in that particular case then needs to make a 
decision, and it’s then . . . then the mechanism kicks in. If the 
individual is not satisfied with that decision, they can then again 
go through the appeal process. But again, I mean I’d say in the 
vast majority of cases individuals are satisfied. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I really think this is a 
very important issue that needs to be addressed, because I have 
heard from some victims of no-fault that tell me that they have 
had a determination made by a medical adjuster, that 
determination being that they were ready to go back to work, 
and in fact their own family doctor said that they weren’t. 
 
And it was . . . when you’re getting an opinion like that from a 
medical adjuster through SGI and that’s the end of your, you 
know, that’s the end of your compensation, that’s the end of 
your treatment and so on, and you’re told basically to go back, 
it’s very, very frustrating for people. And we have had those 
kind of cases come to our attention. 
 
So it seems to me that if there was, I guess, more honour and 
respect given to a general practitioner or any specialist or 
whatever, their word on the condition of the victim, there would 
be a lot more satisfaction, I guess, on the part of the clients. 
And I think we have to take this a step further to maybe trust 
the medical practitioners, the general practitioners that are 
family doctors and specialists that deal with that victim. 
 
So I just wanted to, you know, to certainly bring that forward 
and I still don’t know quite why you did not put some wording 
in this legislation to effect an assurance for victims of no-fault 
that would allow for their family physicians’ word to basically 
determine how far along they are in the process of healing and 
what kind of condition they’re in and for then a determination 
to be made by SGI on the kind of continuum of services or 
therapies or whatever. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think I want to . . . before I just . . . I’m 
actually just going to read you these statistics, but just to 
indicate to you that in fact there are not large numbers of people 
that fall into the category that you describe. 
 
In terms of legislating, the concern that you raise, the only 
analogy that comes to mind for me is I . . . I think it’s 
impossible to legislate morality, as an example, and I think this 
sort of falls into that same category. It’s impossible to legislate 
something that is subject to a fair bit of discretion. So you can’t 
. . . even if we were to put it in legislation, it’s not going to 
absolutely resolve the problem. 
 
Part of the reason, I guess, that it’s not in legislation as well is 
that the recommendations by the PIPP review committee were 
made last year, and we implemented all of those in advance of 
the legislation. So we would . . . I think SGI would argue that in 
fact those change . . . many of those changes already in place 
without the legislation needed. I know you will make other 
arguments, and that’s fair enough. 
 
I want to give you the statistics. There are about 6,500 claims 
per year, which I’ve indicated many times in this Assembly, of 
which 5,200 are described as soft tissue. Of those 5,200, the 
vast majority recover at the direction of their own family 
physician or chiropractor, and only 1,300 people per year are 
referred to a secondary centre for assessment or treatment. And 
of those, only 700 people are recommended to have a tertiary 
assessment and only 400 people are treated at the two tertiary 
centres. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have some 
wrap-up comments to make. I think we’ve waded through a 
number of issues with respect to questions. 
 
There are many questions unanswered I think that we will 
hopefully be able to use other forms to ask, especially as 
regards the various studies and some of the issues that have 
been raised in the media surrounding informed consent. This 
Bill though deals with this government’s attempt to change the 
auto insurance system in the province. 
 
And there are a number of things in this Bill that we have great 
difficulty with here in the . . . on the opposition side. My 
colleague from Humboldt has highlighted, and I have as well, 
one of the major significant difficulties that we have with this 
Bill as it relates to the primacy still given to adjusters over 
victims’ own doctors. 
 
And you used a phrase, Minister, and I don’t want to hang too 
much on it but I think it’s an indication — maybe a subtle one 
— but an indication of why we have a concern. I think you used 
the phrase, so-called medical experts. Minister, when you use 
that phrase I think what a victim hears, from the victims that 
I’ve talked to and we’ve tried to help in our various offices, a 
victim understands that when that phrase is used it’s referring to 
their doctor, a doctor that they trust. A doctor that says to them, 
based on my examination of you I recommend that you don’t do 
this, that you don’t go to a . . . (inaudible) . . . centre, that you 
don’t return to work, whatever it might be. That’s the so-called 
medical expert. It’s a family physician that these people trust. 
 
And so they go back to their insurer and they go back to their 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2549 

 

adjuster with all their documentations in a case that’s made to 
them by these so-called medical experts that are their family 
doctors and some cases specialists. And they find out that it 
doesn’t really matter. It doesn’t really matter because in any 
particular case what the adjuster decrees is what happens. 
 
And there is no perfect world, Minister, you’re quite right in 
pointing that out. But we just believe this Bill could have gone a 
lot further on that. You did address the issue of people . . . of 
impaired drivers. You did address third-party suits. There are a 
number of major, major problems with PIPP that were 
addressed in this Bill and we think . . . we’re not convinced that 
something couldn’t have been done to address this. 
 
(18:00) 
 
The other big problem we have is that there’s no review here. 
There’s no institutional legislative review for the system. And I 
appreciate the answer you gave that while we already have a 
track record in tort and we already have a short one in PIPP. 
But you know, Minister, first of all, there is no track record in 
this modified PIPP and this is a significantly different personal 
injury protection program than what was visited on the province 
in ’95. We don’t have any history with that. 
 
And more to the point, we have — and neither does any other 
jurisdiction — have any history at all with a system of such a 
dual nature. And we would say that system more than any other 
needs at least the government of the day that is trying to 
introduce it to say, look, because of the pitfalls that might exist, 
because of the concerns that are out there, rightly or wrongly, 
that we’re going to set up the tort side to be much more 
expensive and rates to go up. Whatever the reason might be, we 
are committing to a third party arm’s-length review of this new 
dual system. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I do want to thank the officials for spending 
a long time here this afternoon. This is, you know, arguably not 
only the most important auto insurance Bill in the province’s 
history, but it could be said that it’s the most important one in 
Canada’s because of the ground that we’re breaking. 
 
And even though we’ve exhausted over an hour and a half, I 
still think there may be questions and we’ll be wanting to use 
this Legislative Assembly and other forums to ask those. We 
can’t, because of the reasons I’ve mentioned, we can’t support 
this particular piece of legislation, and we’ll find a clause or 
two to express that on. 
 
And the encouragement to you, Minister and to the officials, 
notwithstanding the fact that any processes lacking in this Bill 
to review this system — that that happened, that that occurred 
— and preferably by a third party so that a lot of the concerns 
that people have could be allayed. 
 
It’s just a sense that we have, Minister, and that others have, is 
that this was a political solution to an auto insurance problem. I 
personally believe, and I might be wrong — and if I am, I’ll 
certainly stand to be corrected — but I personally believe that 
right or wrong the senior officials at SGI and perhaps yourself 
are fundamentally committed to no-fault either as it previously 
existed or even more so now with the improvements that are 
outlined in this Bill. But that they chose the premier option 

route because they needed to solve a political problem inside 
the caucus of a government, inside a caucus of a government 
that, frankly, we understand is significantly split on the issue, 
and to solve a problem with respect to the various MLAs 
hearing from the people who had been hurt by the system. And 
we don’t think that’s a way to fix problems or to set up an auto 
insurance program. 
 
So I do want to conclude though by thanking the officials for 
their time here today and thank you, Minister, for your answers 
to questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me just respond very briefly. I 
would do this at the end as well, but I want to thank you as well 
for the good questions, yourself and the member from 
Humboldt. And I think I want to . . . I wouldn’t ordinarily do 
this, I guess. I’m not going to break any of the rules here. But I 
do want to also take the opportunity to thank the individuals 
from the Law Society and particularly those individuals from 
the Coalition Against No-Fault who I think — while we will 
disagree — made I think very reasoned and good arguments. 
 
And I would argue it was from that perspective that the 
government made the decision that we should offer a choice 
because clearly there were two camps. Maybe that’s not a good 
term, but there were two groups of individuals in our province 
who felt that they should have the option of tort, and there was 
groups of individuals thought they should have no-fault. This 
seems I think, for our government, the most reasonable 
proposal. But I thank all of the folks that I’ve just described. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This could take 
me a minute. We would move the following amendment, that 
clause 9 would be amended to read: 
 

(a) by striking out subsection 26(2) of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act, as being enacted by Clause 9 of the 
printed Bill, and substituting the following: 

 
“(2) Notwithstanding sections 22, 22.1 and 23, in the 
circumstances mentioned in subsection (1), the insurer is 
only liable pursuant to section 22, 22.1 or 23 to pay a 
reduced weekly benefit to an insured in the amount RWB 
as calculated in accordance with the following formula: 
 

RWB = AVWE x PWB 
        OB 

 
where: 
 

AVWE is the insured’s average aggregate weekly 
earnings in the 12 months preceding the accident; 

 
PWB is the prescribed weekly benefit that would 
otherwise be payable to the insured pursuant to section 
22, 22.1 or 23 but for this section; and 

 



2550 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

OB is the total benefits payable to the insured with 
respect to the accident”; and 

 
(b) by striking out subsection 30.2(1) of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act, as being enacted by Clause 9 of the 
printed Bill, and substituting the following: 
 

“(1) Subject to section 30.3, if an amount is to be 
adjusted pursuant to this Division, the adjusted amount is 
the amount AM calculated in accordance with the 
following formula: 
 

AM = A x CPICY 
                  CPIPY 

 
where: 
 

A is the amount to be adjusted; 
 
CPICY is the consumer price index for the year in 
which the adjustment is being made; and 
 
CPIPY is the consumer price index for the previous 
year”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s this 
amendment and we’ve received . . . the Clerk has provided us 
just now three other House amendments moving . . . it looks 
like the minister is going to be moving those. 
 
And I mean we’re completely unaware of these particular 
amendments and, Mr. Chairman, while we’re prepared to take it 
as read, we’re not prepared to deal with this right now until we 
could get an explanation please from the minister as to the 
nature of this amendment and what it’s going to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Certainly I’d be happy to provide that 
for the member. This is simply a clerical error. 
 
I’m going to try and describe where the clerical error occurred. 
It was simply an underline that was omitted in the original 
printing. When I referred to MY . . . This doesn’t . . . I’ve got 
the wrong one. 
 
It’s the underline that was not provided in RWB equals AVWE 
times PWB over OB and it was simply the clerical error, simply 
the line was not included in the original printing. 
 
Mr. Wall: — So a division is what was missing, potentially a 
division, a line representing a division. That’s what was 
missing. That’s the only change? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s going to be . . . we’re going to be 
requesting similar explanations to these amendments that are 
upcoming. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 

Clause 27 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Before I make this motion for this 
amendment, let me just say to the member, we apologize for not 
providing those amendments to them in advance. That was an 
oversight on our part. 
 
Clause 27 is . . . I would move the following amendment. That 
we would: 
 

Strike out clause (g) of Clause 27 of the printed Bill and 
substitute the following: 
 

“(g) by adding the following subsections after 
subsection (1): 

 
‘(2) For the purposes of clause (1)(ii), the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council may: 
 

(a) adopt, or authorize the insurer to adopt, by 
reference any specifications, standards or codes as 
amended from time to time or otherwise; 

 
(b) amend, or authorize the insurer to amend, for 
the purposes of this Act any specifications, 
standards or codes adopted pursuant to clause (a); 
and 

 
(c) require compliance with any specifications, 
standards or codes adopted pursuant to clause (a). 

 
‘(3) Notwithstanding any other Act or law, any 
regulations made pursuant to this section may be 
made retroactive to a day not earlier than July 1, 
2002’’’. 

 
And if the member would just wait, I’ll give you a brief 
explanation of that. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — If it would help the members, I would 
note that the amendment is on page 42 of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And in explanation of that, this is to 
make them . . . to make the safe driving regulations retroactive 
to July 1 as were previously announced, and it’s because we’re 
here on July 4, today. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 27 as amended agreed to. 
 
(18:15) 
 
Clauses 28 and 29 agreed to. 
 
Clause 30 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This is again simply a clerical error and 
it’s exactly the same thing as occurred in clause 9, to the 
members opposite. 
 
I will need to read the entire amendment, I’m advised by the 
Clerk. But it’s simply the division line was not included for 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2551 

 

MYIE, referring to that calculation. And also, further down, the 
division was not . . . the division line was not included for AM 
equals A times CPICY. So it’s simply clerical again. 
 
So I would move the following amendment in clause 30 of the 
printed Bill: 
 

Amend subsection (1) of Clause 30 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by striking out subsection 136(2) of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act, as being enacted by subsection 
(1) of Clause 30 of the printed Bill, and substituting the 
following: 

 
“(2) The amount of the maximum yearly insurable 
earnings for 2002 and each year after 2002 is the 
amount MYIE calculated in accordance with the 
following formula: 

 
MYIE = $50,000 x IAWY 

                                   IAW95 
 
where: 

 
IAWY is the average of the average industrial 
average wage for the 12 months before July 1 of the 
year before the year for which the maximum yearly 
insurable earnings are being calculated; and 

 
IAW95 is the average of the industrial average wage 
for the 12 months before July 1, 1994”; and 

 
(b) by striking out subsection 186(1) of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act, as being enacted by subsection 
(1) of Clause 30 of the printed Bill, and substituting the 
following: 

 
“(1) Subject to section 187, if an amount is to be 
adjusted pursuant to this Division, the adjusted amount 
is the amount AM calculated in accordance with the 
following formula: 

 
AM = A x CPICY 

                     CPIPY 
 
where: 

 
A is the amount to be adjusted; 

 
CPICY is the consumer price index for the year in 
which the adjustment is being made; and 

 
CPIPY is the consumer price index for the previous 
year”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 31 to 36 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Clause 37 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. I will move the following 
amendment, and again this is to make the legislation actually 
. . . or the Bill retroactive. The previous one regarding the 
rewards program was to make the regulations retroactive. This 
is to make the legislation retroactive to July 1. 
 
So I move the following: 
 

Clause 37 of the printed Bill 
 
Strike out Clause 37 of the printed Bill and substitute the 
following: 
 
“Coming into force 

37(1) Subject to subsection (2), this Act comes into force 
on proclamation. 
 
(2) Subsection 3(1), sections 4 to 6, and clauses 27(a) to 
(e) and (g) come into force on assent but are retroactive 
and deemed to have been in force on and from July 1, 
2002”. 
 

I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 37 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I will invite the minister to introduce 
any new officials he may have. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to 
stand today to put forward some questions and comments 
regarding The Highway Traffic Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, the part of this Bill that interests me the most is 
certainly the amendment that I understand the government is 
finally making that is going to ensure that children who are 
being subjected to sexual abuse within the meaning of section 3 
of The Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual 
Abuse and Exploitation Act are going to be protected the way 
they should be with these amendments to The Highway Traffic 
Act. 
 
We need to have some continuity, Mr. Chair, throughout these 
Bills when they affect how the police are going to deal with the 
new legislation and to make sure the police can, in effect, carry 
out the legislation so it does protect children, and they have 
every opportunity to do so. 
 
We were talking, Mr. Chair, about the need to put forth an 
amendment to The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, or The 
Highway Traffic Act rather, in order to clarify very clearly that 
police would have the right to stop a vehicle if it’s frequenting 



2552 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

an area where children are being subject to sexual abuse. When 
the government brought down this Bill, Mr. Chair, The 
Highway Traffic Act was supposed to be amended to the point 
that it would allow for Bill No. 2 to be enacted and to be carried 
out quite effectively, and that wasn’t so. 
 
And luckily for the government, one more time, the member for 
Cannington on May 9 brought forward the necessity to go back 
to the drawing board to make sure that there was a 
reconsideration of the text of The Highway Traffic Act . . . 
amendment Act, rather, and to make sure that we had in proper 
wording that would clearly direct the courts and the police and 
so on to be able to look at how this Act pertains to Bill No. 2. 
 
We wanted to make sure, Mr. Chair, that the powers of the 
police were in place and that they understand clearly what their 
new powers were because prior to this time the police had 
certain limited powers as far as stopping vehicles, questioning 
the occupants of those vehicles, and there was a law in place 
that clearly indicated, Mr. Speaker, that . . . actually it was 
under the Charter’s impact on the criminal justice system. And 
that clearly indicated that there were limited powers as far as 
the police being able to question anyone and to obtain 
information to get an answer from that person in a vehicle. 
 
So it’s one thing for police to understand that, under Bill No. 2 
and The Highway Traffic Act, that they can stop a vehicle and 
that . . . they can stop a vehicle if it’s in a location that’s 
frequented by prostitutes. But as the member from Cannington 
pointed out and I pointed out again on June 17, there was no 
reference to the amendment in The Highway Traffic Act that no 
person repeatedly driving a motor vehicle through an area 
frequented by children who have been subjected to sexual abuse 
— within the meaning of section 3 of The Emergency 
Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation 
Act — that children would be protected there. And so we 
brought that forward to the government twice. And I must say 
that I’m very relieved that finally they are bringing this 
amendment forward. 
 
What I do question yet, Mr. Chair, is whether we have 
sufficient and really excellent wording in Bill No. 2 that would 
allow for police to be able to, as the minister mentioned before, 
that we would . . . they would have the allowance then to detain, 
to question people and extract evidence from people in a vehicle 
simply because they are in a particular area of the city. And I 
don’t know whether or not we have made that clear enough yet. 
But I certainly know that this amendment, as put forward with 
our recommendation from the opposition, to ensure that anyone 
driving a motor vehicle through an area where children are 
sexually exploited, would be subject to a vehicle stop and a 
search and so on — so I’m pleased with that. 
 
I would admonish the government for not looking at this 
necessary piece . . . or this necessary clause in this legislation 
beforehand. But it is here today and we will be very happy to 
give assent to that amendment because in fact it came at our 
advice and we knew it was necessary . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Chair, you know, that kind of a comment 
coming from the House Leader of the NDP government is 
really very, very poor. That is — I guess it’s evidence to the 
people of Saskatchewan just what we have here: a House 
Leader calling a member of the opposition stupid. Especially 

when we’re trying to put forward legislation that will be 
effective in protecting children, and this is what we get from 
that member across. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, that is the very, very reason that many of the 
people of this province are going to make sure that he is not in 
office after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I feel really very ashamed 
for the other members opposite that they have a colleague like 
this that they have to be sitting with, that they have to try to 
uphold. I think that member has got to be questioning some of 
his actions and his words, and asking himself why he would say 
something like this at a really important time in a piece of 
legislation that is vitally important to the children of this 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I’m going to, I’m going to just express a point of 
personal privilege at this time, if I may do so, and ask for an 
apology from that member. 
 
(18:30) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — To the committee, I will ask the 
Government House Leader to withdraw and apologize for his 
remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I withdraw and 
apologize to the member. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I will 
continue by just putting forward a couple of other questions to 
the minister that pertain to Bill No. 40. And I would ask . . . 
These questions do not pertain to the part of it that deals with 
the exploitation of children on the streets. But if the minister 
could please provide an explanation of how this Bill is going to 
free up police resources, because in reading the legislation in 
the second reading speech, it stated that a proposed amendment 
will free up police resources by basically stating that the vast 
majority of accidents must now be reported to the police. 
 
Can the minister explain how this work will be . . . how this will 
work rather, and maybe the process behind these . . . how these 
changes came about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’ve been working with the different 
police forces for some time actually to address this concern. It 
used to be that any accidents over $1,000 had to be reported to 
the police and often the same report was then . . . identical 
report was then provided to the adjuster. 
 
So the circumstance now is that the only occasion where police 
need to be involved, a report needs to be made to the police, is 
where there is a bodily injury, or obviously a fatality, a hit and 
run, an impaired operator is involved, and sufficient damage to 
require a vehicle to be towed from the scene of an accident. 
Other than that, the reporting of the accident needs only to be 
made to the adjuster. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how will 
the message get out for people to know that this change is being 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2553 

 

made? Because I imagine that there is going to be some sort of 
advertising campaign to let people know about what happens if 
they are now in an accident. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’re contemplating . . . we’re not 
contemplating, we’re planning I should say, a public . . . a 
number of public service announcements which would include 
utilizing law enforcement agencies and whatever other 
mechanisms would be available to us. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The changes in 
section 40 regarding hazard lights and amber beacons or 
flashing lights, could you . . . could the minister please tell the 
House what is exactly being changed there in section 40, and 
why. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I think the easiest way to answer 
your question is just to refer to specifically this. The current 
legislation restricts the use of amber warning strobe and beacon 
lights on tow trucks and highway maintenance equipment to 
when the vehicle is presenting a hazard to other road users. 
 
A similar restriction is required for other road users. Without 
specific restrictions on the use of these lamps, abuse may occur 
thus reducing the effectiveness of the lamps in hazardous 
situations. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. The 
changes also in the Bill regarding the seat belt law and the 
removal of the exemption for seat belt use at low speeds — I 
think we all have an idea of what kinds of vehicles might be 
referred to here but we’d appreciate you clarifying that. 
 
And also while you’re on the subject of seat belt exemptions, 
individual MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in the 
Assembly on either side, I am sure, have dealt with cases where 
exemptions have been granted for various medical reasons. And 
I just want to make sure that this particular . . . there’s nothing 
contemplated here with respect to those exemptions, that 
nothing has changed materially with respect to those. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There . . . the member’s right. There’s 
no changes to medical exemptions. What we’re proposing to do 
here is to move this to regulation to allow for special 
exemptions for things like milk delivery and garbage pickup 
and that sort of thing. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Once again, on behalf of myself and the member 
for Humboldt, we want to thank officials for their help with 
respect to this, with respect to Bill 40, and the committee 
deliberations. And we certainly look forward to supporting the 
amendment as was touched on by the member from Humboldt. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
don’t think there’s any need for me to go through the 
explanation of this amendment because that’s been worked with 
the . . . we’ve worked with the opposition in coming up with 

this. 
 
So I would move, Mr. Chair, the following that: 
 

Clause 17 of the printed Bill 
 

Amend section 94.1 of the Act, as being enacted by 
Clause 17 of the printed Bill by repealing subsections (1) 
and (2) and substituting the following: 
 

“(1) No person shall, without lawful excuse, 
repeatedly drive a motor vehicle through an area that is 
frequented by: 
 

(a) prostitutes; or 
 
(b) children who have been subjected to sexual 
abuse within the meaning of section 3 of The 
Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual 
Abuse and Exploitation Act. 

 
“(2) No person shall, without lawful excuse, 
repeatedly park a motor vehicle in an area that is 
frequented by: 
 

(a) prostitutes; or 
 
(b) children who have been subjected to sexual 
abuse within the meaning of section 3 of The 
Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual 
Abuse and Exploitation Act”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 18 and 19 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask him to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — One small correction — official. I have 
beside me Mr. Mark Guillet. He is the general counsel and 
corporate secretary for SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s my pleasure to 
question the minister on Bill No. 4, the Saskatchewan energy 
amendment Act, 2002. And I’d like to take this opportunity to 
welcome the minister’s official and I’m sure that he’ll be a great 
help for all of us to get through this material this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that the Bill contemplates private 
contractors installing and maintaining gas piping within oil and 
gas fields. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Just one correction to the member. It’s 
actually for producers, not for contractors. And it’s only to 



2554 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

transport to their own . . . back to their own lines. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. Will there be licensing 
requirements for these producers in order for them to do this job 
safely? Or will they need to be supervised by SaskEnergy 
personnel while this piping is being installed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They’ll be subject to the gas inspections 
branch and after-hour meter if you will. SaskEnergy is no 
longer responsible. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Regarding tie-ins to SaskEnergy lines from 
these producer lines, will SaskEnergy employees be responsible 
for those tie-ins or will that be able to be done under 
supervision by the producers or their contractors? 
 
(18:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The amendments to this Act don’t 
contemplate any . . . the issue of tie-ins at all. It only deals with 
the movement of gas within their own, within their own 
distribution system, I think it’d be probably the best way of 
describing it. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — So I take it then, Mr. Minister, that the tie-ins 
from the producer’s distribution system to the SaskEnergy line 
will still be the responsibility of SaskEnergy employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Nothing will change in that scenario. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — The fee structure for these tie-ins, Mr. 
Minister, do you contemplate that remaining exactly as is, or 
will there be changes because of maybe some possible 
inconsistencies in producer lines and so on? Do you anticipate 
added cost to the industry for these tie-ins? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, there’s no change at all as a 
result of the amendments to this legislation. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you. I think that’s all I have and 
I’ll defer to the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have some 
questions for the minister and the official — and welcome to 
that official — regarding section 5 and the change there . . . the 
material change with respect to when SaskEnergy needs to seek 
the approval of cabinet for expenditures. 
 
The minister will know that current legislation requires that if 
there’s a . . . 
 

Where the purchase price or sale price of real property 
included in one transaction entered into (by the company) 
by the corporation or any of its subsidiaries exceeds 
$200,000 . . . 
 

They need to go to cabinet for approval of that. And this Bill 
changes that. I wonder if the minister could quickly outline the 
rationale for that change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This amendment is simply to make it 
consistent with The Crown Corporations Act. Let me just 
briefly describe: the governing legislation over at SaskEnergy is 

The Crown Corporations Act and since SaskEnergy’s Act was 
in place prior to The Crown Corporations Act being enacted — 
SaskEnergy’s Act was in place in 1992, The Crown 
Corporations Act came into effect actually January 1, 1994 — 
this is simply to bring it into line with The Crown Corporations 
Act. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Why does the corporation, notwithstanding the 
fact that everyone else is doing it, why does SaskEnergy feel 
the need to have this provision in the Act to amend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me try this: first of all, the Act is 
about . . . well not about, it’s exactly 10 years old. And the 
piece that is of particular interest to SaskEnergy here is for any 
acquisition or sale of property, the limit was . . . used to be 
$200,000. This would essentially allow through order in council 
that limit to be raised. And as has been described to me by my 
official, the $200,000 sale of a piece of pipeline, as an example, 
would . . . is almost . . . is insignificant. 
 
So not to minimize the value of $200,000 but in this world it’s 
not very much. So it’s simply to raise the limit and bring it in 
line with The Crown Corporations Act. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that, 
thank the members opposite for the questions they’ve asked 
around this Act. And I certainly thank our official for his 
assistance in helping me answer the questions that we did. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask him to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d ask 
members to welcome Darcy McGovern to my right with whom 
everyone is familiar. Heather Sinclair, Lorne Tangjerd, and Hal 
Cushon behind me from Ag and Food. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to 
welcome the minister and his officials here this evening. 
 
And I want to make the comment that, for the most part, we’re 
very pleased on this side of the House to see this Bill come 
forward. It’s something that we’ve had as a private member’s 
motion, and the original intent and objective of the legislation 
was supposed to be to reduce the exodus of farmers, reduce the 
decline of rural communities, keep land prices low, and provide 
incentive for the young people to farm. 
 
But the evidence is that the very opposite has occurred, and in 
fact the exodus of the farmers in Saskatchewan has exceeded 
the exodus of farmers in Alberta and Manitoba. So obviously 
the Bill didn’t work as it is. 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2555 

 

The questions — I have just a few questions actually — have to 
do with the recommendations that came forward from the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture. The recommendation no. 2 
was that we change the Act so that: 
 

Canadian corporations (would) be permitted to own 
Saskatchewan farm land for agriculture and agrivalue 
purposes. (Using) “Canadian corporation” is to be defined 
as a corporation which is not a “foreign controlled 
corporation . . .” 
 

And then there is an explanation as to what that means. 
 
Now according to the Act, we’re only going to change it to 
allow agriculture . . . or sorry, Canadian-owned entities, 
corporations and other similar entities that are 100 per cent 
Canadian owned but are not publicly traded. So I’d like to ask 
the minister because a number of the presenters made the point 
that they would like to see the legislation change so that we’re 
in line with our neighbouring provinces. 
 
When you look at Manitoba and Alberta and there’s no 
restriction on Canadian corporations, they said it’s important to 
attract investment dollars, and I feel that we fell a little short of 
the mark here. We’re still looking more restrictive than our 
neighbouring provinces and yet a change was made. 
 
So I would like the minister to explain to me why they didn’t go 
that one little step farther, why they stopped short. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
member’s question, first of all let me thank her for her general 
support of what is taking place here. As her comments indicate, 
it’s a matter of some kind of delicacy and some kind of balance 
and to respond to the need to open up the opportunity to bring 
investors into the province but nonetheless to be careful about 
not opening things up so far as to be . . . as to not be in harmony 
with the views of, in particular, rural residents but the people 
across the province as a whole. 
 
The specific provision she raises, in response to that, I can say 
that essentially we’re in step with Manitoba’s response here. 
She’s right that this is not as open or expansive a change as 
Alberta. 
 
But I would point out that when you get to corporations listed 
on the stock exchange and the ownership of those shares, of 
course they’re bought and sold in the marketplace and it’s not 
always . . . in fact it’s quite difficult to track who owns shares of 
those corporations on a very concrete basis. You would then 
end up with corporations starting off by being Canadian owned, 
owned by Canadians, but who knows where those shares might 
. . . to whom those shares might be sold. 
 
And it would be very difficult to ensure that the owners then of 
farm land here in the province would actually be Canadian 
corporations or corporations owned by Canadians in any real 
sense. 
 
(19:00) 
 
So that difficulty in tracking shareholdings and of maintaining 
the definition of . . . or maintaining the Canadian control of that 

corporation led us to go as far as the Manitoba situation but not 
as far as the Alberta. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for his answer but I 
hope he’s not serious. Because if he would find that so difficult 
to track, the changing of the corporations, he could perhaps ask 
British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Nova Scotia, 
New Brunswick, or Newfoundland how they do it because 
they’re all wide open to Canadian corporations and therefore 
somehow they have a mechanism for being able to track that. 
 
However the other question that I wanted to ask was in the area 
. . . the recommendation that the committee gave is there was a 
clause or an add put on that: 
 

Canadian corporations be permitted to own Saskatchewan 
farm land for agricultural or agrivalue purposes. 
 

And that was done for a particular reason, and the reason was a 
lot of the presenters have concerns about conservation groups 
owning large tracts of land. We all realize that having some 
land for conservation is extremely important in our province, 
but in particular we got a number of complaints and there’s a 
number of concerns over Ducks Unlimited. 
 
And Ducks Unlimited is the number one foreign-owned 
landowner in the province, and in my particular constituency, 
they own approximately 26,000 acres of land. In the Saltcoats 
constituency, I believe they own around 16,000 acres of land. 
And what we’re finding in the community near there is that 
they’re not . . . these large tracts of land being taken out of 
production is not helping the young farmers to start farming. 
It’s not revitalizing the area. It’s not contributing to the 
community in any way. It’s not repopulating the province at all 
and it’s not helping the economy in the area. So there’s 
definitely concerns about Ducks Unlimited which presently 
own large tracts of land. 
 
The other concern that came forward to us about Ducks 
Unlimited is their most recent document that they prepared and 
published in October 17, 2001 states quite clearly that they wish 
to buy approximately 2.8 million acres in Saskatchewan. And 
furthermore, in the document, it goes on a number of times and 
it says that they want to take this land out of production for 
perpetuity, not to be used for any agriculture purposes 
whatsoever. 
 
Now the Farm Land Security Board has already been noted . . . 
or lobbied with concerns on this issue. We put a moratorium on 
Ducks Unlimited even being able to apply to purchase any more 
farm land. And as near as I know, that moratorium is still in 
place. 
 
So that was the purpose of the committee recommending that it 
be used for agriculture or agri-value purposes. Will the minister 
please let us know what his position is. Is there a concern and 
will he still keep this in mind that perhaps this is an issue that 
we should look at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises a question that is 
important I think to all in the province. The definition that we 
have in the legislation would not include Ducks Unlimited in 
the sense of them being able to come and own land. It won’t be 



2556 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

primarily engaged in the business of farming, as the member 
points out. And it may not be that the majority of issued shares 
are owned by producers. That would be most likely the case 
too. 
 
So Ducks Unlimited would not be in the category of being able 
to buy unlimited amounts of land. It would be then in the 
category of a corporation that . . . or of an entity that . . . well 
would be able to buy 10 acres, I suppose, as a result of being 
foreign owned. But essentially would be . . . would have to 
apply to the Farm Land Security Board for an exemption in 
order to buy more land and in that process . . . more land than it 
has at the present time. And in that process the board of course 
would pay attention to those in the vicinity who would have 
views about the setting aside of land for the purposes of Ducks 
Unlimited does, taking it out of that farm or agricultural 
purpose. 
 
And essentially what happens in Manitoba, where Ducks 
Unlimited has been continuing to apply to the board and 
obtaining exemptions from time to time. I agree with the 
member, I think we all agree, that this is a matter which 
requires some care and to ensure that local interests are . . . that 
we pay considerable interest to local interests when these kinds 
of applications come forward. 
 
I presume it will not always be contrary to the best interests of 
the neighbourhood or the province to have Ducks Unlimited 
buy more land. But in other instances it plainly will. 
 
So the matter will then be resolved by the Farm Land Security 
Board, and the member could look at Manitoba to see how that 
has worked. We would anticipate that working effectively here 
too, but it’s plainly something that would require some careful 
attention over time. And if it didn’t, if the ownership of land by 
Ducks Unlimited appeared to be more than we would want, 
then we would have to take some other steps. 
 
So this will be left to the Farm Land Security Board to resolve. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and just to repeat what I 
understand is they would still be limited to 10 acres of land 
unless they applied to the Farm Land Security Board. 
 
The other issue though, the Farm Land Security Board 
themselves asked or made note to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture that they would like some direction on how to deal 
with these applications. I’m not too sure who instated the 
moratorium that’s on at the moment, but they said they needed 
some guidelines; they needed better direction as to, you know, 
what they should be doing and how they should deal with 
applications from Ducks Unlimited, for example. But there was 
other incidences where they would have liked to have better 
direction, better guidelines, better regulations. 
 
Will the minister look into that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks how it’s anticipated 
to respond to the concern of the Farm Land Security Board for 
at least some direction or some clearer understanding of what it 
is envisaged they do and what it is envisaged they pay attention 
to. 
 

The Act setting out the definitions of who can have access to 
land makes it pretty clear that the priority here is to have farm 
owners who are engaged in agricultural activities, and to that 
extent there is some direction in the Bill. 
 
In terms of how you would respond or how anyone would ask 
or expect the Farm Land Security Board to respond to a specific 
application from, say, Ducks Unlimited, I think it’s clear that as 
an arm’s-length, quasi-judicial board you wouldn’t anticipate 
the government telling or setting out criteria to the Farm Land 
Security Board. You’d also want to ensure that on a case by 
case basis there is some flexibility here and you’d also want to 
make sure that those in the vicinity who would be most affected 
— and that vicinity might be quite large, might even be as 
broad as the province, I suppose — but those in the vicinity 
have an opportunity to have their views considered. 
 
In addition to that, should the Farm Land Security Board want 
any questions answered in terms of the general response of the 
government, Agriculture, Saskatchewan Environment, possibly 
other departments, would be . . . will be . . . would be and will 
be available to respond in that regard. So if Farm Land Security 
Board wants it, wants to pursue a particular point, there will be 
government departments and officials in those departments 
prepared to respond. 
 
I think the member can see that it’s . . . that if we have a board 
then we have to let that board do its work. But we also need to 
ensure that that board has an understanding of the priorities of 
the province — not just the government, but the priorities of the 
province as a whole. 
 
So it’s our expectation that that kind of process as well as the 
clear statement here that unlimited ownership of land is 
designed to be by those who will engage in agricultural 
activities, and then for other activities for there to be a review 
by the board . . . But that is the way in which we’ll try to draw 
that balance and that different uses of land are plainly desirable 
in the province. 
 
But this is . . . but what we’ve said here primarily is that we’re 
interested in those who come from outside being engaged in . . . 
or engaging in agricultural, farming activities rather than 
anything else. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that. I just want, I 
guess, to . . . or really stress the importance that this has 
become, especially in my constituency. The presentation given 
by Ducks Unlimited themselves, the presenters stated that a 
significant portion of Ducks Unlimited Canada’s budget comes 
from American citizens who value our habitat — not only to 
visit it but because they value the wildlife that use this habitat 
as part of its life cycle. 
 
And I believe that is important — but we must keep it in 
perspective — that a significant portion of the funding is 
coming from the US and is taking our productive land out of 
production. And there is only a certain portion of Saskatchewan 
that is in productivity. We actually have an enormous northern 
part of our province that has all sorts of habitat, and so therefore 
we’re not going to lose it all just because we want to have some 
farm land. 
 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2557 

 

So I want to thank the minister for his summary notes. They 
were great, and we appreciated it very much. And with that, I 
have no more questions. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce any 
new officials he may have joining him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I’d ask the Assembly to 
welcome the Information Services Corporation officials, Ron 
Hewitt, Q.C. (Queen’s Counsel) as the senior vice-president. 
Behind him is Ed Desnoyers. Is that correct? Ed Desnoyers, 
who’s the controller of surveys. I should have checked these 
names before. Mary Ellen Wellsch, who’s the senior counsel for 
Information Services Corporation and behind me is Shawna 
Kelly, who is the director of corporate communications. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the minister and his officials. It’s always an interesting time 
when we get to discuss what’s happening with land surveys and 
land titles and all those sorts of things. I’m sure we’ll have an 
interesting time this evening as well. 
 
One of the things that the Saskatchewan landowners for the 
most part are always very concerned about and have a 
considerable interest in is sort of the original land title, that 
particular piece of paper. Like that always has some very 
significant attachment to them, partly probably from the early 
settlement days but it’s sort of there’s an original document that 
declares that they have some interest in a piece of property. 
 
Under the new system, where exactly are the originals going to 
be kept? Are they going to be kept? And what is their purpose 
and interaction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member quite rightly raises the 
issue of a piece of paper and the importance of a piece of paper 
to many citizens as a representation of the land they own. And 
in the process of computerizing land titles systems of this sort, 
across . . . well in every province and across the world, there is 
an importance attached to the piece of paper to people and the 
member is quite right about that. 
 
Those pieces of paper, the original Crown grant and so on are 
kept and decisions will be made along with the Provincial 
Archivist about how to make sure that they’re maintained 
appropriately. The electronic copy available on the Internet of 
that . . . of those pieces of paper is available to anyone in the 
province, anyone in the world to make copies and so on of. So 
that the title will be an electronic title, computerized and so on, 
and available then on the Internet. 

And for those who wish to have a piece of paper to represent 
the ownership of their land, they can simply print it off the 
Internet. 
 
But the representation of title to the land is now a computer 
record rather than a piece of paper record, but as I say those 
who are interested can get a paper copy of that computer record. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — In your second reading speech, the minister I 
believe said that we’re now operating I believe 6 out of 10 
districts that exist. What’s the timeline that has been set out to 
have this operation on all 7 land registration districts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member points out quite rightly 
that we don’t have all the districts on board at the present time 
but we do have 8 out of the 10. On July 29 Yorkton will be in 
operation, in electronic mode. And the last one, Swift Current, 
will be in operation on August 26. So within a couple of months 
the whole province will be working on the electronic mode 
rather than on paper. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. To the minister. In the 
explanatory notes that came along with Bill 33, part IV, 
subsection 4, there’s a statement there that land titles registry is 
going to be liable for the accuracy of the information received. 
And I’d like for the minister to explain exactly what is meant by 
reliability, to what extent, and how this is going to be set up and 
organized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The land titles system we have in the 
province, the Torrens system, is one in which the province 
guarantees the title to the person who has title to it, and doesn’t 
require that person to go back and check to see that various 
transactions have been done appropriately over time. So the 
province stands behind every land title under that Torrens 
system. 
 
What we’ve done is translate that paper system into a computer 
system. The province continues to stand behind the title and 
should any adverse consequences arise as a result of errors by 
ISC (Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), those 
would be rectified for the owner of the title. So basically the 
province says to whoever has title to a piece of property: you 
don’t have to worry, this is yours, we guarantee it’s yours. And 
if there is some challenge to that, we’ll make sure that you are 
protected and compensated. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. There is a new section, section 
33, dealing with registered owners. And there is an old section 
that was repealed and this one was put in, and I’m wondering 
why the . . . what was necessary to get rid of the old one and put 
this particular section in because I think some of the concerns 
that are out there deal with unincorporated businesses and 



2558 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

partnerships that do require the ability to register and protect 
their interests. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
the legislation now, when this is passed, will ensure that in 
order to own land you have to be one of the categories of people 
listed here: an individual, the Crown, a body corporate or some 
other entity which is designated in the regulations. 
 
What the change entails is ensuring that those who hold an 
interest other than ownership, like a builder’s lien or something, 
would not have to qualify as one of these categories. So it 
enables . . . well, it would enable a law firm for example to have 
an interest or somebody other than an individual, the Crown, a 
body corporate, or some specific entity. 
 
So it provides for that flexibility. 
 
The Chair: — Members, this Bill is relatively lengthy. Is it 
permissible to go by parts? Is that agreed? Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — And I would recognize the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We have 
behind me Darcy McGovern, who was here a minute ago; Jim 
Hall, sitting next to him, who is the superintendent of real estate 
amongst other things; and to the right Karen Pflanzner, who is a 
Crown counsel in legislative services. And I’d ask members to 
welcome them. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening to the 
minister and his officials. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, Bill No. 9 has certainly been thoroughly, I 
guess, spoken to by members of the opposition, as well as 
yourself who has introduced this Bill. And we did have an 
opportunity during second reading debate to bring forward 
some of our views on the Bill and our thoughts in accordance 
with some of the views and thoughts that were brought forward 
to us by brokers in the world of real estate. 
 
I have a few questions, Mr. Minister, that I’m going to pose, 
and I would suspect that there will be a — not suspect, I will be 
putting forward — a House amendment at one point during the 
Bill, so . . . 
 
One of the questions I have is, Mr. Minister, what precipitated 
this Bill coming forward? Why did the Bill come forward in the 
first place, because I understand that as far as the component of 
the Bill that talks about compulsory errors and omissions 

insurance that there have been a number of boards in the 
province that already have made bylaws that would ensure that 
the realtors do have insurance. And so I’m wondering why the 
Bill came forward in view of the fact that those bylaws are 
taking place throughout the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises one specific 
question and then a general question about how this legislation 
came into being; and it’s the result of widespread discussions 
with the real estate association, the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Association and the superintendent, which . . . and a process of 
identifying issues that it was felt needed to be addressed and 
done, as I say, in consultation with the real estate association. 
 
There are a number of provisions, as the member will know, 
which essentially deals with better working of the legislation 
dealing with information sharing across provinces with 
superintendents in other provinces and having available to them 
information about things going on here and us finding out 
what’s going on in other places as people move across the 
country — sharing of information in general — and just more 
housekeeping measures to ensure that the legislation works 
smoothly. 
 
In regards to the matter the member raised, the enabling 
provision regarding mandatory errors and omissions insurance, 
the member will know that the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Association and the Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission 
recommends that such a program be implemented. The 
provision is an enabling one which permits the legislature to 
institute a regulation which would enable this to take place. We 
would only respond in that way if the real estate board — 
basically real estate agents across the province — wanted it. It’s 
something which is desired by the larger associations, but it is 
not something that we will do unless it receives the support of 
the real estate agents in particular. 
 
So we have here an opportunity, should it be regarded as 
desirable, to provide for mandatory errors and omissions 
insurance. Nothing will happen, as I say, as a result of this 
provision until the next step is taken which would be a 
regulation which would only be done after significant 
consultation with the real estate community. And I think the 
member knows that in those consultative processes we are 
careful to ensure that we are doing something which facilitates 
the activities — in this case the real estate agents — not hinders 
them. And we are not interested in doing things which are not 
what they regard as good industry practice. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
think there’s any dispute anywhere about the support for all 
registrants in the province carrying compulsory errors and 
omissions insurance. But as I mentioned in my second reading 
debate to you, and as it has been asked of me to put forward to 
you, there is a differentiation between mandatory and 
compulsory. 
 
Now it’s my understanding from the Saskatoon Real Estate 
Board as well as boards . . . some I believe in North Battleford 
as well as Prince Albert, that they are in sync with the 
Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission and the Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Association as strong supporters of all registrants in 
the province carrying compulsory errors and omissions 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2559 

 

insurance. And their position has been verified by the actions 
within their board of directors. 
 
And their board . . . for instance in Saskatoon they recently 
approved a bylaw change which states the following, that would 
back up their firm belief that compulsory errors and omissions 
insurance needs to be in place. And their bylaw change that 
they made reads: 
 

As a prerequisite to admission and continued membership 
in the board, the applicant shall have in place professional 
liabilities, errors and omissions insurance, in an amount not 
less than $200,000. And the applicant shall provide 
satisfactory proof thereof to the board upon request of the 
board. 

 
Now it seems to me that there is a conscientiousness of the 
necessity for this. And I can understand why. I mean I had an 
experience myself not very long ago in Saskatoon where there 
was some fraudulent activity that took place in a condominium. 
And in fact there was no coverage anywhere to protect the 
people that had bought into that condominium and it would 
have been very helpful. 
 
So I agree with this personally but I also can see very clearly 
that the realtors of this province want to do what’s right and 
want to ensure that they have adequate insurance in place to 
cover instances such as the one that I have experienced. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the strong opposition from the Saskatoon 
Real Estate Board comes with the sort of mandatory errors and 
omissions insurance because it dictates to the registrant with 
which insurer the registrant must be insured. Now the 
Saskatoon Real Estate Board believes the quality and value of 
insurance is best served by an open marketplace. Registrants 
should have the choice of insurance providers. 
 
When and through this legislation, if it goes through as is, it’s 
going to mandate that a specified insurer will be in place, and 
that tells the realtors of the province that a single insurer model 
is going to be in place that they’re going to have to swallow and 
take. 
 
And they say that they have seen this before. The last time they 
saw a single insurer model and had to abide by it, that model 
provided 80 per cent less coverage at a 30 per cent higher cost 
to the registrant. Now that is not, according to them and 
according to the opposition, in the best interests of the 
consumer or the real estate industry. 
 
And so the Saskatoon Real Estate Board strongly is 
recommending that the suggested amendment to The Real 
Estate Act, section 83(1)(q.1)(ii) be repealed. 
 
And in accordance with their wishes, even though there has 
been a great deal of debate and letter writing back and forth 
between your office, Mr. Minister, my office, and the realtors of 
the province, I guess on your part there was an attempt to 
explain that this was just enabling legislation. 
 
However the response that you got back from Mr. Harry 
Janzen, the executive officer of the Saskatoon Real Estate 
Board . . . And I would dare to read his response to you. He 

says thank you for your letter of April 10 in response to the 
letter that they wrote to you on March 26 expressing their 
concerns with respect to that specific clause that I’ve just 
mentioned. Anyway, Mr. Janzen states that he wishes to 
confirm that there is no misunderstanding with regards to this 
amendment, and they are requesting the wording of 83(1)(q)(ii) 
be replaced with the following, and you have that letter from 
him. 
 
And so I would ask you, Mr. Minister, in respect to the 
correspondence that you’ve had and the wishes of the executive 
director of the Saskatoon Real Estate Board, as well as the 
wishes of many people that signed letters of petition that I 
tabled in this legislature and passed on to you, why you have 
not complied with their wishes to make sure that we have an 
open market system and withdraw that one clause and replace it 
with wording that is more friendly and allows choice for the 
realtors of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The real estate industry across the 
province and its provincial . . . province-wide organizations 
support the provision as it stands, as the member will know. I’ll 
just read, if I may, just an excerpt from a letter from the 
executive vice-president of the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Association where he says: 
 

We recognize the enabling nature of this legislation (and I 
know the member understands that too) and feel it will 
allow a full discussion of all options should any 
recommendations come forward in the future, and we do 
understand that full consultations with the industry will be 
held prior to the implementation of any recommendations. 

 
And the support from across . . . from all other organizations is 
significant. Here what we are, I think, doing is responding to 
the majority of real estate agents in the province. And we are 
following other provinces — British Columbia, Alberta, 
Ontario, and Manitoba. 
 
And there are some specific reasons why this approach is most 
desirable and why it would be supported by the Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Association and so on. And that is there have been 
three major insurance companies who have decided to cease 
writing errors and omissions insurance for real estate . . . the 
real estate industry so we need to ensure there is a guaranteed 
availability of insurance to protect consumers. We also need to 
ensure that lapses in coverage are addressed, and they would be 
under a mandatory program so you would not end up with 
having some real estate agents covered and others not. 
 
It’s most efficient and likely . . . and cheaper if there is a 
uniform or universal program. And it also makes it portable. If 
people move from one insurance . . . from one real estate 
company to another, there’ll be consistency in handling claims 
for consumers across the province. And it’s our view and the 
view of the Real Estate Association that in fact this will be a 
more efficient, cheaper process than if it were left to real estate 
agents to go seek an insurance company to cover them on their 
own. 
 
But I do want to remind the member that no decisions about this 
have been made. The industry has said to us — and we have 
listened — that we leave options open and that there would be 



2560 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

considerable consultation with the real estate association, with 
the real estate industry, before any steps were taken to provide 
this errors and omission mandatory coverage. 
 
So I think in summary while there have been concerns raised by 
the Saskatoon Real Estate Board, the Saskatchewan . . . the 
province-wide organization is fully supportive of this provision 
and that is the reason for us going ahead with the provision as 
is. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m sorry but 
I can’t accept that the majority of realtors in the province accept 
this one specific clause, clause 83, because we have been in 
correspondence with them for some time and have at no time 
heard them say that they feel that this should be left as is. It is 
specifically clause 83(1)(q.1)(ii) that they would like to see 
removed. 
 
And they believe that the wording . . . if there was different 
wording that in fact they have asked for and that’s what I’m 
placing in the House amendment it’s their belief that that 
wording would still accomplish the intended results of section 
83 and will enhance the protection level to the consumer and 
certainly would alleviate the major concerns that their board of 
directors, brokers, and membership have with the current 
wording. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Putting it very simply, Mr. Minister, the concern is that they are 
going to have an insurance carrier mandated. They must buy 
insurance from a specific carrier and that does not provide them 
with choice. 
 
It is my belief and I understand certainly the belief of all 
brokers in the province, that they have the intelligence and the 
ability and certainly the free-market field out there to be able to 
choose from and they would like to do so. 
 
I heard what you said today, Mr. Minister, and I know as I’ve 
mentioned that you’ve had quite a bit of correspondence 
yourself with boards throughout the province and I just am 
going to let you know that I intend to put forward this House 
amendment on behalf of the many brokers that have spoken to 
me about their opposition to that specific clause. 
 
And once again, I mention on their behalf that they have no 
opposition to the body of the Bill overall. It’s just that one 
clause that they feel is very restrictive for them and that 
basically tells them what to do as far as having to buy their 
insurance from a specified carrier and frankly, they have 
opposition to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I would just say to the member 
that the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association and the 
Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission, their joint task force 
recommended mandatory errors and omissions insurance be 
implemented for all real estate agents in the province. And the 
member will have also received a letter from the Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Association, as did all the MLAs, in which the 
association indicates that the board, and I quote here: 
 

The board of directors are convinced the majority of the 

membership are in favour of the amendments as proposed 
and that the amendments are in the best interests of the 
industry and the public. 

 
So the member may say that there are, I mean as I am sure there 
are, a number of real estate agents who don’t support this 
process but the industry association has indicated to us and to 
her also, that the majority of the membership are in favour and 
that it is in the best interest of the industry and consumers and 
that is why we will continue to support the provision as is. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, your 
reference to the letter from the executive vice-president of the 
Saskatchewan Real Estate Association is a letter that I have 
with me and on my desk here. And I see clearly that they want 
to see that this kind of legislation comes forward. 
 
There is no opposition to errors and omissions insurance, but 
there is opposition to mandatory insurance, meaning that it’s 
going to be mandated which will be in fact a way of dictating to 
the registrant with which insurer the registrant must be insured. 
And that is the point of opposition. So I hope we’re not 
debating here for nothing. I mean this is not something that is 
terribly confusing. The body of the legislation that asks for the 
implementation of errors and omissions insurance and that it be 
compulsory is . . . everyone is in favour of that. 
 
But there is disapproval and disfavour of the provision in this 
legislation that would require and dictate that the registrant buy 
from a specified insurer. And that’s something that I don’t . . . 
I’m not too sure that has been discussed thoroughly with the 
executive vice-president. 
 
Now I hear you saying that your government is not going to be 
pressing anything without discussion about regulations, and I 
think that’s fair. But I think it would be more assuring to the 
realtors of the province if this one clause was removed and we 
substituted that clause with wording that I have in the 
amendment, that: 
 

the documentation that a registrant must provide with 
respect to evidence of Errors and Omissions Insurance from 
an insurance provider registered in Saskatchewan 
 

. . . would certainly take care of the same thing. So I ask the . . . 
minister, rather, to consider that when the time comes for this 
clause to be moved forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Just in response, I would merely say 
that other provinces faced some of the similar criticism the 
member presents, I think largely from two perspectives I would 
imagine. One, some concern about the cost of the insurance, 
and all of the evidence suggests that the cost of the mandatory 
insurance would be cheaper than if it were left to the devices of 
individual agents to find insurance. And I did mention to the 
member that it is becoming increasingly difficult to find 
insurance companies to provide the errors and omissions 
insurance. 
 
And, in addition, there might be some philosophical objection 
to a mandatory program. That same opposition existed in other 
provinces but, as the member might know, essentially withered 
away once it was clear that the single, the mandatory program 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2561 

 

was much more efficient and cheaper for the agents, and for a 
whole range of reasons was also more expansive and more 
reliable for both the agents and consumers. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. I just 
make one comment to you in respect to your remarks, and that’s 
that I believe that any time there is an ability for any purchasers 
of anything to be able to work in the open market, in a 
competitive market, that there is a much better chance that the 
cost will be and can be lower. And I believe that the realtors of 
the province recognize that also. 
 
Now in respect to the fact that there may not be a lot of carriers 
that are providing this insurance, I guess I would have to take 
your word for that. I’m not really absolutely sure. But I think 
again it would be really healthy and respectful if the 
government of the day would allow the real estate boards of this 
province to make that determination and to find that out for 
themselves. And in doing that and giving them that kind of 
respect and that opportunity to research that kind of thing, I 
think it would be open to them to choose those carriers if they 
should find them. But if we leave in clause 83, they won’t even 
have the opportunity to do that. So again I make my case for the 
need for the amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well just in final response, I think the 
member might want to move her amendment, but this just is a 
provision to enable the province to move forward with 
mandatory errors and omissions insurance. 
 
And I can assure the member that every effort will be made to 
have a full consultation process with all affected parties 
including the Saskatoon Real Estate Board. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, at this time I 
would like to put forward a House amendment to: 
 

Clause 5 of the printed Bill 
 

Amend Clause 83(1)(q.1) of The Real Estate Act as 
being enacted by Clause 5 of the printed Bill by 
repealing subclause (ii) and substituting the following: 

 
“(ii) the documentation that a registrant must provide 
with respect to evidence of Errors and Omissions 
Insurance from an insurance provider registered in 
Saskatchewan.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Act 

 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask him to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to say that I’ve 
assembled a group of fine officials. In addition to Darcy 
McGovern, to my right Tim Epp, who is Crown counsel for 
legislative services; and behind him Dave Wild who is Chair of 
the Securities Commission and a range of other things as well. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again 
welcome to the minister and his mostly new officials that have 
been well assembled. 
 
Bill No. 59 is basically a consolidation of different departments 
and sections and I’d like for the minister to list the departments 
that are going to be consolidated, or organizations, and also 
what the timeline is to complete the whole process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asked what organizations 
will be brought together under the new Saskatchewan Financial 
Services Commission. They will be as follows: the 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission, the financial institutions 
section of the consumer protection branch of the Department of 
Justice, and the pension benefits branch will be brought 
together in one organization. 
 
More specifically the legislation that will be brought together 
will be part XIX of The Co-operatives Act, The Credit Union 
Act of ’85 and ’98, The Mortgage Brokers Act, The Pension 
Benefits Act, The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, The Securities 
Act, The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, and there may be 
some others. 
 
And in terms of regulators the . . . will be brought together 
under this one organization: the Co-operative Securities Board, 
the Registrar of Credit Unions, the Superintendent of Insurance, 
the Superintendent of Pensions, the Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission, the Saskatchewan Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions. 
 
Really what’s involved here, as I think the member appreciates, 
is with the lack . . . or less differentiation of financial 
instruments, the ability of . . . or the marketplace becoming one 
in which more . . . in which institutions sell financial products 
which previously they had not sold, that it’s important to 
provide one mechanism where these can be regulated 
effectively and also to assist consumers in their decision making 
when they invest their hard-earned savings. 
 
So it is an effort to streamline the process and to make it more 
effective and to bring it in harmony with the marketplace. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you to the minister. This gathering 
together of groups that you’re consolidating, is there also going 
to be sort of a physical change? Are they going to be in the 
same facilities physically because of the interaction that you say 



2562 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

they will be needing and taking place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — That certainly is the intention, Mr. 
Chair, to bring all of the operations under one roof. And in 
hopefully short order that will be achieved. 
 
The Chair: — Hon. members, this Bill is a rather lengthy Bill. 
Is leave granted to deal with it by part? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 34 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Consequential Amendment Act, 2002/ 

Loi de 2002 apportant des modifications corrélatives 
à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Bill No. 60, as was just stated, is 
a consequential amendment Act. And I’m wondering for what 
specific reason this wasn’t included as part of Bill No. 59 that 
we just dealt with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The reason for that, Mr. Chair, is that 
The Co-operatives Act is a bilingual Act and therefore a 
consequential amendment is made to that by this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Darcy McGovern remains here, Mr. 
Chair, and it’s kind of hard to gather up one person but we’ve 
managed to do it. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is an 
interesting Bill in that I think we have the opportunity here to 
probably spend an hour or three discussing the underlying 
philosophy on that side of the government that has brought 
about Bill No. 63. 
 
As we’re well aware, Bill No. 63 was brought about as my 
colleague just used the term quite well, the impropriety of the 
former cabinet minister from the NDP side who then decided to 
get involved and put a couple of feet in the trough and get some 
money out of government that he shouldn’t have had at that 
point. 
 
And it’s unfortunate that it’s, you know, come to this, that the 

NDP government over the last 10 years has become so old and 
tired that they haven’t taken care of these sorts of things and 
made sure that they’ve basically been upstanding in the image 
that they presented to this province and to the rest of Canada. 
 
And as I said this was brought about specifically by the Upshall 
incident. And I think this government realizes very much that 
it’s an old and tired government and that they needed to put this 
in place, or else a lot of the other cabinet ministers that have left 
and are now smiling because they’re contemplating the joy of 
leaving the NDP fold will be out there looking for opportunities 
to make money on their inside knowledge. 
 
And I think we had a good example of what’s happened with 
Broe industries and how suddenly they became so cozy and got 
linked up with this NDP government. And if we check what the 
link in there is, it happens to be another NDP past member. And 
so this has been happening on a very regular basis and 
happening on an accelerating basis. 
 
And I think it’s for that particular reason that the NDP 
government realized that if they don’t go ahead and close some 
of these opportunities, whatever part of their image isn’t 
tarnished would be totally destroyed in another month or two. 
 
And so that, as I said, Mr. Chairman, is the background behind 
Bill No. 63. We discussed that in detail, I believe, over the span 
of an hour or three the last time this came up, and so I’m going 
to save the government the privilege of hearing the same, the 
same statements two or three times. But I think that’s the key 
thing. 
 
I would like to thank the minister though for involving me at an 
early stage of this particular Bill going through. The length of 
time that would be needed in order to say well, enough time is 
passed that we think that inside information would not be of any 
particular value at this particular point. 
 
I do have one question though that we didn’t discuss when we, 
when we met to look at the background and the details of Bill 
63, and that is there’s an opportunity given for cabinet ministers 
to apply for the Conflict of Interest Commissioner for an 
exemption from the provisions of this particular Act. And that’s 
the one thing I think that we haven’t discussed in this particular 
Bill. 
 
And I would like for the minister to see if he has any examples 
where it would be possible where the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner might say in these situations, we should grant an 
exception? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises a question about a 
new, a new provision in the Bill, which I think serves both the 
public interest and the interests of former cabinet ministers 
well, in the sense that it enables a former cabinet minister to ask 
the commissioner to clarify that he or she will not be . . . will 
not run afoul of the conflict of interest guidelines and to get an 
opinion from the commissioner to that effect. 
 
It’s an approach used in Alberta and Newfoundland and 
Labrador, and I think it does strike an appropriate balance 
between ensuring that the member’s conduct is fair and 
transparent and ensuring that those who enter public life have 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2563 

 

. . . are not unduly hindered once they return to private life. 
 
And you know the, as the member will know, the core issue 
here is whether or not a former cabinet minister is a guiding 
mind of an organization which is seeking to do business with 
the government or who for somebody who is actually seeking to 
benefit themselves from a potential contract with the . . . with 
the government. And there is a need sometimes to clarify these 
positions. 
 
For example, the member asks what about an example. What 
about a teacher working for a school board? Plainly the school 
board will receive funds from the province and the member 
could . . . the former cabinet minister who became a teacher 
could be . . . could envisage being caught by that provision. So 
what this will do is enable, say, a former cabinet minister who 
becomes a teacher to ask the commissioner to indicate that he or 
she is not in a conflict of interest situation simply because 
they’re a teacher working for a school board which receives 
funds from the government. 
 
And that opinion by the commissioner will be made available to 
the legislature so it will be . . . the results will be fully 
transparent. So I think what it does is enable situations in which 
we may not in a theoretical sense be . . . say this definitely is or 
is not, is in or is not out of . . . No, let me put it another way. 
 
In those instances where you can’t easily assess whether 
conflict of interest guidelines are being infringed, it provides 
the opportunity for a former cabinet minister to ask the 
commissioner, the commissioner will make a decision, and the 
commissioner will provide that decision to the legislature. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(20:15) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Regional Health Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that the amendments be now read 
the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Health Statutes Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur la santé 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Health Quality Council Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Saskatchewan Health Research 
Foundation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of . . . I should say, Mr. 
Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 57 be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I move the amendments be now read a 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move that Bill No. 40 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 



2564 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Consequential Amendment Act, 2002/ 

Loi de 2002 apportant des modifications corrélatives 
à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I go into Committee of Finance, why 
is the member from Saskatoon Northwest on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly 
is a pleasure for me to introduce some teachers who are visiting 
here from other places in Canada. They are attending 
Knowledge of the Environment for Youth. And I would like 
members to welcome Marvin Waldner from Manitoba, Kathy 
Booth from Manitoba, Rollie Lynds from Nova Scotia, Ida 
Oldford from Nova Scotia, Kathy Muise from Nova Scotia, 
Anne-Laure Zeitouni from Quebec, and Denise Lombard from 
Nova Scotia. 
 
And it certainly is a pleasure as the Minister of Learning to 
have teachers here in the off-season but still working, and I’d 
ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them here this 
evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I really welcome the teachers here from 
across Canada. I’m sure you’re going to enjoy the legislature 
and it’s nice to see that you’re working even when you’re not 
working, just like we are. 
 
So welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Health to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much. I’m pleased to 
have with me this evening, to my left, Glenda Yeates, deputy 
minister. And to her left, Duncan Fisher, assistant deputy 
minister. And behind Glenda is Lauren Donnelly who is the 
executive director of acute and emergency services. And behind 
me is Bert Linklater, executive director of district management 
services. And to my right is Mick Grainger, assistant deputy 
minister. And in the back we have extra help — John Paul 
Cullen who’s the assistant to the deputy minister; Brenda 
Russell who’s a financial analyst, finance and management 
services branch; Bob Firnesz who’s associate executive director 
of medical services; and Barb Shea who’s the executive director 
of the drug plan and extended benefits. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
welcome, Minister, and to all your officials this evening for 
what quite likely will be the last opportunity for us to discuss 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2565 

 

health estimates in this session. 
 
Mr. Minister, because this is a windup, there are a number of 
topics that I want to touch on and there are certainly a few more 
members that have some issues that they would like to raise this 
evening as well. So we will keep the preamble pretty short. 
 
Minister, I don’t know if you had the opportunity but on June 
24 on a CBC National presentation there was a program called, 
I believe, Doctors in Waiting. 
 
And this program went on to trace the reality in Ontario at least, 
and it was done on the basis of Ontario, so I can’t automatically 
extrapolate that information. But really what the program dealt 
with was unlicensed doctors who were unable to get certified to 
practise medicine in Ontario and, by extension, in Canada. And 
the program alleged that there were some 4,000 doctors in that 
status in Ontario. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Now I know Ontario is much larger than Saskatchewan is and 
I’m wondering if the department has any statistics on doctors 
who would be caught in this dilemma. It highlighted the case of 
one doctor individual who had actually been trained, I believe, 
in Pakistan, had 10 years of experience in the medical 
profession, had been fully accredited as a doctor in Pakistan, 
and when he came to Canada was unable to meet the 
requirements at that time and was managing an apartment 
block, actually — totally out of his field, totally unuseful to the 
medical system in Ontario. 
 
And I’m wondering if there is a similar situation, although I 
would recognize immediately that the numbers would be quite 
different because of our relative sizes. But do we have that 
situation in Saskatchewan as well where we have medical 
professionals who are caught in the licensing limbo, if you like, 
awaiting licence accreditation in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we don’t know the 
exact numbers of people in Saskatchewan but we know there 
are some people. One of the new initiatives that we brought 
forward this year is called the international medical graduate 
assessment pilot project and so Saskatchewan is piloting a new 
project to evaluate foreign trained family physicians not 
currently eligible to be licensed in Saskatchewan. 
 
This project was developed by the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons of Saskatchewan in co-operation with the College of 
Medicine at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan), the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan Health is providing about 
$85,000 for this project. 
 
The candidates who go into this program and are assessed and 
then get their licence have to agree to a return of service 
commitment in an area of need in Saskatchewan. So basically, 
it’s something that we’ve identified that there are some people 
that are in the kind of limbo that you talk about and that we then 
have developed this program, which is basically now just 
getting implemented. I think there are two positions for this 
year. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I recognize that this is a new 
program and a new initiative so it’ll take a little time to sort of 
get fully operational. But is it anticipated that individuals who 
apply to this program are going to be in a sort of an all or 
nothing immediate situation, or might there be a situation where 
on the assessment of their credentials and qualifications that it 
is determined that they may need a further module of training or 
something of that nature at the College of Medicine or 
something of that nature? 
 
And if that’s the case, is there a way that they can be used in the 
health care system at maybe a different designation than full 
accreditation as a doctor or a nurse so that they’re not lost to the 
system and end up, as this program depicted, where they are 
managing an apartment block rather than being of use to the 
medical system and are sort of put together with someone from 
entering or whatever, so that they can actually be used in the 
medical system while they’re awaiting full opportunity to 
complete their accreditation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the programs, like this one I just 
mentioned for the international medical graduates, are designed 
in a way that people actually work so that their skills can be 
assessed as they’re working. So on that basis, they are 
providing some help in the overall system and at the same time 
are being assessed by people who are obviously experts in the 
field that needs to be assessed. So that is kind of how it goes. 
 
There aren’t, I don’t think, as formal programs with some of the 
other professions, but there are some ways that some of these 
things can be done. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in my 
travels to different districts over the last couple of years I’ve run 
into a couple of occasions where health districts had recruited 
nurses from other jurisdictions. The Philippines come to mind 
in one instance. And there seemed to be a fair bit of red tape 
and delays and frustration by certainly the new immigrant 
nurses if you like, and the health district in terms of what was 
required for them to challenge literacy exams, and all the rest of 
those sorts of things so that they could be accredited to function 
within the Saskatchewan system. 
 
Can the minister outline in the nursing situation what the 
process is, and have improvements been made to streamline that 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think there are two parts to an 
answer to this question. It’s an ongoing process. The first part is 
that for example for nursing, the Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association has their processes for evaluating degrees, 
and they work obviously with organizations in other 
jurisdictions around that evaluation. 
 
But one of the things that the Government of Saskatchewan has 
initiated this year is a position within intergovernmental affairs 
that works around facilitating immigration issues for various 
professionals or . . . and other people with skills that we need in 
Saskatchewan. And that’s a new position and that’s one that 
people within Saskatchewan Health . . . they work with that 
person, and also obviously with the health districts and other 
places where people are required. 
 



2566 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you 
probably see where I’m leading in terms of trying to ascertain, 
are we making maximum use of all the potential people that we 
have in this province to be available to work in an appropriate 
way in the health care system? Because we obviously in many 
categories are very short of health care professionals. 
 
And so I appreciate the fact that some of this work is ongoing, 
and I would certainly encourage the department to work in 
whatever way of streamlining it in a responsible way. I mean, 
nobody wants us to take shortcuts that would somehow 
jeopardize the quality and standards of practice in this province. 
But I think that if we can minimize and speed up the 
bureaucratic maze that people find themselves sometimes 
caught in, that that is going to be of benefit not only for the 
health care system but for the individuals who are caught up in 
that maze. And so I’d encourage the department to continue in 
its efforts in that regard. 
 
Minister, one of the ongoing concerns that, you know, that I’ve 
expressed is my concern about the availability of health care 
professionals in the province today and going forward. Because 
in my estimation it’s one of the very critical issues that are key 
to us finding solutions in a long-term way to many of the other 
problems that we face. If it is waiting times and things of that 
nature, if we don’t have health care professionals to work 
appropriately in sufficient numbers, it’s going to be very 
difficult to deal with those other issues that I think we all 
recognize as challenges. 
 
Minister, there’s been a report released not very long ago that 
compared the statistical information about the nursing 
profession in our province and across Canada, and there were, 
you know, some concerning statistics in that report. You know 
that we have, I believe, the potential in the next 10 years of 
having virtually half of our nurses be eligible for retirement. 
 
We have approximately 9,000 nurses currently practising in the 
province, and doing the simple math, that means that potentially 
over 4,000 of them could be eligible for retirement in the next 
decade. Minister, you obviously . . . and I know you have 
looked at those statistics and I suspect are concerned about 
some of those statistical information. 
 
On the other side of this puzzle, we currently have about 260 
training seats for registered nurses in the province, and I believe 
our current success ratio in terms of retention is about 
two-thirds of those graduates stay and practise their profession 
in the province and about one-third of them leave for other 
jurisdictions in Canada or internationally. 
 
So when you do the math, I mean, even if we kept 100 per cent 
of the people graduating over the next 10 years, that potentially 
is a supply of two and a half thousand at the same time we 
potentially are going to have four and a half thousand retire. 
Minister, those are just broad numbers but I think they illustrate 
and highlight a real concern about the long-term planning for 
the replacement of our nurse professionals. 
 
I believe a year ago when we had estimates we talked about the 
fact that you’d done a study to ascertain the demand and the 
supply requirements and indicated that, I believe it was Mr. 
Elliott’s study said that we’re fine at 260. But in light of the 

statistics that I quoted from that are quite recent, I wonder if 
you’ve had an opportunity to revisit your comments about our 
current level of graduating 260 nurses is appropriate in light of 
the statistics that I have just quoted to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As the member knows, this area is a 
challenge always and the best thing I can say is that there is a 
continual monitoring of the numbers of people that are required, 
the numbers of people that have trained. We presently are 
training 260 nurses a year and we’re adding another 40 with the 
northern nursing program, so it will be up to 300 I think later 
this year. 
 
You use those and then you look at some of the demographics 
in the nursing profession and try to manage some of these 
things. I know that some of the most dire predictions have many 
people retiring at age 55 or about that category. And so we 
know that there are people who are willing and enjoy their work 
and will continue on past that time. 
 
(20:45) 
 
What we’re doing in Saskatchewan is clearly working with the 
professional organizations, with the employee organizations, 
the unions, also with the College of Nursing, and with SIAST. 
And this is also an area of great concern for all of our 
neighbours, especially in Western Canada, and so it’s actually a 
topic of discussion on a regular basis with ministers of Health 
as we get together because one of the challenges is always when 
one area ends up recruiting from another part of the country. 
 
And so this is something we’re going to continue to work at. 
We’re going to try to deal with the predictions. We’re trying to 
deal with the demands that we have now. Another challenge is, 
in trying to increase the training spaces too dramatically and too 
fast, is that we don’t have enough clinical spots and enough 
clinical training people to do all of that as well. 
 
And so it’s one where we’re working carefully with all of the 
different people to make sure that we be as prepared as we can 
for some of the demographic changes that we see. And I guess 
what I would note is that this is true not just in nursing 
professions or other medical or health-related professions, it’s 
true among lawyers and other groups as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, I know that you’ve got an 
affection for a shortage of lawyers but I suspect that the public 
would have less affinity or concern about not having enough 
lawyers in this province as compared to enough nurses. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know, in a way that you can sort of look and 
talk now like you’re going to be monitoring things. And that 
sounds very benign and sort of all well and good. But the 
problem is, is that your government was in power when a 
decision was made in the early ’90s to reduce dramatically the 
number of training seats for registered nurses in this country. 
 
It’s quite possible that the current Premier was the Health 
minister at the time. And there used to be something like 10,000 
nurses trained a year, and I understand nationally that number 
has dropped to something in the magnitude of 4,000 a year. And 
I’m wondering, and I know it wasn’t during your watch as a 
Health minister, but how you as a government can sit there and 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2567 

 

eight or so years later after participating in a decision to 
dramatically decrease the number of training seats for 
professional nurses, now say that you’re going to monitor this 
situation as we go forward. 
 
The minister is quite happy to have a situation where he says 
well, people in this province or people in the nursing profession 
are going to stay beyond the retirement age. Minister, if you’ve 
been in the field at all and in the areas where nurse practitioner 
or professionals are working in the wards and the units across 
the province, the workload is very severe. 
 
And many of the nurses, particularly as they are approaching 
retirement, are barely hanging on long enough to make 
retirement. I run into darn few of them that are talking about 
staying beyond that time. In fact, one of the challenges in the 
statistics of the number of nurses we’re losing is people that are 
actually dropping out of the profession prior to retirement age, 
not considering staying on beyond it. 
 
So I think you’re living with some real rose-coloured glasses 
when you talk about looking at that you’re going to now 
monitor the situation and somehow say that we’re all going to 
work this out okay and everything is going to be fine. It’s 
serious and it’s been getting worse every day and every year 
that goes by under this government’s mandate. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you justify being part of a decision, your 
government’s being a part of a decision to dramatically 
decrease the number of nurses trained not only in this province 
but across this country and now expect the monitoring of this 
dramatically changed situation is going to meet the needs of the 
next decade? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member refers to a time when there 
were some changes around nursing education and I think the 
numbers that he uses refers to the two-year nursing programs. 
And as the member knows, there aren’t that many two-year RN 
(registered nurse) nursing programs left and that actually the 
standard is now a four-year nursing degree. And that’s a factor 
that has to be taken into account in looking at the last decade 
and some of the changes, because we have highly skilled people 
with more training who are doing a broader array of kinds of 
work. And they are also then working with people who are very 
good nurses, who have many years of experience but started out 
with a different kind of training. 
 
Another factor that has to be taken into account is that there are 
many people in the nursing profession who work part-time and 
we also have a program for people who want to re-enter the 
whole nursing profession after some time doing some other 
things. 
 
All of these things mean that there is a continual challenge 
around having enough nurses but also a challenge around 
making sure that they’re used with the appropriate support 
because, as nursing professionals gain more and more skills, 
then they require other people to work with them to make sure 
that they’re being used in the most appropriate way in the whole 
health system. 
 
And that’s very much the concept that we’re working at with 
the primary health care teams which will end up having entry 

into health care with nursing practitioners and other 
professionals as well as with the doctors. And this will make a 
huge change as this is implemented over the next numbers of 
years in the complement of the kinds of people that we need 
within the nursing profession. 
 
The only way we can do that, though, is working with our 
training facilities, and also with our professional associations 
and the unions so that we can do all of this together. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well Minister, going from a two-year 
program to a four-year program doesn’t cut the number of 
graduates in half indefinitely. It creates a two-year lag where 
you in essence would graduate no one, and then after that if you 
have the same number of training seats, you’re going to have 
the same number of graduates. 
 
It has to do with training seats and if you’re there two years 
longer, you create a two-year dead space if you like, while you 
graduate no one. So your logic is very flawed and you’ve been 
masters of creating the problem yourselves. And that warning 
has been flagged by the professional nursing associations for a 
number of years, and it’s only recently where there has been 
some response. 
 
I’m wondering again, Minister, in light of the demographic 
situation that we have in our province, are you still confident 
that the current level of 400 nursing seats coming on stream in 
the next year or so is going to meet that demographic reality 
given the heavy workload, and the likelihood that nurses who 
are eligible for retirement are indeed going to take it — if 
hopefully that they stay for the full period of their employment 
so that they can get to retirement age? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I have a request from 
the Chair. I would request leave to introduce some guests who 
have arrived. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I would like to introduce to 
you and to all members of the legislature, three people who are 
in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
And starting on the left is Dr. Carl Cherland, who is from 
Luther College. And many of you will recognize him because 
he brings his choir here every year to provide a concert in the 
rotunda, and so we can all hear that echoing throughout the 
building. And we thank you very much for that. 
 
Beside him is his wife, Dr. Meredith Cherland, who is a 
professor at the University of Regina in the Faculty of 
Education, and she’s done much work that’s of benefit to 
children and teachers across Saskatchewan. 
 
And accompanying them tonight, I assume on a neighbourhood 
walk, is Dr. Helen Harper, from the University of Western 
Ontario in London, and we welcome her as well. 
 
I ask all members to welcome our guests. 
 



2568 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — So with that, I will now continue with the 
answer to the question. Just on the logic question, if we have 10 
nursing training spots a year, for 2 years we would be able to 
train 20 people. I mean, yes, after 2 years you’d have 10 nurses 
trained . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re graduating 10,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, no, but if you’re just talking about 10 
— I’m just using straight logic — you would end up, if you 
have 10 nursing positions, after 2 years on a 2-year program, 
you would end up with 10 nurses. Under a 4-year training 
program, you would end up having to do those same 10 training 
spots for 4 years to end up with 10 nurses. So effectively, under 
a 2-year program, you graduate twice as many as under a 4-year 
program. That’s the only point I was making — that continues 
on right through the whole system. It takes the same resources 
every year for that training. 
 
Now the important thing that to recognize around the whole 
nursing area is that there are issues around the education of 
nurses. There’s also an issue around the retention of nurses for 
the long term. And I think that’s where some of the questions 
that arise here come, which is the workplace and . . . quality 
workplace and basically allowing for people to thrive in the 
place that they work for the long term. 
 
And so one of the things that we have been working with very 
closely, with both the unions and with the registered nursing 
associations, is to look at quality workplaces. And one of the 
projects we’ve had going in Moose Jaw has been quite 
successful in identifying those factors which make it a good 
place to work versus those factors which make it a less 
appealing place to work. 
 
And as we continue to work on those kinds of things we can 
also help address the long-term needs in the nursing profession, 
because often then those people who have the longer experience 
become our teachers of the next generation of nurses. And it’s 
that challenge of having enough mentors and teachers for the 
next generation of nurses that makes it difficult to dramatically 
increase the nursing training positions. 
 
So I think what has to happen is that we’ll continue to work 
with all of the various parts of the system, and we’ll attempt to 
train people, we’ll attempt to retain them, and we’ll also attempt 
to recruit them. 
 
I know that the minister or the Deputy Premier and I were in 
Yorkton this morning at the long-term care home. And I was 
told that it’s surprising the number of people who are applying 
to come and work in the Yorkton area from other provinces — 
British Columbia and Alberta and Ontario — and that this is a 

bit of a different change. Because one of the factors I think is 
that much as we have some change in our system in 
Saskatchewan, our health system in Saskatchewan has some 
longer-term stability when they’re compared to some other 
places in the country. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And we’ll talk 
later about the debate about graduating 10,000 nurses versus 
graduating 4,000 nurses and how the math works. 
 
Mr. Minister, you open another area that is a concern and it 
partly is in regard to the training but also the retention in that 
there’s sort of a couple components. There are a number of 
nurses or health care professionals who aspire to advance their 
training and complete and add more training so that they quality 
for registered nurse positions. And, Minister, I wonder, there’s 
like two-year diploma trained or prepared nurses who want to 
advance to become fully degreed nurses and things of that 
nature. 
 
There are nurses who have been out of practice for a number of 
years and so they require an upgrading module or a number of 
modules in order to be accredited to practise again. Minister, 
would you outline what financial support there is for those 
individuals who are looking to improve or renew their 
credentials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — With the implementation of the action 
plan that’s taken place over this spring, this year’s budget we’ve 
added 160 nursing bursaries on top of the existing 60. So this 
year there will be 220 nursing bursaries that are available. Right 
now people are in the process of applying for the 160 new 
bursaries. 
 
We’ve had a re-entry bursary program in place since April 
2000, and as of earlier this spring 124 bursaries have been 
awarded — 73 RNs, 39 LPNs (licensed practical nurse), and 12 
registered psych nurses under that particular program. So what 
we’ve been doing and part of the initiative around the action 
plan was to increase the numbers of bursaries and work at 
facilitating the re-entry for people who want to come back and 
work in the profession. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, are the re-entry bursaries part of 
the 220 total nursing bursaries available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, the re-entry bursaries are separate 
ones. And I should clarify — of the 220 total, 160 are dedicated 
to nursing and the other 60 are for other professions in the 
health area. So it’s 160 plus 60. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So the . . . there’s 160 plus the re-entry 
bursaries that are available for the nursing profession, and in 
addition to that another 60 bursaries that are available across the 
other medical professional components. 
 
Minister, that leads me to . . . another concern I guess is that 
there certainly has been articulated a need for revisiting the 
number of medical laboratory technologists and laboratory . . . 
or radiologists, medical radiologists, that are being trained, 
because there has been the indication that there is another area 
where we are in pretty short supply. Will the minister indicate 
what plans there are to address this concern? 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2569 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — On May 23, just over a month and a half 
ago, I was pleased to announce there’s an increase in bursary 
funding and for the first time students who are studying medical 
radiation and medical laboratory technology are eligible under 
the expanding health bursary program. So this is a response to 
some of the concerns around the needs that are there, for 
especially the medical radiation technology and X-ray 
technician kinds of programs. 
 
So that is a response and basically how the bursary system is 
designed is to try to respond to some of the areas that have been 
identified by health districts and others who require people and 
aren’t able to obtain them. So then we end up working to 
identify spots to meet the demands one or two or three years 
down the road. We also end up then working with SIAST or 
with the universities to identify training spots, because 
sometimes there need to be adjustments in the training spots as 
well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I certainly 
support and appreciate the increased bursary program because 
that does very dramatically help those people who are 
successful in being accepted into a medical program. 
 
But part of the challenge of course of having enough people is 
not having them better funded — or only just better funded; 
that’s very good — but also to have more training spots 
available for them. 
 
For example, I have some statistics that I believe to be accurate 
that says that in 2001 that in the nursing profession we admitted 
261 nurses to the degree nursing program but that that only 
represented 37 per cent of the number who applied. 
 
So there’s certainly not a shortage of people applying and 
desiring to get into the profession, that a bursary program would 
. . . you know, if there weren’t enough people applying because 
it was financially too burdensome or things of that nature, then 
the bursary program by itself would have some real significant 
improvement in that. But obviously two-thirds of the people 
that apply are not being accepted because there’s not enough 
training seats. And I suspect the same thing is true or relatively 
true in the laboratory technologists and the radiology 
technologists as well. 
 
So, Minister, you talked about the bursaries — and don’t get me 
wrong, I think they’re very good — but unless we actually 
increase the number of training spots so that we graduate more 
professionals in those fields, we still are not going to meet the 
demands that the system is indicating are obviously there in the 
forefront. 
 
Minister, are you as well as the bursaries looking at increasing 
the training spots for the medical laboratory and medical 
radiology people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer is yes, we are 
considering that. But we end up having to work with obviously 
the training places which in this area is SIAST and perhaps the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology, working together 
with those people to make sure there are programs that are 
there. 
 

I think all of us know, I mean just to give you another example, 
the Indian Federated College has brought in a public health 
inspector course which will be a Saskatchewan-based course. 
That’s another area where we’ve had some challenges recruiting 
people. So that’s a positive thing. 
 
So what we need to do is keep making sure we get the 
information from the places where they’re hiring to SIAST or to 
the universities, to make sure that the courses and the places are 
available. And this is just an ongoing process of making sure 
that we’re doing that. And that in fact is what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Continuing on the 
theme of shortages of health professionals. Mr. Minister, I 
believe that there are also a shortage of speech-language 
pathologists in the province as well. And I don’t believe that 
there is a training program in Saskatchewan. And I wonder how 
the government and the department is looking at meeting this 
shortage of this category of medical professionals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The questions you’ve raised around 
speech language pathology and audiology is an important one to 
illustrate how we do respond to these particular specific kinds 
of needs that we have. 
 
There are programs that . . . where we have examined whether it 
makes sense to have the program in Saskatchewan on a cost 
benefit basis. And this is one area where we have basically said 
that people should go either to Minot State or the University of 
Manitoba for this training. 
 
One of the advantages that we have when we use bursaries for 
these kinds of positions is that the bursaries have a return 
service provision so that the people come back and actually 
provide service in the province after we’ve assisted them 
financially in the costs of the training. But right now, based on 
analysis of the cost of having a program in Saskatchewan 
versus sharing with some of our neighbours, we’ve fallen down 
on the side of sharing with the neighbours because that seems to 
make the most sense. And we are getting most of these people 
to come back to work in Saskatchewan with the way we’re 
doing it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
another area that’s been identified again as an area of concern is 
the issue of public health inspectors. Mr. Minister, coming out 
of Justice Laing’s report in regard to the North Battleford issue, 
there were certainly concerns about the fact that there needs to 
be adequate public health inspectors available and that there 
was some concern that people were being taken out of the 
public health inspector service in order to meet some of the 
environmental water testing requirements. 
 
What is the department doing to make sure that we have an 
adequate supply of public health inspectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is an area where I think there are 
challenges across the country as well. For last year, 
Saskatchewan Health had three public health inspection course 
bursaries available. This year we’ve doubled that to six, so there 
are six bursaries available for the public health inspector course. 
 
The good news, as I alluded to earlier, is that in March of 2002 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College was accredited 
nationally for their environmental science health program, 
which is public health inspector program. The number of seats 
for this year are five. It’s expected that there will be 40 seats by 
the time that program is fully implemented at the Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College. And so this will be of great assistance 
to our province as you know there are many people who are — 
Saskatchewan people — who go and study at that particular 
institution. 
 
And so we think over a number of years, we’ll be able to get a 
whole new contingent of people who will be trained in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And when we’re 
talking about the issue of bursaries, one of the issues that has 
been raised by letter, I believe, to yourself and to me from the 
students at the College of Medicine is the concern about the 
significant increases in tuition rates for medical students at the 
College of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
And Marla Gray has been — I think sent me correspondence 
and I believe you, as well, Minister — and has been quoted in 
the media about expressing the concern about the concerns that 
there are going to be for medical doctor students facing 
increased tuitions. And I don’t know, Minister, if the bursary 
program is going to be sufficient. 
 
And I believe there are other programs dealing with this issue, 
but I would like you to comment on the concern raised by Ms. 
Gray in regard to the increased tuition fees for College of 
Medicine students. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I recall the letter that was received, and in 
fact I didn’t have a chance to talk to Ms. Gray but I did talk to 
her mother at another event that I was at recently. And it is a 
challenge not just for the student but also for families, and it is 
an area where the Department of Learning has been working 
with the university around how to deal with some of these 
tuition fee increases. 
 
We obviously will, you know, add our concern. But we also 
recognize the need to make sure that the training institutions 
have sufficient funds to do the work that they’re doing, which is 
important for the health care system. 
 
(21:15) 
 
So I guess what I would say is we’ll continue to grapple with 
this issue, which is a national issue as some of the higher paying 
professions are having . . . seeing their tuition rates increase you 
know quite dramatically compared to some other ones. And that 
then becomes a challenge in the health care field because there 
are . . . I identified some of those positions that are people that 
are important for our health care system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Minister, I appreciate us spending a fair bit of time on this 
whole issue of medical personnel because really when we talk 
about anything in the medical system, surgical waiting lists or 
whatever, I think the brutal reality is, is that the system is only 
as strong as the weakest link in the system. And quite often we 
see these situations where the whole system is virtually brought 

to a standstill because we haven’t anticipated an appropriate 
blend of the health care professionals that we need to make the 
system work. And so I appreciate spending some time at it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have two other issues that I would like to raise 
in general before I turn it over to some of my colleagues who 
have some issues to raise with you. And, Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate that the issue I’m going to raise with you now may 
not be within your department’s jurisdiction but that I would 
like you to . . . I’m quite sure that you’re aware of the situation 
and if you’re not, I would like to make you aware of it. 
 
There’s been a recent decision by the Canadian Blood Services 
to discontinue Saskatoon as a major blood collections depot and 
to consolidate into Regina, and that Saskatoon would be a 
sub-centre in this whole process. 
 
Minister, I recognize that this is a decision by the Canadian 
Blood Services and as a participating province in that service, I 
think that . . . obviously I would think that the Department of 
Health in this province would be concerned or at least aware of 
the issue. 
 
And, Minister, I wonder if you could comment. It would strike 
me that the concerns raised by the employees and others where 
Saskatoon is a more of a geographic centre and certainly 
services not only the central part of the province but also a good 
part of the northern part of the province . . . and I’m wondering 
if you would comment on the decision by the Canadian Blood 
Services to discontinue Saskatoon as a major centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I am the minister in charge of this 
particular area. And the way the Canadian Blood Services 
works, the shareholders of the Canadian Blood Services are 
actually the ministers of Health of the country. So it is the 
appropriate place to ask this question now that the . . . But the 
situation is such that Canadian Blood Services is, as you know, 
a successor organization to the blood collection part of the 
Canadian Red Cross. 
 
And the Canadian Red Cross was set up to do many things 
besides the blood service, and so one of the challenges for the 
Canadian Blood Services as they continued the work around the 
blood collection and distribution has been to make sense of the 
organization that related to things like swimming lessons and 
safety and other things as well as the blood services, and then 
make sure that there was the appropriate transfer or division of 
those things over to the Red Cross. 
 
What’s happened this year, and basically we heard about it and 
asked a lot of questions, was that Canadian Blood Services 
decided to consolidate the laboratory testing of donor blood into 
three locations. Prior to this spring or this summer — they’re 
implementing it over this summer — this was done in 11 
locations, and now it’s only going to be done in three locations. 
For western Canada, that location is Calgary . . . is what they 
have chosen. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we were one of the last provinces that had 
more than one blood centre in the sense that we had Saskatoon 
and Regina, and so what’s happened is that they evaluated both 
places and looked at kind of the assets that they had, the staff, 
all of these kinds of things, and ended up setting up Saskatoon 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

 

as a permanent collection site and centre for mobile blood 
collection services in the northern half of the province. 
 
Regina’s office became the permanent collection site for the 
southern half of the province and also base for the mobile 
collection of blood. But the lab services required in 
Saskatchewan were going to be done out of the Regina office. 
 
And so this is a challenge. It’s based on a number of different 
factors. The information that we’ve received is that the 
intention for the whole country was to achieve operational 
efficiencies, make the best use of state-of-the-art testing 
technologies, and improve the safety of the blood system. One 
of the huge challenges coming out of the Krever report was the 
safety of the blood system and the effective use of technology 
in 3 sites instead of 11 sites is what they’ve been doing. 
 
So we’ve been asking a lot of questions, and we know of the 
impact, but we also understand some of the pressures that the 
Canadian Blood Services is under to try to sort out how it’s 
organized in Canada. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I know that 
you’re aware of the concerns that were expressed by the people 
working in the Saskatoon collection centre and I certainly do 
think that the geographic issue of Saskatoon being more central 
to provide this service is something that hopefully was 
considered appropriately. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to move on now to the area of SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network) and I believe in 
late last year SHIN was inviting proposals for a clinical 
information system, CIS. And I believe at that time through the 
RFI (request for information) process that they had selected 
MediSolutions as the provider for this system. Can you tell me 
if that contract has been awarded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The latest information as of this afternoon 
is that they are still under negotiations with MediSolutions. 
They haven’t entered into any contract. They’ve said that they 
would like to but they need to get the parameters correct before 
they will enter into it and they’re not at that stage yet. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
imagine that if you’re not aware, that SHIN should be aware 
that there have been some pretty significant financial 
challenges, I think would be the kindest way to place it, that 
MediSolutions has undergone in the last short while. 
 
Their share stock has dropped fairly dramatically and Trilon I 
believe who are their backers or partners in the thing have had 
to come in and commit extra resources and all those sorts of 
things. 
 
In light of the pretty shaky situations in the stock market and all 
these situations, do you know if this is a major component in 
terms of this contract? Because it would strike me as that it’s 
very, very important to make sure that there is financial stability 
occurring in order for us to enter into these kinds of contracts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I have been aware of some of the 
things that have happened. It’s been part of the information in 
the financial pages of our newspapers. But one of the situations 

that does happen in this information technology area is that 
there are takeovers and changes and Trilon’s involvement with 
MediSolutions in a lot of ways would maybe provide some 
stability. But clearly one of the factors that takes place any time 
you enter into a longer term service supply contract is to make 
sure that the party that’s going to provide the service is going to 
be there for the long term, and so it may in fact be a factor 
which has slowed down the final resolution of what kind of a 
contract there is. And ultimately, if that isn’t all sorted out, well 
then there may not be a contract and then go back for new 
proposals from other people. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That completes 
the questions I have at this time. I would like to invite my 
colleague from Canora-Pelly to ask some questions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, a couple of areas that I wanted to get some 
information on if I might. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am in receipt of a letter cc’d (carbon copy) to 
me from yourself back . . . dated March 21 of 2002. And it’s a 
letter that you wrote to the mayor of Preeceville, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Grant See. In it you stated that basically the planned facility 
for Preeceville is being put into abeyance while the action plan 
and further discussions go on with the Assiniboine Valley 
Health District and the northwest planning committee. 
 
Mr. Minister, I noticed that today’s Leader-Post, an article was 
there regarding the Moosomin facility and moving forward. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if there has been any additional 
communication with the town of Preeceville or anyone 
connected with this project? Are you going to be, as . . . the 
Department of Health, are they going to be releasing projects to 
proceed or are we still in the study stage and wait until the 
districts are fully operational? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are some projects that are 
continuing and all of them are moving along at a pace that, if 
we had broader capital resources, that we might be able to move 
a little bit faster. But we’re being very careful because we don’t 
have the broad kinds of resources that we want. 
 
And so what is happening with specific projects is that some of 
them are getting the go-ahead to look at the scope and sort of 
the . . . what kinds of things are to be done; others are being 
evaluated but there is no blanket sort of hold on projects now. 
But they are all being evaluated in light of what the regional 
health authority planning committees will look at and then the 
boards over the longer term. 
 
But clearly the kinds of discussions and plans that have been 
there from the health districts will be included in that overall 
process. But it’s one where we’re continuing to examine and try 
to make the most appropriate use of the funds that we have 
available. And unfortunately we don’t have the . . . as large a 
capital fund as might be there to meet all of the demands that 
are there. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
fully aware that of course capital projects will depend on 
funding and I guess that’s the concern of the people of not only 



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Preeceville, because it’s going to serve a large area further north 
into communities like Stenen and Sturgis and all through that 
area. They’ve been at this project for a number of years. I’m 
sure that you’re fully aware of that. And fundraising has been 
going on. They’re doing their part to ensure that, I guess, their 
capital monies are going to be available. 
 
And I note in your letter to Mayor See you’ve indicated that 
you were impressed with the level of support this project had 
received locally. And I know that they’ve reported to you that 
they have hundreds of thousands of dollars already set aside 
ready to go. 
 
Is there any indication that you can give to these people: should 
they be continuing to raise funds? Because a lot of them are 
very concerned that as we’ve moved from the Assiniboine 
Valley Health District, we’re now part of whatever that new 
district’s name is going to be, that includes Yorkton and 
Melville as well. And we’ve just seen the completion of a new 
facility in Melville and its opening. 
 
(21:30) 
 
People in smaller communities like Preeceville are saying, are 
we doing this in vain? Is this really something that we’re doing 
for three years but somewhere down the road, a year and a half 
from now, the Department of Health is going to say, sorry we 
don’t have the money and we’re going to close you because 
your facility has deteriorated and there are conditions of . . . 
physical conditions of the building need to be addressed. So 
there’s always that pessimism out there that says Department of 
Health is not going to let this go forward and we’re doing this in 
vain. 
 
Can you assure the people of Preeceville and that surrounding 
area that capital projects are going to continue as we move 
forward in developing a financial capital plan and indeed a 
facility like that, that is needed in that large area, is indeed still 
going to be a reality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — First off I want to deal with the issue 
around the locally raised money. And this was an issue that was 
asked earlier this afternoon when we were looking at the 
regional health authorities Act, because it’s one of the parts of 
that particular legislation. And the assurance is very clear that 
locally raised money in trust funds will continue to be locally 
controlled money that will be used for local projects. So there 
shouldn’t be any concern there as the regional health authority 
is larger than the present health district, that there’d be any 
problem there. 
 
We will continue to renew and build facilities that are required 
across the province in both larger centres and smaller centres 
because, as you rightly identify, services are provided and they 
go for broader areas than just Preeceville. It includes a number 
of communities all around there. And our goal is to continue to 
renew the facilities and also, frankly, when you go and see 
places you know that there are newer ways and better ways that 
we provide some of the services that are there in some of these 
communities. And the only way you can do that is to renew the 
facilities. 
 
So my sense would be that we’re not moving quite as fast as we 

might like, as with all of the capital projects, but those projects 
which will serve a need for the short term and the long term will 
be projects that are eventually done. And hopefully we can get a 
time where we can . . . when we can get them all lined up in a 
way that is clear. 
 
One of the things that we’re obviously working on with the 
health plan and the new regional health authorities is to have 
even greater coordination of how these things happen on a 
broader basis and . . . but also recognizing that community 
identified needs are ones that meet . . . that are there to be met 
because that’s where the services are provided. 
 
I know that I’ve met with the mayor and some of the other 
people from Preeceville. And once we’re free, I’m hoping to go 
up to that area and see their project and the place where they 
want it to go and even have a better understanding of what 
they’re wanting to do. Because I think that’s how we rejuvenate 
our health system across the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I 
appreciate your comments. And I know the people of the area 
will be very glad to hear your comments about coming up there 
and ensuring that you understand the project and are able to do 
what you can. And I thank you for that. 
 
My second area, very quickly, Mr. Minister, is regarding . . . as 
you’ve talked about providing services on a broader basis and 
that deals with the Yorkton Hospital and the orthopedic surgeon 
that is there. Many physicians in Preeceville and Kamsack and 
Canora and Norquay refer patients to Dr. Van Sittert in Yorkton 
for orthopedic work. 
 
I have a number of letters from a number of physicians, but 
especially Dr. McKitterick in Norquay. Dr. McKitterick has 
responses back from Van Sittert’s office that indicate that the 
waiting lists for things like hip replacements especially — not 
so much knee but hip — is now into the two- to three-year 
waiting period. 
 
And his concern is that these people that are waiting for more 
operating time in Yorkton to serve this broad area, and a 
regional facility . . . It’s recognized that the regional facility in 
Yorkton with a competent doctor like Dr. Van Sittert is going to 
be the place where these are going to be done. But a three-year 
waiting period is just not acceptable because there are examples 
of other conditions that develop for these patients as they’re 
waiting. 
 
What is the Department of Health doing to address that 
orthopedic deficiency that exists on the east central side of 
Saskatchewan, being that Dr. Van Sittert is a very good doctor, 
is used by so many general physicians, and the referrals have 
mounted up to the point where now we’re on a two- or a 
three-year waiting list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well there are a number of factors. Just 
some information that is interesting and tries to put some of this 
into context — on an age and sex adjusted basis across Canada, 
we are above the national average for the number of hip and 
knee replacements as far as the number that are actually 
performed in the province. And so that becomes then a 
challenge because of some of these other things. 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2573 

 

Now the other thing that is happening is that we have basically 
set up a surgical waiting list strategy that is laid out in the action 
plan, and parts of that include a surgical registry which will be 
province-wide, and it’s actually section 12 of The Regional 
Health Services Act that provides the legislative authority for 
setting this up. 
 
One of the factors then becomes that we will have a 
province-wide surgical waiting list which will then have 
common criteria across the province so that we can actually 
know how these things are because right now we don’t have all 
of that information in a way that is comparable across the 
province. And so it’s the surgeons and others who are working 
together with them that are working on some of the kinds of 
issues in that particular area. Clearly the goal is provide the care 
that people need and in this particular case provide the hips and 
knee replacements. 
 
Once again, this morning in Yorkton, I met one of Dr. Van 
Sittert’s patients who was doing very well and was looking 
forward to returning to the old-timers hockey league with his 
new knee, so that there are very many sort of testimonials about 
almost sort of the miraculous change that can take place with 
some of these things. And clearly what’s happened in the last 
15 years is that that type of a process has been perfected to the 
point where people are willing to undergo the process in a way 
they wouldn’t have 20 years ago. And so that adds a new 
demand on the whole thing. 
 
What we’re working at is making sure that people who may be 
on a waiting list know exactly how it matches with others on a 
waiting list so that people feel, you know, have some sense of 
the fairness of where they are in that process. We’re also 
working with the health districts and the staff, make sure that 
there’s enough capacity to do these various things. And we are 
continuing to deal with the challenge in some specific areas of 
where the surgery isn’t always, or rarely, listed as emergency or 
urgent surgery — it’s that sort of surgery where you can wait a 
bit of time. 
 
But I think the simple answer is that we’re trying to figure out a 
way so that people can understand how all this works. We’re 
trying to make sure the capacity’s there to get the procedures 
done. We’re trying to make sure that, you know, the doctors 
who do a good job can do it in a way that provides them with 
appropriate income and reward and a good place to work and all 
of the staff that are with them. 
 
So it’s a whole big process and we’re working at it. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
understand the new guidelines are being developed for renal 
dialysis satellite services sites. Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, 
how far along those guidelines are in the development process? 
Or are they, or have they been completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There is a province-wide committee of 
people involved, which is called the Saskatchewan Integrated 
Renal Committee. And I think they work with the 
Saskatchewan integrated renal program, and they have 
established guidelines around staffing requirements, lab 
requirements, the numbers of physicians, the numbers of 
patients, that then try to establish where satellite renal, you 

know, places should be. 
 
And so then one of the questions becomes, well, which places 
are next on the list as far as expansion. Right now, the place . . . 
the two . . . the next two places that are being discussed are the 
Battlefords area and Estevan area. But what then has to happen 
is to make sure that there are sufficient people who are trained 
that would be able to have the expansion there, that they have 
the lab capacity and that . . . the big issue is the physicians are 
primarily . . . well, they are in Regina and Saskatoon and they 
end up having to make sure that there are the right supervisory 
roles created to allow for this. 
 
For example, earlier this year there was an expansion of a few 
beds or a few chairs, I guess would be a better way to describe 
it, in Yorkton. And that came after the doctors who supervise 
that particular satellite out of Regina were assured that there 
was sufficient staff and the proper supervision to allow for the 
expansion. 
 
And I guess the good news is that we are continuing to examine 
this and look at this guidelines that have been set up so that we 
can expand it. But the bad news is that there are more and more 
people that require this service which is a fairly difficult one for 
the patient and also a challenge for the cost in the whole health 
system. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the capital 
cost involved in setting up a satellite dialysis unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The capital costs have ranged between a 
quarter million and a half a million dollars depending on the 
kind of renovations that are required. But that’s the one time 
cost. And then it’s the operating costs of making sure you have 
sufficient staff that becomes the major challenge. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — How many staff members are required, Mr. 
Minister, to operate a satellite unit? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I can’t provide you with the exact staff 
ratio, but I can give you a pretty good idea of the operating 
costs, and sort of at a minimum of six chairs per unit would be 
about $44,000 a year for each unit. And I think that works out 
to around one staff person for two patients during the time that 
they’re receiving the renal dialysis. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if, Mr. Minister, if 
you’re aware that the Royal Canadian Legion in Moose Jaw, 
branch no. 59, is spearheading a fundraising campaign to cover 
the capital costs and/or water treatment for a satellite dialysis 
unit in Moose Jaw and that several nurses travel from Moose 
Jaw to Regina daily to work in the satellite . . . or work in the 
dialysis unit here in Regina? 
 
I wonder, if the funds are in place for the capital and the water 
treatment and the staff is clearly there to operate these units, 
would it not make sense to set up a satellite unit in Moose Jaw 
which would obviously require some operating money, but 
could deal with the patients from the Moose Jaw and area as 
well as take some of the strain off the overused facilities in 
Regina? 



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m aware that Moose Jaw is part of 
the discussion across the province, and in fact the committee 
that I mentioned earlier, one of the things that they continually 
do is sort of map where the patients are across the province and 
try to identify how we can set up new satellites that will be of 
benefit both for the patient — in other words, reducing travel 
time for people — and also for making sure, you know, that 
appropriate care is there. 
 
And I think from the Moose Jaw perspective, right now Estevan 
is a little farther away, and so that the people who would have 
to come into the Estevan area have about — what? — three 
times, almost three times as far to travel to come to Regina, and 
that’s why Estevan is probably just a bit ahead of Moose Jaw. 
 
But it’s actively being considered. One of the obvious 
advantages of Moose Jaw, as you’ve identified, is that they 
have the staff. One of the challenges though is that you need to 
have the assurance from the supervising nephrologist in Regina 
that they’re at ease with the kind of supervision that’s there. So 
there are a whole number of factors that are there. 
 
We’re trying to do this, once again, on a province wide basis, 
working cooperatively with the health districts, and it will be 
the regional health authorities. And we very much appreciate 
the willingness of the legion and other groups to come and help 
and get involved because it is often that initial cost of getting 
some of those things done that allows then for the longer term 
program to continue and provide good service for people. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to 
your staff, thank you for the opportunity to raise an issue with 
you tonight. And again, it’s on dialysis. But my question is for 
patients that are going outside of Saskatchewan for dialysis, 
maybe it’s because of their work or visiting someone. 
 
I’m wondering how much money the department spends on 
dialysis outside of Canada, and I’m wondering if there’s a set 
amount of money that’s set aside for this treatment when 
they’re outside of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is an issue for people that travel both 
into the province and out of the province. And basically how it 
works is that there is reciprocal billing so that if somebody 
comes to Saskatchewan from Alberta then we would bill 
Alberta and vice versa. 
 
I think going into the States there are some bigger challenges 
depending on how they do their costing because we wouldn’t 
pay anything more than what we would normally pay here. 
 
The big issue for this transient dialysis is to make sure that the 
capacity is available where somebody travels to; and that can be 
a challenge because, frankly, in Saskatchewan our dialysis units 
are very heavily scheduled and there may not be place for 
somebody to come here who has a reason like a wedding or 
something else where they need to come to the province. But 
the staff do work to try to fit those people in and then that’s 
billed back the other way. 
 
We can’t tell you exactly how much is spent on people going 
outside the province because it’s sort of lumped together with 
other costs of billings that come back from other places, but it is 

a possibility. And I know even in my time as the Health 
minister that you know there have been some examples of 
people going out to BC (British Columbia) where there’s some 
questions have arisen — or people that are coming here — and 
it often is around actually scheduling the procedure as opposed 
to the cost because the cost works out through the reciprocal 
billing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a constituent 
who goes to the States a number of times, and over the last year 
or so they paid a bill in the States and then received a letter 
from your department saying that there was an error made in 
assessing the claim for dialysis treatment and so they actually 
did pay the bill. 
 
Then the last time they went out to the States, again it seems to 
be refused. There seems to be some dispute in whether the 
amount of money that was . . . that is billed to the province or 
that the province will pay for if the work is done in a clinic or if 
it’s done in a hospital. And we have . . . we’re wondering if 
there’s a set amount of money that they know can be paid for a 
dialysis treatment in different treatment centres. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think how it works is that a person who 
does go to the States basically has to provide information to 
Saskatchewan Health that sets out what the physician cost is 
and what the hospital or what the clinic cost is. And then when 
that’s broken down, then we would pay the physician cost 
which would be the amount that a physician in Saskatchewan 
would get for the same procedure. And for the hospital or clinic 
cost we pay $50 a day and that would be the contribution. 
 
But if those two are lumped together, then it’s very difficult for 
us to work with that until we get the information from the 
patient and from the doctor and clinic or hospital in the States. 
But that’s how it works. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then just to 
summarize it then, is my constituent would have to apply to 
your department before to let them know that they’re going 
down there or to acknowledge that this treatment has to take 
place. And then they would be paid $50 a day if they’re within 
the hospital, and it would be a different amount if they were in a 
clinic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, basically it’s $50 a day maximum for 
either the clinic or a hospital where it’s done, but then there’s 
also an amount that would be paid if there’s a doctor’s fee 
included. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good evening to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, I’ve just had some 
concern brought to my attention by EMS (emergency medical 
services) providers about seats at SIAST for upgrading. 
 
And they have some information that has given them an 
indication that out-of-province EMS providers are getting the 
seats at SIAST, and this is the only institution obviously that 
provides for this kind of upgrade training. 
 
They’re wondering why out-of-province EMS providers are 
getting those seats when in fact we have in-province providers 
that need that training, and it’s part of the policy of your 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2575 

 

government right now to ensure that that happens. So we’re 
wondering why out-of-province EMS providers are granted 
those seats when our own are refused. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll have to admit this is an area that I 
don’t have an answer for you in the sense that it’s about the 
admissions policy at SIAST which is a Department of Learning 
issue. 
 
But this is the first time that I’ve heard about this being a 
challenge. And so it’s something that I’ll ask some questions 
about and when I get some information I’ll forward it on to you. 
Because, you know, obviously we have as part of our action 
plan a goal of upgrading people and training people through the 
EMS system and we obviously want to use the facilities in our 
province for the people who are working in Saskatchewan or 
who want to work in Saskatchewan. And if there’s something 
else happening, well then I think I’d like to know about that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I 
appreciate your looking into this because of course it is very 
important to the EMS providers in the province. They’re 
certainly trying to do their part and are cognizant of the fact that 
this is part of the government’s policy. So it probably is very 
frustrating for them if they come to find out things like this. 
 
Another area surrounding the concerns of ambulance service 
providers is that they claim, and have indicated to me, that 
government-run ambulances are granted funding, funding for 
second level training, while private companies are not granted 
the same. And the question is: why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll try and answer that. I think this may 
answer part of the question. And effectively this year in our 
2002-2003 budget which is . . . there’s a half a million dollars, 
that’s the first year of the training initiative for the EMS 
providers. And we want to, over the next three years, train 240 
new or existing EMS providers to the EMT (emergency medical 
technician) basic level. So there’s a half million dollars this first 
year. And the goal this year is to . . . for training 80 EMT 
students, and it’s anticipated that these students will start in the 
fall of 2002. 
 
(22:00) 
 
And we’ve initially designated priorities for this EMT training 
initiative in certain health districts in two areas. The first is 
where there is a significant proportion of ambulance calls have 
emergency medical responders as the highest trained provider 
based on the analysis of the 2000-2001 ambulance calls. And so 
the districts that are designated based on the fact that they don’t 
have EMT trained people on the ambulances at the highest 
number are Moose Mountain, Keewatin Yatthé, Midwest, and 
Living Sky health districts. Those areas are designated. 
 
And then the second area where we’re putting priority on the 
EMT training is those places where a significant percentage of 
staff on ambulance service rosters are emergency medical 
responders based on the current ambulance service rosters — in 
other words, the people who are actually working right now. 
And the districts then that have the priority are Southwest, 
South East, Rolling Hills, Greenhead, and South Central health 
districts. 

And so I don’t think there’s any designation between whether 
it’s a health district run system or one that’s run by a private 
operator. But it is based on where the greatest need is at the 
present time. But obviously we were hoping for 80 next year 
and 80 the following year. And then we’re hoping to deal with 
it on a province-wide basis. 
 
But in allocating our dollars we wanted to focus it in the places 
where we identified the greatest need. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
distinction was clearly made to me that there was knowledge 
that government run ambulances were granted that funding, 
whereas private companies were not. But in view of your 
remarks and your answer to this question, I will forward a 
transcript of Hansard today to the person that asked this and 
hopefully that will answer the question for them. 
 
Mr. Minister, does . . . This is just along a different vein and it 
has to do with drug addictions for youth. And I’m wondering if 
the Health department collects any data on how many kids seek 
medical attention as a result of taking illegal drugs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for the question. And I’ll give 
you a couple of answers which I think will give you the kind of 
information that you want, and then I’ll be happy to try to 
answer further questions. 
 
Between . . . first I’ll talk about the numbers of youth who’ve 
asked for help through the Kids Help Phone. And basically 
between January 1, 2001 and December 31, 2001 — in other 
words, during the year 2001 — there were 30,340 calls that 
went to the Kids Help Phone. And 1,517 of these calls related to 
substance use and abuse, which is about 5 per cent of the calls. 
 
And so then and also by comparison, there were about 2,385 
youth admissions in the Saskatchewan alcohol and drug 
services during the 2000-2001 year. So it’s not quite 
comparable because it’s the . . . our fiscal year versus that 
calendar year. 
 
In that year 2000-2001, there were — yes, that’s the number — 
2,385 people who their main reason for getting help was 
substance and drug abuse. There were about another maybe 
200, 250 where that may have been a related issue, but it wasn’t 
the principal reason that they sought help. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s very informative 
and I appreciate those statistics. But I’m wondering also 
whether or not there is any policy in place for statistics to be 
gathered regarding youth that may go . . . for instance, if a 
youth takes speed, that drug, and from that there’s anxiety 
attacks. So sometimes these youth may require medical or seek 
medical attention. And oftentimes they will go to the 
emergency department of a hospital. 
 
So I’m wondering whether within our system, within the 
hospitals, there’s any provision made for the gathering of 
statistics to determine how many youth are actually coming for 
medical attention to deal with something like anxiety attacks as 
a result of taking drugs? Is there any provision for gathering of 
statistics right now in the health districts within our cities? 
 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m not sure that statistics are kept exactly 
in the way that you’ve asked the question, but I think that it’s 
clear when people do come in and then access the counselling 
services with the alcohol and drug services part or the mental 
health part, if there are dual diagnosis or greater numbers of 
problems identified at once, they try to keep track of that. And 
so that’s why that figure I gave you, which was the . . . where 
the primary reason that a person came was for the drug or 
substance abuse. Then there were another approximately 250 
people who had that as a lesser problem. 
 
Within the emergency system, that’s often where the referrals 
take place if it’s identified that it is a drug or alcohol abuse kind 
of problem, so that it does then go into the other service. So I 
think you maybe could go and try to track all of those things, 
but it’s in the actual place where people are getting their help 
that we do keep more of the records. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just 
wanted to make the comment that often times when youth take 
some illegal drugs for the first time, they don’t know what’s 
happening to them. They may feel a sense of anxiety. They may 
go to a hospital, get treated, but if the attendants at the hospital 
are not instructed to record that in fact a youth had been taking 
some sort of illegal drug, there’s no way that the system can 
possibly know just how many youth are involved in this 
activity. And I would just think that it might be a good measure 
to try to possibly track some of this through the hospital system. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have one more issue that I want to question you 
about. I have a letter here from a constituent that wrote to me in 
regard to her concern about the joint job evaluation program 
involving CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees), SEIU 
(Service Employees’ International Union), and SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union). 
 
This constituent states to me that the government has failed to 
commit to a four-year timeline as per your policy framework 
and the negotiated agreement you made with the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses. And she says here as a health care worker in 
the province, she finds it appalling that the provider groups in 
health care are being treated so unfairly. 
 
And so the question is, is this government committed to internal 
equity and pay equity for health care workers in the provider 
groups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The government’s committed to the pay 
equity throughout the government. Employees and the group 
that is involved, or groups that are involved, with the letter that 
you’ve quoted are actually in the process now. And when that 
process is completed, then how the resources are allocated to 
meet the result of the process will be discussed with SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), who is 
the employer . . . representative employer organization to then 
implement the pay equity in an appropriate fashion. But they’re 
in the process right now. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One last question. I was 
just wondering, in view of this concern put forward by my 
constituent this question came to mind, and I was wondering if 
the government intends to have one contract for all of those 
providers in those three unions. Do you intend to do that — 

have one contract for all service providers in the new regions, 
the new health authorities that are being set up? Will CUPE, 
SEIU, and SGEU workers be under the same contract then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There will continue to be contracts with 
each of the different unions, but in the process that is going to 
take place over the next number of months there will be groups 
coming together so that there will be some changes. I can’t say 
at this point whether there ever will be one contract because we 
will negotiate with the various unions involved. 
 
But I think it’s clear, even from the last numbers of bargaining 
sessions, that there are many, many similarities in the kinds of 
things that have been bargained so that the differences aren’t as 
great as they once were. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials, I just have a couple of questions here. In part 
some have been actually talked about by the members. 
 
But earlier on when the member from Canora-Pelly was talking 
about hip and knee replacements and the waiting list that has 
grown in the community of Yorkton, I know a few years back I 
started suggesting to patients they look towards Yorkton 
because of the quality of the care that was being received there. 
However now it’s not the place to look any more because of the 
waiting lists. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, one thing that concerns me is when you 
always . . . or the department and yourself use the term, national 
average. We’re above the national average on the number of hip 
replacements and what have you. We forget about the fact that 
we might be leading the nation in the national average of 
patients over . . . or people over 65 in the province of 
Saskatchewan as well. So I don’t think it’s fair to just use 
national average. We need to look at what the requirements and 
the need in the province. 
 
But I don’t want to dwell on that. I would like to raise a 
question in regards to the . . . I think you’ve talked about 
coordinating services in that when you talk about hip 
replacements maybe we need to start looking at if there’s a real 
long list in Yorkton, looking at maybe there’s an avenue in 
Regina or Saskatoon. 
 
And I’d like to expand that beyond and ask what the department 
is doing. When you talk about coordinating services, are you 
looking at some of the small rural centres and the capabilities 
they have and bringing them on-line and referring patients to 
some of the surgeons in some of these smaller centres to 
address the waiting lists in the large urban centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate those questions. I think first I 
will make a comment about the total hip replacements, and this 
is information from the Canadian Institute for Health 
Information for the year ’99-2000 and the age standardized 
rates. So it actually takes into account the fact that we do have 
an older population in Saskatchewan than some of the other 
provinces, and it basically makes adjustments to that. 
 
(22:15) 
 
The national average of total hip replacements is 59.7 for 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

 

Canada, so 59.7 for every 100,000 people. In Saskatchewan that 
number is 70.3. So it’s, you know, it’s higher and that number 
quote from ’94-95 is fairly consistent that we’re above the 
national average by about 15 per cent. But anyway, so I just 
wanted you to clarify that that is age adjusted. 
 
Now your other question about what are we doing, well 
basically as part of the action plan we’ve established the 
Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network. And there’s a group of 
people headed by Dr. Peter Glynn, who is from Kingston, 
Ontario, and he is working with people here and also to look at 
the provincial wait list. 
 
And some of the things that they’re doing are exactly like you 
said. We’re going to have a province-wide surgical registry. 
We’re going to facilitate the relationship between the various 
surgical centres in the province — which is your point — 
making sure that they’re being used appropriately. We’ll be 
getting advice from this group of . . . which includes surgeons 
and hospital administrators and others, around how to provide 
these services. And then we’re also going to develop a way of 
making sure that the public has a better understanding of how 
some of these kinds of choices are made. 
 
The issue then becomes, well, where would be the appropriate 
places to do some of these procedures or whether you can do 
them in some of the other places. One of the challenges is 
getting the right balance between a sufficient number of cases 
so that you’re assured around some of the quality and the ability 
to do the work, and then basically the access and the distance 
that people have to travel and some of those things. But those 
are all part of what are being developed and worked with, with 
the Surgical Care Network. And this is what I referred to earlier 
as part of what’s being established and in connection with 
section 12 in The Regional Health Services Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Minister, I think 
that’s important and I think it’s important we . . . that we 
certainly keep in mind the . . . some of the rural communities 
like Moosomin and what they’ve been able to do and even 
request for specialists for O.R. (operating room) time because 
of the facility being there. And taking advantage of what is out 
there rather than just trying to coordinate it in two or three or 
four centres. 
 
And having brought the subject of Moosomin up, Mr. Minister, 
I know recently Sask Health committed another 575,000 to 
planning in Moosomin for the new integrated health facility. 
And I just . . . a couple questions here, one related to Moosomin 
and one related to Grenfell. Moosomin specifically, their 
integrated facility, is the . . . Does the department have, based 
on the information now, the money going into the planning 
stage and architectural fees? Any idea when the final 
announcement will be made regarding that project? 
 
And secondly, has the department given any consideration to 
the request from Grenfell for a long-term care facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding that in Grenfell, 
they’ve completed phase 1 of their transition, and that they’ve 
done an early submission around phase 2 which would be the 
next part of what they’re doing there. And that that’s, I guess, 
the best way to describe it — in early stages of review in the 

department. And that’s where it’s at. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And, Mr. Minister, I guess, maybe just bring me 
up to speed on where Moosomin would be at in the final stages 
with the current announcement and what that means. Does it 
mean the department is within a few months or next spring of 
announcing that construction will begin on a facility in 
Moosomin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The money that’s gone forward now is to 
get the functional plan, the design, completed. And so that’s 
what they’ll be working on now to figure out exactly what 
needs to be done but get the detailed parts done. And then we’ll 
look at that and we’ll move to the next step. 
 
Mr. Toth: — One final question, Mr. Minister, a letter recently 
came to Sask Health community branch from a Dr. Jamieson 
. . . Sinclair Jamieson Memorial Foundation in Moosomin here. 
It’s kind of provides addictional services. And they’ve come 
forward with their request to be recognized as a 
community-based organization and have asked as well to be 
issued a service provider number. 
 
And I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, where the department is, 
if they’ve looked at that request, what response? If they’ve 
looked . . . decided that that would be an appropriate decision to 
make in regards to the foundation and the service they provide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have a specific response on that 
particular one. But I can look and see what I can find out and let 
you know. Hopefully tomorrow. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
have a few questions to ask this evening. First of all, with 
regards to the health care facility in Radville, I’ve been 
approached by Dr. Oberholzer from Radville on several 
occasions and other residents of the town of Radville who 
believe that they have a role to play in providing health care in 
our province and especially to the town of Radville and the 
area. 
 
Dr. Oberholzer is now seeing some 2,000 patients and is 
providing an excellent service there. And their request is that 
they be allowed to do some minor surgery, to provide beds for 
recovery, for palliative care, for children that need 
hospitalization for a short period of time, for minor reasons, and 
also especially for the elderly in rural Saskatchewan who do not 
need to go to Regina or Saskatoon or even Weyburn but do 
require in-patient care for a day or longer. 
 
And what the . . . I’d like a response from the minister about 
how he sees the role of facilities such as Radville helping to 
alleviate the burden that is placed on Regina and Saskatoon and 
also to shorten waiting lists in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well there are a number of questions that 
you have asked together and I’ll try to respond and sort them 
out in a way that makes sense to you and to me. 
 
So basically one of the issues is around, I think, some minor 
surgical procedures and things that could be done basically in a 
clinic kind of setting, or a day kind of setting, or whatever. 
Those kinds of things are done in conjunction with the health 



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

district organizing how they provide the services in their 
particular area, and also together with the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons who basically have ways of credentialing people, 
together with the health district. Because there are basically 
steps that the physicians have to go through to make sure that 
all of these things are done in a way that are properly 
supervised by the professional body. 
 
Then you’ve asked some questions around respite care, at least 
in palliative care. Once again those are things that are . . . get 
done in conjunction with some of the long-term care, and the 
health centre kinds of things. And that these are often then 
arranged together with the health district or the regional health 
authority as they look at the area where their services are being 
provided, and then make sure that the appropriate balance is 
there. 
 
And so that’s something that I think that the community works 
out with the other areas to provide that kind of care. 
 
I know for example, and you raised the question of Regina and 
then how that fits in with post-operative recovery or some of 
these other things . . . That is actually an area where both 
Regina and Saskatoon, and Prince Albert especially have been 
working with their neighbouring health districts, and we know 
that that will happen with the new regional health authorities, 
on how to make sure those kinds of things happen in a seamless 
way and where then the most appropriate care is done. 
 
So I think I’ve answered most of your questions but if you have 
some more I’m happy to keep trying. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I do believe 
you’ve answered my questions. I guess I’d just like to portray to 
you that I think the message needs to be sent by yourself and by 
this government to the health districts, and now the regional 
health districts that . . . or health boards, that they should be 
looking at ways to utilize their smaller centres, especially where 
there is a doctor present that wants to remain in that 
community; and to find ways to make it worthwhile for him to 
stay there — him or her to stay there — and also to service the 
people of the province more efficiently and effectively. 
 
So it’s a message that I hear often from the people in my 
constituency, and certainly from the town of Radville in 
particular. 
 
Moving on to another issue, Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you 
what the status is of the South Central Health District’s 
proposal to build the new long-term care facility in Weyburn — 
where that’s at today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well my understanding that there’ve been 
a number of hurdles that they foresaw, and some they didn’t 
foresee, that they’ve been working with and so, for example, 
some of the environmental issues have now been sorted out, so 
that’s resolved. That’s necessitated some adjustments around 
the functional plan and how it’s all going to work. And that’s 
right where it’s at now, but I know that basically the funds are 
available just to move the project along and in a regular step. 
And so hopefully we’ll see even more what is actually 
physically going to happen there very soon. 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering what 
consideration has been given to the people that live in the area 
that are very concerned about the facility being erected where it 
is and the ramifications that it’s going to have on their area of 
Weyburn, and especially to do with the tearing down of trees 
and diverting of water and the whole disruption to their part of 
town. 
 
I know that when I met with SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), they assured me that local people 
would be consulted and would be . . . they would want 
consensus before anything was continued in this area. To my 
understanding, the people of Elgin Street have not given 
consensus, but are still very concerned about what is happening 
here. And I wonder if you’d comment on that. 
 
(22:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — These are issues that are being dealt with 
by the health district as they proceed with the project. And they 
inform Saskatchewan Health officials about what’s happening. 
And I know there have been a number of meetings where they 
tried to deal with some of the issues or as many of the issues as 
possible. I’m not sure that they’ve been able to deal with all of 
the issues, but I know the health district has been continuing to 
work with the community and with the people in close 
proximity. And my understanding is that they’re trying to deal 
with as many of them as possible. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I’m a 
little confused. My understanding was that these issues had to 
be met . . . conditions had to be met prior to the project going 
ahead. And so I would hope that you would take this into 
consideration and look at the total proposal and ensure yourself 
that these issues are dealt with. My understanding is they have 
not been dealt with properly. 
 
I’d like to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you support the concept of 
the Eden model for heavy level 4 and if you have other facilities 
in Saskatchewan that are using the Eden model for heavy level 
4, like we have in Souris Valley in Weyburn, and what is the 
results of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This issue of the Eden model and level 4 
care is not something that’s, you know, endorsed by 
Saskatchewan Health, but there are some facilities that have 
looked at this or used this in their . . . I don’t know the exact 
numbers, but it’s basically something where the people who are 
managing the facility and working will look at whether that is 
an option. But the actual numbers, we don’t have that. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, 
I’m a little shocked to hear that this . . . the model, the Eden 
model, is not endorsed by Saskatchewan Health because 
Saskatchewan Health is authorizing the expenditure of upwards 
of $20 million in Weyburn to build this facility. It’s going to 
mean a reduction in beds. There’s going to be some 135 beds 
now because the local health board was instructed by the 
department that they had to reduce the number of beds. This has 
been spun as something positive for the city which, to me, is 
absolutely the opposite. We have an aging population, and yet 
we’re reducing beds. We are going to reduce the level of 
staffing in the facility and we are going to reduce the 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

 

professional level of staffing in the facility. And yet the 
Department of Health and the minister is endorsing this and 
allowing this to go ahead, spend $20 million. 
 
The staff in Weyburn have approached me about this. They do 
not believe that is going to be adequate care provided by the 
Eden model and yet you’re willing to allow this to go ahead 
when there isn’t even anything showing that this is a positive 
move, one that is not endorsed by the Department of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The concern from Saskatchewan Health’s 
perspective is that there is quality service provided, and that 
relates to the staffing component and making sure that the 
appropriate care is there. And when I said that there isn’t an 
endorsement or a non-endorsement of the Eden model, we look 
at it from the perspective of the kind of care that’s provided and 
the staffing that’s provided, and there are the models that are 
Eden models that do meet those kinds of concerns and they 
have some of the kinds of results that we expect from that 
service. 
 
Now practically, the challenge in your community is to have 
appropriate physical space and have that for the longer term. 
And it’s unfortunate there is a division of opinion in the 
community that you come from around how good a project this 
is versus some who are not as keen about it. But the practical 
matter is that the physical space right now for a number of the 
residents of your community is not adequate and we need to do 
something about that, and this is the project that has come 
forward as the one that makes the most sense for the Weyburn 
area. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well there certainly 
is division around this whole concept and, as you know, we’ve 
discussed this prior to today and I certainly have been on record 
as opposing this. 
 
We have private care homes in Weyburn that provide the Eden 
model and are very appropriate for people that are at that level 
of care. I fail to see where it’s appropriate for people that are at 
a heavy level 4. We have most of the people in Souris Valley 
are bedridden or on tube feeding, and to put them into an Eden 
model, if you’re concerned about the quality of care provided, 
certainly is not the way to go. When they’re going to be put in a 
private room, basically see no one all day, and be bedridden, I 
fail to see how quality of care is going to be provided. 
 
And I would encourage you to look at this prior to the dirt being 
turned in Weyburn and these facilities being built and then find 
we have a level of care that is certainly not going to provide 
quality care for the people that they’re building it for. The staff 
have indicated to me that they fail to see where the benefit to 
the patients is going to be. And it certainly is not going to be an 
enhancement of staffing and job creation in the city of 
Weyburn. 
 
So I would ask that you look at this and maybe make some 
changes prior to it advancing. 
 
Another question, Mr. Minister, is I’ve had a constituent contact 
me — and actually I contacted your office about this in March 
and did not receive a response — about how people from 
outside of the country access treatment in a very short space of 

time where we have at the same time people in our own 
province waiting months and sometimes years to access the 
same kind of treatment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Can you provide more details so we can 
try to respond to that question? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I don’t have the actual file with me. It was for 
either knee or hip replacement and the person came into the 
province, received appointment to have surgery, and had it 
performed within, I believe, two to three weeks. And the person 
that phoned me about this was very upset because they had a 
family member that had been waiting months for the same type 
of surgery and asked me how this happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s quite difficult to try to respond to that 
without looking at a very specific case, and so I don’t have that 
information with me. But if you wish I can try to answer that 
question when I have the more specific detail around that one, 
for you privately. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I will contact 
your office again and see if we can get the correct answer to 
that. 
 
On another issue, Mr. Minister, near the end of May, I was 
asking you some questions in estimates when the House was 
adjourned and did not finish questioning on the issue that we 
were discussing, and that was around the issue of doctors 
accessing priority time at the General Hospital under nuclear 
medicine for testing for cancer patients. 
 
And I’d just like to quote from your response when I asked you 
about this. My question was: do people in Saskatchewan who 
have cancer, do they pay for this treatment or is it covered 
under medicare? And your response was, first of all, that their 
costs would be covered, and then you responded that the fees 
are paid through the agency, referring to the Cancer Agency. 
 
I was just wondering if you could clarify this for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I have a copy of my letter to you, and I’ll 
try to explain how this works. Basically the Cancer Agency 
doctor . . . so if a patient is seeing a doctor at the Cancer 
Agency, those doctors are all on salary and paid through the 
Cancer Agency. But they will refer people for diagnostic tests 
or other kinds of things that are required, and those services 
then are provided by, in this example, the Regina Health 
District. 
 
Basically what happens is the Cancer Agency says we 
anticipate over the next year we’re going to require so many 
procedures per month, and they basically assure the Regina 
Health District that they will be requiring this many procedures 
for cancer patients, and those costs for that are billed from the 
health district through the Cancer Agency. 
 
It all comes out of the . . . I mean the Department of Health’s 
budget, but one is channelled through the Cancer Agency and 
then goes to the health district. 
 
The key point though is that all cancer patients are treated as 
urgent patients in that kind of a process and so that they . . . and 



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

that’s one of the reasons why the Cancer Agency just says well, 
we anticipate on a regular basis we’ll have this many patients 
per month over the coming years and that’s how these spots are 
organized. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, and I understand that 
explanation. I guess my question was on the previous time we 
spoke about this, and it still is today, if that is the case, then 
how do doctors that are not employed by the Cancer Agency 
access treatment for their patients because their patient’s 
condition is urgent as well when they have been diagnosed as 
having cancer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Perhaps this will explain how you get 
access to the diagnostic tests. Basically there’s sort of priority 
codes. And so in Regina, for access to the tests, there are five 
sort of levels. 
 
And the first level is immediate threat to life or permanent loss 
of function, so you have that level. Then the next level is risk of 
irreversible deterioration in the condition within 7 to 10 days. 
Then the third level is ongoing disability for undiagnosed state 
causing significant physical or mental suffering. The fourth 
level is chronic but stable pathology management and 
outcomes. So it’s something that you need to do but it’s 
managing a chronic or longer-term condition. And then the 
lowest priority is a routine follow-up. In other words, where 
somebody is functioning fine but they want to make sure that 
everything has gone the way it’s planned. 
 
And so the cancer patients, whether they’re coming from the 
Cancer Agency or whether they’re coming from an individual 
doctor, would all fit into these same codes and would be in the 
first two categories, would be my sense of it. But it’s done 
within the health district and in the process of setting up the 
priorities within the health district. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, as I explained 
to you when I questioned about this previously, was that when I 
phoned nuclear medicine at the Regina hospital to inquire what 
the waiting time would be for testing, I was informed that the 
doctor that was — and this doctor is a specialist — that was 
looking after this patient did not have priority at the General 
Hospital and so his wait would be longer. So if the same criteria 
applies to all cancer patients across the board, why was I told 
that his doctor did not have priority and so the wait would be 
longer for him? 
 
(22:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is a very difficult question for me to 
answer on behalf of Saskatchewan Health because it does relate 
to a specific issue within the health district. But if you wanted 
to further document this and have us go and ask the questions 
again in the health district, ultimately the health district would 
have to respond around how the priority codes are set up and 
how it’s been dealt with by their staff, by the doctor, and all of 
those kinds of things. 
 
But what I’ve tried to explain to you is how the overall process 
works and how the priorities are set. But it’s very difficult for 
me to answer the specific question. 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the issue is 
that this is . . . must be a policy. Because it had nothing to do 
with the patient’s condition. It had to do with priority of the 
doctors. And that was clearly the message that I was told on the 
phone, was that these 10 doctors had priority and they paid a fee 
for this service and their patients would have priority — that 
this doctor’s patients would not, and they would have a longer 
wait. 
 
And I brought this to your attention before and I think that it . . . 
in fairness to the people of this province who have cancer, as 
well as to the doctors — because the doctor that was looking 
after this person had no idea that this was going on and that his 
patients would not have priority or that they . . . some other 
doctor’s patients would have priority over his — that this issue 
would have been looked into prior to now. It’s been a month 
since I raised this issue and . . . that something would be done to 
clarify this and correct this situation. 
 
It is my understanding that in this province that we all have 
equal access to care if our condition warrants it. And this 
certainly is not happening in this case if the information that I 
was given is correct. And so I would hope that you would look 
into this and clarify it for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m not able to comment, but it appears 
there may have been some misunderstanding because I think in 
this particular case the diagnostic test that was required was 
done within the time frame which is appropriate and that the 
result was as it should have been. But the question appears to 
revolve around the conversation and some of the discussion 
there at the hospital. 
 
But practically the system and what the principles are and how 
this works is as I have described, but if you wish, we can 
request that the health district end up with a further clarification 
around that particular conversation. I think practically for the 
patient involved, he actually had the test in that prioritized time 
whether which was the same kind of time he would have had 
whether he was a patient of one of the cancer clinic doctors or 
whether he was a cancer patient of a doctor who wasn’t one of 
the salaried employees of the cancer agency. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Minister, and I would appreciate a 
reply to this and some clarification. And certainly the 
gentleman in question did have his testing, but this is not a 
concern just about this issue. It’s about a concern of how 
doctors in this province and people access the testing they need 
and are all treated in a like manner. And so I would appreciate 
some clarification on this. 
 
I just have a couple more issues, Mr. Minister, and one is also 
another, an issue that I had brought up previously last year, and 
it’s to do with the Jackson family. And at the end of our 
discussion last year in estimates, I had asked that you would 
look into this issue further, and I’m wondering if you have, Mr. 
Minister, and what the progress has been. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I have to admit that the Jackson issue has 
not been one that has arisen in a way that I’ve had to deal with 
it for, well probably for about a year. And so I’m not able to say 
whether it’s finally resolved or not or what the situation is. 
 



July 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

 

But I clearly recall our conversation last year and I have talked 
with Mrs. Jackson myself last spring about some of the issues. 
But I can’t say whether it’s been ultimately resolved or not. 
And I’m not sure if you’ve had any contact with the Jackson 
family recently or not. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Minister, this has been ongoing for 
quite some time and to my understanding that has not been 
satisfactorily resolved. The family has been asking for 
compensation for the costs that they incurred prior to their 
brother’s death. They believe that they were very ill-served by 
the health care system, that there was extreme negligence by 
Pioneer Village, and Mr. Jackson sadly died in ICU (intensive 
care unit) at the General Hospital in September of ’99 after 
being transferred there from Pioneer Village. 
 
His family has been asking for answers about how this could 
have happened and asking for compensation for the costs that 
they incurred to provide adequate care for him when he was in 
Pioneer Village because it was not provided to him by the 
health district and by the staff there. 
 
And I’m wondering what steps the minister is prepared to 
finally take to resolve this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well this issue is one where the health 
district has been working with this — and I don’t know the 
latest situation around this one — but I know that after your 
questions last year and after my conversations with Mrs. 
Jackson directly that I had I think written or contacted the 
health district, and that they had had further discussions and 
meetings around this. 
 
At this stage I don’t know what the final result of that is. If you 
want me to do some inquiring about that I can do that and let 
you know what I find out. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’d appreciate 
that because it seems to date that the health district has not 
addressed the issue. And that’s why I brought it to your 
attention again to see if you could please look into it and come 
to some resolve in this. 
 
Just have one last issue to discuss with you and it’s around the 
40-bed limit that is being eliminated from personal care homes. 
And at the time that the directive was sent out to the personal 
care homes there was a indicate . . . or there was a form sent 
with it asking their opinion on regulations that were being 
looked at to be implemented. And I’m wondering, have these 
regulations been drawn up, and if they have, have they been 
implemented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The regulations are in the final drafting 
stage with the Department of Justice lawyers. The consultations 
have been completed. All of the information from various 
people have been gathered together, and so they’re working on 
the final regulations and, hopefully, they’ll be ready in the next 
month or so. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was contacted by 
persons who run private care homes quite concerned about 
some of the regulations that were being proposed, and I’d just 
like to ask you about two or three of them and if you are going 

forth with them, or if you have listened to the voice of the 
private care homes regarding their concern. 
 
And one is the training course, which was being proposed, of 
four months of full-time training that would have to be . . . 
would realize that staff would have to leave their facility and go 
to training and it would put a great burden on the personal care 
home provider. Is that still being proposed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s a little bit, little bit hard to answer 
some of these questions directly because we haven’t actually 
gone to the final format, but I think around the training issues, 
there’s a . . . our recollection is that there is about a minimum 
requirement of around 16 hours kind of training which is not 
onerous kind of situation but there are . . . there are some things. 
 
But I don’t have all of that information here, and if there are 
some specific concerns around the regulations which have not 
been finalized, well, I’d appreciate if you’d give them to me and 
we’ll take a look at them as we’re going into the finalization 
process. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So there will be a 
process where prior to this being implemented, there will be an 
opportunity for ourselves as elected officials and persons from 
private care homes to look at the draft before it is actually — 
once it’s drawn up — before it’s actually implemented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That is the process where you have the 
information that you do now, which is these are the proposed 
regulations. And we’re getting the information and ideas around 
that. And so if there are specific concerns, well then please raise 
them and we’ll look at those concerns. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, just a 
couple of quick questions concerning the situation in Redberry 
Lake constituency. Redberry Lake only had one hospital up 
until fairly recently, and that was the hospital at Hafford, 
Saskatchewan. And the doctor left some time ago and the health 
board has not been able to supply the hospital with a full time 
doctor. Since then, they have pulled out the acute care beds and 
taken away its designation as a . . . for its emergency services. 
 
And at a public meeting this spring, the health board, then the 
Parkland Health Board, said that they would be pulling out the 
acute care beds and basically leaving the community up to 
themselves to find a doctor. 
 
And I was just wondering if . . . I assume you are aware of this 
situation. I was wondering if you could shed any light on what 
is happening in Hafford concerning getting a permanent doctor. 
They do have a doctor that comes, I believe, two days a week. 
Are you able to do anything about getting a doctor to stay in 
Hafford on a permanent basis and getting back its acute care 
beds and emergency services? 
 
(23:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the Hafford situation is an example 
of the challenges that are faced in the health system across the 
province. The service provided, I think, at two days a week 
does meet, I think, many of the needs there as it relates to the 
patient care. And so it becomes this balance of trying to find 



2582 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2002 

 

somebody who wants to work there where maybe there isn’t as 
much business, if I can use that word, as there might be in some 
of the other communities around. 
 
And so one of the challenges that we have as a province 
because we don’t go and specifically work and hire the doctors 
there — the health districts or now the regional health 
authorities will be working at doing that — but one of the 
things that we try to do is in some of the broader provincial 
programs make it conducive for people to provide coverage 
across the province and so some of the things that we’ve been 
doing have related to getting people to work in communities. 
 
Sometimes a place like Hafford may have to share with another 
community to have sufficient income for a doctor, but it’s also a 
place where some of the primary care team models might work 
very well. And I know that some of those initiatives are being 
developed where we know in other parts of the province a 
doctor working in one community may have nurse practitioners 
working in other communities in close proximity or relatively 
close proximity and they work in a group practice so that people 
have somebody there to provide the care but its not sort of a 
doctor in every spot. 
 
So it’s a challenge and it’s one of the reasons why we’ve been 
working with all of the various professions and especially the 
medical doctors to figure out the appropriate models that work 
both financially but also for the security of the community. And 
I think your question around the Hafford community goes right 
to the heart of that big issue. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Just one more point, Mr. Minister, 
to the minister. In Hafford where it’s interesting you brought up 
the point about business and at the public meeting that was the 
point that the members of the community brought up. The 
services, the reliability of the doctor has been decreasing and 
now there’s only two days a week so naturally patients from 
that community have been and are going to other hospitals, 
other doctors. So it’s a kind of a self-fulfilling situation where 
it’s going to ratchet down to the point where there isn’t enough 
patients because they have gone elsewhere. But the community 
really have always worked very hard and raised thousands of 
dollars to upgrade the hospital and make it work. 
 
And now it’s gotten to the point because of the circumstances 
that they can’t attract a doctor, because when they look at the 
statistics the patient load isn’t there, even though it was there at 
one time. And it could be if all the patients and the citizens 
came to that one particular hospital in Hafford where there was 
a full-time doctor. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I would 
like to take this opportunity on behalf of the official opposition 
to thank you in your efforts this evening, and through the 
process of estimates of answering the questions of the official 
opposition and many of the members in their areas. And I 
would like especially to thank the members of the department 
for supporting you in providing those answers this evening. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to 
answer these questions. And it’s, as I was telling some of the 

people from the department, it’s very nice to have question 
period with assistance of a whole team because we actually get 
good questions and I think very good answers. 
 
So I’d like to do a special . . . especially thank all of the 
department officials, the ones that are here tonight, but also all 
of the people who work within the department and other parts 
of the health system in Saskatchewan, who have provided the 
information that allows me to answer the questions and to 
provide clarification of a number of issues for people in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 23:07. 
 
 


