















































Hansard: June 07, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1877 
 June 7, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 
to stand today to present a petition from constituents of mine 
who are hoping to have the Humboldt territory operations office 
remain in Humboldt. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt and the community of St. Gregor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the 
Assembly today to present a petition on behalf of people who 
are concerned about the new tobacco legislation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley, 
Wadena, and Elfros, Saskatchewan. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the 
shortcomings in the government’s tobacco legislation. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the communities of Tisdale, Meadow Lake, Prince 
Albert, and actually as well from Edmonton, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with reductions to the 

Saskatchewan drug plan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Glentworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of those citizens that are 
. . . have concerns about the tobacco legislation. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Bracken, Orkney, and 
Climax. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present regarding health care in our province. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in Kendal and 
Indian Head. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned about 
the changes to crop insurance. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Fillmore, 
and Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life or 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in this area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Tugaske, Eyebrow, Brownlee. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the safety of Highway No. 15. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Watrous, Aneroid, Guernsey, and 
Raymore. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
will be no surprise today I have a petition of citizens concerned 
about Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Watrous, Manitou 
Beach, and Simpson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition signed by 
residents of the province concerned about the prescription drug 
deductible. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Bracken, 
Orkney, and Climax. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens who are outraged over 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I ask members 
just to come to order, please, so we could . . . it would be much 
easier for me to be able to hear — and everybody to hear — the 
member’s statement. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I realize it’s a 
pretty sensitive issue, but I rise today to represent citizens who 
are very much outraged with the crop insurance scheme of this 
government. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Bracken and Orkney. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning a proposed in-patient treatment 
centre in the city of Weyburn; and 

 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 11, 18, 23, 132, and 157. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 62 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for CIC: how many exams for a 
class 1A driver’s licence were taken in the year 2001 in the 
areas outside of Regina, Saskatoon, P.A., and Moose Jaw; 
and how many have been taken so far in the year 2002 in 
the same areas? 
 

Also on the same day I have another question: 
 
How many communities has SGI eliminated services which 
provide class 1A driver licence testing; and further to that, 
how many more communities will SGI eliminate from 
offering this test this year? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

 

shall on day no. 62 ask the government the following question: 
 

What is the total expenditure so far in 2002-2003 on the 
We’re Fixing the Roads advertising campaign, including 
expenditures on all advertising mediums in the 2001-2002 
fiscal year, including a detailed breakdown of all costs 
associated with that campaign? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar question for a previous 
year. 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 62 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: what is the projected cost to the 
Workers’ Compensation Board for increasing the 
permanent functional impairment award from a minimum 
of $1,100 to $2,200, and from a maximum of $22,600 to 
$45,200, and how many workers’ claims will be affected 
by this change? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I give notice I 
shall on day no. 62 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: what is the projected annual 
costs for decreasing the Workers’ Compensation Board 
independence allowance calculation from 10 per cent to 5 
per cent of the permanent functional impairment award? 

 
And I also would like to submit a number of other written 
questions as well. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m very pleased this morning to introduce to you and through 
you to the Assembly and the guests that have come here to the 
Assembly today, Ms. Olga Ginsberg, seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, who is a member of the National Parliament of 
Ukraine, Verkhovna Rada. 
 
She’s accompanied by Yars Lozowchuk, who is an active 
member of the Ukrainian community here, and also by Gwen 
Jacobson from Government Relations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Ginsberg is leading a delegation of senior 
officials from Ukraine who are participating in the 
Canadian-Ukraine legislative and intergovernmental project. 
Her delegation is here to learn about Canadian policy and 
legislation, to effectively govern land registration, which is a 
major priority for the Government of Ukraine. And they are 
interested in our land title computer software. 
 
So I would like to ask everyone to help me welcome Ms. 
Ginsberg to this Assembly. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
And please enjoy your visit here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to join with the Minister of Government Relations in 
welcoming the member of the National Parliament of Ukraine. 
 
And if I may be permitted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just indicated to her that on behalf of the 
official opposition I want to welcome her to Saskatchewan and 
to the Legislative Assembly this morning, and I hope that she 
enjoys her stay here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And also a special welcome to Yars. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the House, four adults from the Saskatchewan Abilities 
Council who are seated on the floor of the Chamber. 
 
And they are participants in the life enrichment program and 
they are Florence Matt, Steve Fiiesel, Dorothy Grierson, and 
Clark Amundsen. And they are accompanied here today by 
Lynne Demeule. And the group will be taking in the 
proceedings this morning including question period and I’m 
sure that’ll be the comedy highlight of the day for them. 
 
So I’ll ask all the members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning in 
the west gallery, I have the grade 5 students from the Yorkdale 
School Division here visiting the legislature along with a 
number of chaperones and teachers. 
 
Their teachers: Miss Valerie Jeske and Mrs. Susan Brilz. And 
also, the chaperones, Mr. Speaker: Corinn Lutz, and Dale Bohn, 
Gaylene Skinner, Chris Dreger, Louise Perrson-Riess, Margo 
Ziolkowski, and Cheryl Deneswych are also accompanying the 
young folks who are here. 
 
Later on this morning I’m going to have an opportunity to have 
some photographs with them and some refreshments. 
 
And I want all members of the legislature to join with me in 
welcoming the chaperones and the students and the teachers to 
the legislature this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 
morning to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
this Hon. Assembly, 12 grade 10 to 12 students seated in the 
east gallery from the Gravelbourg High School. The students 
are accompanied by their teachers, Rosemarie Brown and 
Francine Gauthier, and chaperones, Michelle Lafreniere and 
Kathy Dewulf. 
 
I hope that the students and teachers will have an interesting 
and educational day in their Legislative Assembly. And I’ll be 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

looking forward to meeting with you later this afternoon at 
3:30. 
 
And I hope that all members will extend a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
to all members in the legislature, I’d like you to welcome 30 
guests from Porcupine Plain School, in the east gallery. 
 
They’re grade 8 students. With them are the teachers, Chantel 
Weaver, Anette Legare, and Doug King, and a parent, Kevin 
Logan. 
 
I met with them for just a couple of minutes earlier and I think 
the only people more excited about being in the legislature 
today than them is the opposition. 
 
I look forward to meeting with you a little later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member from Regina Northeast and welcome 
Lynne Demeule, Florence Matt, Dorothy Grierson, Steve 
Fiiesel, and Clark Amundsen to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity over a number of years to 
work very closely with Lynne. She is someone who is very 
devoted to the human services sector and to her community — a 
very hard-working individual that has been recognized for that 
work on many occasions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would introduce . . . 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a very special person who is part of the group that 
was introduced by the member from Kelvington-Wadena. And 
that is my niece, Alicia Kim Kistner. And, Alicia, would you 
stand? And, Mr. Speaker, Alicia is one of those very, very 
special people that can just make your entire day much better 
with her beautiful smile and her cheery attitude. 
 
So I would ask everyone to join with me in welcoming Alicia to 
the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Bob Bymoen. If you 
would stand, Bob. He’s the president of the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union) 
and we welcome you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe I was 
presumptuous — I think you were going to members’ 
statements. I would ask leave of the Assembly to make a 
statement before you go to members’ statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology to the Legislative Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday I was asked the following question by the member 
from Rosthern: 
 

. . . (has) SGI, hired Robinson or . . . any other private 
investigation firm to run surveillance or investigate 
Saskatchewan residents? 
 

I replied with the following: 
 

I . . . (have) been advised that . . . they do not. 
 
I said yesterday that I would apologize to this House if the 
information I provided was incorrect. The information I was 
given was incorrect and therefore so was my answer. For that, 
Mr. Speaker, I apologize to this House. 
 
I have directed the president of SGI to do the following: review 
the circumstances of the case which was raised yesterday in 
question period; ensure that the corporation’s policies regarding 
in-depth investigations have been fully complied with; and 
determine why I was given incomplete information on this issue 
and take appropriate remedial action. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s Labour Force 
Friday and I have good news. And contrary to the forecast of 
the political editor of the Leader-Post, just as we have been 
saying for the past several months, the true strength of the 
Saskatchewan economy is beginning to reassert itself. And that 
is good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
We all know the seriousness of the agricultural situation. Our 
Premier has just returned from the Western Premiers’ 
Conference with unanimous recognition of its seriousness. We 
all know that drought and subsidy wars have been a drag on our 
economy over the past year. Other sectors though have 
remained strong and the results are here in black and white for 
us to see. 
 
In the May 11 —in May, pardon me — 11,500 more jobs were 
created than a year ago . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — . . . 486,000 people employed in Saskatchewan 
— the second highest employment for the month of May on 
record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Speaker, even jobs in agriculture were 
up by more than 1,000. 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And the forecast is predicting even a brighter 
future for next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. The member’s time 
has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Aboriginal Kinsmen Club 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening the Leader of the Opposition and I were honoured to 
attend the opening ceremonies of the First Nations pavilion, the 
gathering place, Mosaic 2002, A Festival of Cultures. 
 
The Regina Aboriginal Kinsmen Club were instrumental in 
planning and organizing the festivities at that pavilion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Aboriginal Kinsmen Club deserve a 
great deal of commendation for their dedication to inner-city 
youth. In February of 2000, a group of Aboriginal businessmen 
from Regina and the surrounding area decided to form a service 
club dedicated to providing opportunities for youth living in the 
core area of Regina. 
 
The group’s members felt that as Aboriginal entrepreneurs and 
professionals, they could act as role models for kids who might 
otherwise be denied the opportunity to reach their full potential 
both as human beings and as community leaders of tomorrow. 
 
To that end, the group approached the Queen City Kinsmen 
who assisted in the establishment of the Regina Aboriginal 
Kinsmen Club, Canada’s very first Aboriginal Kinsmen Club. 
 
Since its inception, Mr. Speaker, this club has helped numerous 
organizations and individuals through partnerships and 
fundraising events. They promote high ideals and afford their 
members the opportunity for personal motivation, business 
practices, communication, and public involvement. 
 
Members of the Saskatchewan Party official opposition salute 
the Regina Aboriginal Kinsmen Club and wish them much 
success in their endeavours to assist inner-city youth in 
becoming the best they can be. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Employment Programs Recognized 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board Training for 
Excellence Awards . . . at it, a program received an award that 
deserves our special merit. 
 
In the category for Recognition of Prior Learning, the Ranch 

Ehrlo Society Construction Crew — Construction Careers 
Regina and Ranch Ehrlo Society received an award. 
 
This program is a construction experience program for youth at 
risk, Mr. Speaker. Each participant is given the ability to 
develop their own portfolio so that they have the skills an 
employer may want. 
 
The construction career project may also add the Conference 
Board of Canada’s National Partners in Education Award to 
their list of achievements. 
 
The construction career project was given this award because of 
successfully placing — get this, 1,800; yes, 1,800 — people in 
construction jobs and apprenticeships. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — The industry experts in Saskatchewan 
Construction Association are very supportive of this program 
and highlight that the project helps First Nations people and 
others establish careers in construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the true victory of this program is that it is helping 
to retain and reintroduce people into the workforce while letting 
all of us reap the rewards. It’s a delight to bring this story to our 
attention. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emergency Response/Mine Rescue Competition 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The mine rescue team 
from Luscar Ltd. came home winners from the Saskatchewan 
emergency response/mine rescue competition on June 1 in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Luscar’s team, made up of employees from the Bienfait and 
Boundary dam mines near Estevan, competed in the surface and 
soft rock categories. The team placed first in first aid, 
firefighting, and proficiency. 
 
As a result of placing first in these three categories, Luscar won 
the overall team title. Members of the local Luscar team 
included Arnold Betzema, Keith Gould, George Kingdon, Scott 
MacKenzie, Ken Elliott, Trevor Bourassa, and Dale Feser. 
 
There were six surface mine teams competing. They came from 
surface coal, uranium, and potash mining companies. Please 
join me in extending congratulations to the team from Luscar. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Pride Dinner 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion 
of Tourism Awareness Week I want to mention to the 
Assembly the tourism pride dinners held this week in Saskatoon 
and Regina, the latter of which I was happy to attend with the 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

Minister of Labour. 
 
These recognition dinners are held annually by the 
Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council and are designed to 
recognize the professional development of members of the 
tourism industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, as we know, tourism is a $1.1 
billion industry which employs 45,000 employees. That is 1 out 
of every 10 workers in the province. Within the industry are 
many professionals who meet national standards through 
certification. 
 
Professional development improves the skills and broadens the 
knowledge of tourism employees, which leads to better service 
for our guests, which in turn makes our province more attractive 
to future visitors. 
 
There are a number of professions which require certification 
and STEC (Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council) dinners 
honour those workers who received certification in 2002. The 
professions range from outfitting to heritage interpreting, 
bartending, information counselling, tour guiding — like our 
wonderful guides in the legislature here — hotel front desk 
management, and a whole range of activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these workers in the tourism industry are 
invaluable to our province and its economy. I congratulate those 
involved in organizing the evenings that were set aside to 
recognize such valuable work. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sara Hnetka Receives Top Mark in Piano Examinations 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, music is the art of mixing 
combinations of tones and rhythms to create melody and 
emotional effects. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow called music 
the universal language of mankind, while William Shakespeare 
called it the food of love. Some claim music, not English, is the 
international language because everyone responds to notes. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to rise in the legislature to recognize a 
constituent who has been very successful through her piano 
examinations in connecting with people in her world. 
 
Sara Hnetka, a 16-year-old from Archerwill, recently received 
the award for attaining the highest mark in Conservatory 
Canadian examinations in Saskatchewan for grade 6 piano. 
 
This is not the first time Sara has received this award. In the 
past she was presented with medals for grade 1 piano, grade 3 
piano, and grade 5 piano. Sara also recently won awards at local 
music festivals. 
 
Sara’s skill and dedication to music has allowed her to achieve 
a high level of success. Whether or not Sara continues her 
pursuit of music excellence, her gift of music is a lifetime talent 
which she can use to enhance the world she lives in. 
 
I would ask this Assembly to join with me in congratulating 
Sara on her success in her piano examinations. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Winners of SaskPower’s Energy and 
Environment Poster Contest 

 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
Environment Week 2002 draws to a close, I’m pleased to tell 
the members of the House about the achievements of four very 
special grade 5 and 6 students here in the province. 
 
These four students, Aidan Searle of Saskatoon, Derek 
Yakimchuk of Wakaw, Elena Topisirovic of Moose Jaw, and 
Ceara Caton of Eastend, were chosen as winners of 
SaskPower’s first ever Energy and Our Environment Poster 
Contest. 
 
In response to a call from SaskPower for posters on addressing 
climate change, more than 1,000 posters were received. The 
magnitude and variety of these responses shows just how much 
we can learn from our youth when it comes to environmental 
awareness. 
 
To reward their efforts, each winner will be given a bicycle 
from SaskPower Shand Greenhouse. Their school will also 
receive a credit to help purchase trees for school grounds, as 
well as climate change books and reference materials for their 
libraries. 
 
I am very encouraged, Mr. Speaker, by the efforts of these 
students and seeing that this generation of leaders and decision 
makers is already well tuned with environmental issues. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Aidan, Derek, Elena, and 
Ceara on creating their winning posters, and SaskPower for its 
proactive steps to educate more of our province’s residents on 
the issues of climate change. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Claims by Government Agencies 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We appreciated the 
apology that we received this morning from the Minister of SGI 
because this House cannot operate if we can’t trust the veracity 
of the individuals answering the questions. 
 
We did, however — and I don’t think that this business is 
completely completed, Mr. Speaker — we have a lot of 
questions for the Minister of SGI this morning. And the first 
one relates to a request for an apology made by Virginia Cook 
yesterday. Can Virginia Cook expect an apology from the 
minister for what happened to her because of the actions of 
SGI? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I indicated in the lobby yesterday, Mr. Speaker, for me to offer 
an apology — while I regret that I’m not able to, Mr. Speaker 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

 

— would suggest, if I offer an apology, it suggests that I have 
an opinion on the case and I have full knowledge of the case. 
Mr. Speaker, I am aware that there is an appeal taking place 
right now and it’s absolutely inappropriate for me to inject 
myself into a specific case especially where there’s an issue of 
appeal taking place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — As head of SGI it’s the minister’s 
responsibility to be in touch with what his department’s doing. 
He should have known what would have happened so he could 
have apologized before all of this work took place, before the 
appeals took place. This minister is not in control of his 
department and his department is out of control. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, after question period the minister went 
out and he spent some half . . . 30 minutes with his officials to 
decide on the action that he was going to take with the media. 
 
Mr. Minister, to the minister, did his officials mislead him 
before he gave those same answers as he gave in the House to 
the media? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I made it clear in my 
statement that the information that I provided in the House 
yesterday was incomplete and inaccurate and I apologize for 
that. 
 
If that member is now, Mr. Speaker, standing up and saying that 
we should not investigate cases where we think there is fraud, 
Mr. Speaker, I ask him to stand up and say that here in the 
House and say it outside, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We as an insurance company, any insurance company, have the 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to investigate cases where we think 
fraud has occurred. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we asked the question in the 
House. The minister says he did not know the answer to that. 
He apologized today. After that, after that, Mr. Speaker, he 
went out and checked with his officials. 
 
Did his officials give him incorrect information after that 
particular point? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I said in my 
apology, Mr. Speaker, that the information that I received, that 
the information that I received was incomplete and inaccurate. I 
don’t know how much more clearer I can be than that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year it is estimated that across Canada there 
is $1.3 billion in fraud as a result of inappropriate claims as it 
pertains to insurance, Mr. Speaker. Surely that member is not 
suggesting that we should not investigate cases where we think 
fraud has occurred, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — For the third time to that minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. And allow the member 
to put the question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — For the third time to that minister, after the 
question was asked, after he answered the question in the 
House, he went out and spent some 30 minutes with his 
officials. He knew at that time what the question was. Then he 
went out and gave the same answers to the media. 
 
Did his officials mislead him, give him incorrect information 
after question period, before he went and addressed the media? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I was clear that the 
information that I received was incomplete and incorrect, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve asked and instructed the president of SGI to do a 
full review, Mr. Speaker, to bring back to me in a very timely 
manner for the requirement that he looks into the issues of how 
investigations are conducted, Mr. Speaker. I’ve asked him to 
look into the specific case. 
 
I was absolutely categoric in saying that the information I 
received was incomplete and inaccurate. I don’t know how 
much clearer I can be than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Simple question to the minister. Did he 
receive the incorrect information before question period, after 
question period, or at both times? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, one more time I’ll read 
this last statement. I said . . . And this is what I’ve asked the 
president of SGI, to determine for me why I was given 
incomplete information on this issue and take appropriate 
remedial action. I can’t be any clearer than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to ask again though of that member, Mr. Speaker, if 
that member says that we should not conduct investigations 
where we think fraud has occurred, I ask you to stand up in this 
House and tell us that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This minister, Mr. Speaker, this minister 
comes in the House and he says he does not know the correct 
information because his officials have given him incorrect 
information. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It’s impossible for any minister of this NDP 
(New Democratic Party) side to go ahead and deal with their 
issues if they’re given incorrect information by their officials. 
 
What disciplinary action will this minister take on his officials 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

for misleading him and thus misleading the people of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, appropriate . . . an 
appropriate action will be taken, Mr. Speaker. I think they don’t 
like process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, coming from that member, that member who said, 
Mr. Speaker, that we should first contact people who we think 
are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order, please. I would ask the member . . . Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I said that 
appropriate remedial action will be take . . . will be taken as 
soon as we know the facts of what exactly had took place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But coming from that member, that member who said just a few 
days ago in this House that in cases where we think fraud has 
been committed, we should first contact — believe this, Mr. 
Speaker, believe this — we’re supposed to first contact the 
individuals to see if it’s okay if we investigate whether they’re 
doing something wrong or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the investigation, 
the investigation has taken place. That’s why we had the 
apology. He was mislead by his people. 
 
Will he fire those people that mislead the cabinet ministers and 
thus mislead the people of this province? Will he commit to do 
that so we can get correct information in this House as we work 
for the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to 
form a vigilante group and just get rid of people without 
knowing what the facts are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and coming 
from that member, Mr. Speaker, who said that even in cases . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, and I find it incredulous, 
even coming from that member, who again a few days ago said 
that even where individuals have a criminal record and have 
been charged a number of times, we should contact them to see 
whether or not we should do an investigation on them; to see 
whether they’d like it if we did an investigation on them, even 
though they may be defrauding the people of Saskatchewan. 
What a ridiculous position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask him to stand up in the House again or out in the rotunda 

and again restate that position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, is when we have a 
member of this House . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — . . . a member who’s a cabinet member who 
gets incorrect and misleading information from his people and 
he’s not prepared to say that he’s going to discipline them and 
make sure that he comes into this House knowing what he’s 
talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s see that if in the interim since May 27 this 
minister has got any correct information from his people that 
are supposed to advise him or whether he still is totally at sea 
with what’s going on with SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the minister has been made aware that 
SGI does conduct video surveillance on insurance claimants, 
perhaps he also knows the answer to this question. Mr. Speaker, 
will the minister finally explain in detail what criteria are used 
by SGI to determine when an insurance case needs to be 
investigated and when video surveillance is needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I ask members and the 
people who work in our civil service to listen carefully to what 
that member has just asked, Mr. Speaker. He’s asked us not to 
follow due process, Mr. Speaker, to just . . . for the minister just 
to fire people indiscriminately, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been clear. I’ve asked 
the president of SGI to find out why I was given incomplete and 
inappropriate information, and that I wanted remedial action to 
be taken place . . . to take place as a result of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if that member is suggesting that, on behalf 
of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, where we think fraud has 
been committed that we should somehow not investigate that, 
Mr. Speaker, please stand up and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I very specifically asked that 
minister to explain what the rules and criteria are that SGI uses. 
The minister got up and restated incorrectly and falsely my 
question and then didn’t answer it. Will he now get up in his 
spot and answer the question: what criteria do they use? That’s 
the question. We want the answer from that minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, last year . . . Mr. Speaker, 
I said that I’ve asked the president that he would ensure that a 
remedial action took place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, if that member is suggesting that somehow 
when we believe that fraud has been committed, Mr. Speaker, 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

 

that we should somehow not investigate that, I would ask him 
to stand up and make that point again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say again that if somehow he is suggesting that 
indiscriminate investigations and surveillances of Saskatchewan 
people take place, nothing could be further from the truth. Last 
year, there were 6,500 personal injury claims and of that, Mr. 
Speaker, we are told that between 8 and 10 involve 
surveillance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that does not suggest indiscriminate investigations 
and surveillances of people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We asked the questions, Mr. Speaker, and the 
minister restates them incorrectly. And he wonders about being 
far from the truth — and he wonders about being far from the 
truth. 
 
We’ve heard it this morning — we’ve heard it this morning. 
Another question, and see if he knows this one. He spent 30 
minutes in his little vestibule back there yesterday getting 
briefed, by now he should know. It’s been since May 27, what 
does he know? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister told John Gormley on May 28 and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We’ve got the Minister of Health chirping 
over there, how long it took to write these questions. It’ll take 
24 years for those people to even get a sniff at government 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The people of Saskatchewan are livid over 
the information that’s coming out over the incorrect 
surveillance, the unnecessary surveillance, the invasion of 
privacy that SGI is doing. May 28, and I quote John Gormley’s 
show: 
 

In Saskatchewan we have roughly 6,500 auto injury claims 
each year and only between (6) . . . to 10 of these are 
investigated in-depth. 

 
Yesterday in the legislature the minister said, and I quote: 
 

. . . in cases where there are injury claims — I’ve said, 
some 6,500 across the province annually . . . SGI, the 
corporation . . . will investigate . . . some 8 or 10 annually 
. . . 

 
The Speaker: — Would the member go directly to the 
question, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — And would the members allow the member to 
go directly to the question. 

Mr. Heppner: — In the year 2000, there were 72 
investigations. Mr. Speaker, why is the minister relying on 
incorrect information to give that kind of information to this 
particular House? How many people are being investigated on 
an average year, Mr. Speaker? And how many of those are 
charged because of that investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said that the 
information I received was incomplete and it was inaccurate. I 
can’t be any clearer than that, Mr. Speaker. He is correct when 
he says that the numbers were 70 in the year prior and they 
were 9 last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believed that that was the average at the time. 
And that’s why I’ve stood in the House and apologized, Mr. 
Speaker, because I believed that that was the average at the 
time. And I apologized then and I apologize now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let’s put this in perspective, Mr. Speaker. Of 6,500 injury 
claims, whether it’s 9 or whether it’s 70, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
small percentage. 
 
And again, is that member suggesting that somehow if we 
believe that fraud has been committed that we should not do the 
investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We asked a very 
simple question: how many charges were laid because of those 
investigations? Again we received no answer. 
 
This government continues to stall, to have their officials give 
them incorrect information, and the people of this province 
wonder how at sea they actually are. 
 
I want to go back, Mr. Speaker, to a statement that the minister 
made earlier on. He said that because of the fact that his 
officials were misleading him, giving him incorrect 
information, an investigation was going to take place. 
 
I want that minister to stand in his place and tell us who’s going 
to do that investigation. Is he going to investigate, himself? Or 
will this be SGI investigating themselves? Or who’s going to 
investigate this, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, part of the reason SGI has 
amongst the lowest insurance rates in all the country, Mr. 
Speaker, is because we investigate and we ensure, Mr. Speaker, 
that SGI’s customers are not being ripped off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, if that member, if 
that member is suggesting that we would know in advance 
somehow whether those individuals that we believe are 
committing fraud are in fact committing fraud, you wouldn’t 
have to do the investigation, Mr. Speaker — excuse me — you 
wouldn’t have to do the investigation. 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

It’s hard when you’re yelling overtop of this all the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that member suggests that we shouldn’t do the 
investigations when we think fraud is committed, he should 
stand up in the House here again — or out in the rotunda — and 
say so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budgetary Projections 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
obvious this morning we’re going to get very little in terms of 
honest answers from that minister, so let’s try, let’s try the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker. Let’s try the Premier. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order, order. 
Order. Order, order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask members 
to come to order. I would ask members to come to order, 
complete order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Members, it is one thing to talk about being misled and 
inadvertently misled or accidentally misled; it’s another thing to 
impute that there was a deliberate attempt at misleading. And to 
question another member’s honesty is not permitted in this 
House. And I would ask the member to withdraw the statement 
before he proceeds with his question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll withdraw that statement and 
I’ll apologize to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — But I do want to have an answer from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, now. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — This year’s provincial budget on March 27, 
the Minister of Finance told the legislature and the people of 
Saskatchewan that the budget was balanced. But as everyone in 
Saskatchewan now knows, Mr. Speaker, the budget wasn’t 
balanced. In fact, the NDP will run a deficit this year of at least 
$225 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister told the people of 
Saskatchewan that he was introducing a balanced budget when 
he knew full well that the budget would run a $225 million 
deficit. 
 
Will the Premier tell us why the people of Saskatchewan should 
believe anything the NDP government says? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the nonsense 
from the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the nonsense 
from the member opposite and we’ll continue to hear it. He will 

go around saying that we’re trying to mislead the people of the 
province. 
 
But I want the people to know, Mr. Speaker, that I had the 
opportunity to challenge that member in estimates, where I 
pointed out to that member that Moody’s Investment Services 
had looked at our budget and had given us a credit rating 
upgrade. And I said to that member that he was peddling 
nonsense, and I asked that member to stand up and justify 
saying we were misleading the people. 
 
And this is what he said, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from 
Hansard, May 15, page 1464. When I challenged him, he said 
this: 
 

. . . I’m not suggesting . . . you’re trying to mislead the 
people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 
He said that, Mr. Speaker, and then he went on, Mr. Speaker, to 
say: 
 

Mr. Minister, I am not suggesting that you are mishandling 
the finances of this province. 

 
He says one thing one day, Mr. Speaker, and another thing 
another day. And what he has, Mr. Speaker, in the face of our 
credit rating upgrade and 11,000 new jobs this May, is no 
credibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when a 
government has lost its way, Mr. Speaker, when a government 
can’t keep its stories straight any more, Mr. Speaker, they just 
crank up the volume of the argument. It doesn’t mean they’re 
any stronger, Mr. Speaker. The arguments are still weak. And 
this is a government on its way out. Make no mistake, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, two years ago — two years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, this government . . . My question is to the Premier. 
Two years ago, this government promised to automate land 
titles for 20 to $30 million. The cost to date, $60 million and 
rising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, well what they then said was, we’ll pay for this 
bloated expense by selling this technology around the world. 
Now we hear, Mr. Speaker, that the government is not going to 
try to sell this technology around the world. No wonder the 
people of Saskatchewan don’t believe them. 
 
To the Premier, would he tell this Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Must be able to hear the question. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the events of today, in 
light of the string of times that this government has had to 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

 

change its story, would he please tell this Assembly why in the 
world Saskatchewan people should believe a word that 
government has to say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member 
who wants to be the leader of the Saskatchewan Party, let me 
say this: he wants the story, I’ll tell him the story. 
 
The Speaker: — Would ask for order. Would ask for order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you the story. We 
have questions about the budget. Now we’ll listen to the 
questions, but I’ll tell you we’ll pay attention to Moody’s of 
New York . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . who gave this budget a credit rating 
upgrade. 
 
We will listen to the question from the member from Rosthern 
who chirps perennially from his seat . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Members have 
had an opportunity to ask their questions. I would now ask the 
Premier to continue with his response. Order. With order. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll listen to the question 
from Rosthern. But I want to hear him state his position — or 
better yet, his leader. Is it the position of the Saskatchewan 
Party that those who are suspected of defrauding the motorists 
of Saskatchewan should not be investigated? Would they make 
that clear? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to build in this province. We’re going 
to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is completely obvious to 
the people of Saskatchewan this is a party in decline, a party 
that cannot stand good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on a day, on a day when 
there are more people working in the month of May in 
Saskatchewan, second highest in the history of this province, I 
just want to say this, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have to fight 
the Republicans in Washington, I have to fight the Liberals in 
Ottawa, I have to fight the Sask Party in Saskatchewan — in 
spite of that, 11,000 new jobs in the month of May. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave to introduce 

guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(11:00) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, shortly after the time allotted for introduction of 
guests, a school group from my constituency arrived in the east 
gallery. And it’s my privilege and my pleasure to introduce to 
you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of the House, 12 grade 11 
students from my home community of Invermay, from the 
Invermay School. 
 
They’re here on a day in Regina and will be heading back to 
Invermay later on today. I understand that many of the students 
were at the school as early as 6:30 this morning to get here. 
 
So I want to ask all members to welcome the grade 11 students 
and the their teacher Gail Krawetz and bus driver Budd Johns. 
Let’s welcome them this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise on a 
point of privilege. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of privilege 
please? 
 

PRIVILEGE 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I 
sent you a letter outlining the point of privilege dealing with the 
events of the House in the last two days. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to read that letter into the record. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move a motion at the end of my comments. And the motion will 
read: 
 

That the statements by the minister responsible for Crown 
Investments Corporation on pages 1856 through 1858 of 
June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard regarding the 
surveillance of Saskatchewan residents by Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Privileges and Elections for investigation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, 
 

. . . on several occasions the Minister responsible for 
Crown Investments Corporation said that Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance (SGI) does not hire private 
investigators to investigate no-fault insurance claims and 
that SGI does not conduct any form of surveillance on 
private individuals. 
 
The Minister made statements to this effect on eight 
occasions yesterday. I have highlighted these statements on 
pages 1856 through 1858 of Hansard for your information. 
 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

Later, after the Official Opposition produced a videotape of 
surveillance conducted by a private investigator under 
contract with SGI, the Minister and an SGI official 
admitted that SGI does contract with private investigators 
to conduct surveillances. 
 
Page 111 of the 22nd edition of Erskine May states: “The 
Commons may treat the making of a deliberately 
misleading statement as a contempt.” Page 141 of the 19th 
edition of Erskine May states that: “Conspiracy to deceive 
either House or any committees of either House will also be 
treated as a breach of privilege. 

 
The Minister clearly made misleading statements in the 
Assembly when he said SGI does not conduct surveillance 
of individuals. On some (but not all) occasions, he qualified 
this statement by saying he had been advised of this 
information by SGI officials. 

 
Therefore, either the minister deliberately misled the 
House, in contradiction of Page 111 of Erskine May as 
quoted above, or there has been a conspiracy by one or 
more SGI officials to deceive the Minister, and by 
extension the House, in contraction of Page 141 of Erskine 
May as quoted above. 

 
Either way, the end result was that members were provided 
with incorrect information in the Assembly. Page 67 of 
Marleau and Montpetit states: 

 
The House also claims the right to punish, as a contempt, 
any action which, . . . tends to obstruct or impede the 
House in the performance of its functions (or) obstructs 
or impedes any member or officer of the House in the 
discharge of their duties. 

 
Clearly providing incorrect information to the House — 
namely, that SGI does not conduct surveillance of 
individuals — obstructs members of the Assembly in the 
discharge of their duties. It is important that the Assembly 
determine who is responsible for this obstruction. As such, 
I believe this matter should be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Elections and Privileges for further 
investigation. 

 
This situation is similar in nature to the privilege question 
involving former National Defence Minister Art Eggleton 
earlier this year. Mr. Eggleton provided misleading 
information to the House of Commons regarding the 
capture and detention of prisoners by Canadian Forces . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I consider this a serious matter. 
I appreciate very much if members would not interrupt. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll repeat that 
paragraph: 
 

This situation is similar in nature to the privilege question 
involving former National Defence Minister Art Eggleton 
earlier this year. Mr. Eggleton provided misleading 
information to the House of Commons regarding the 
capture and detention of prisoners by Canadian Forces in 
Afghanistan. A point of privilege was raised against Mr. 

Eggleton. 
 
Even though the Speaker accepted that Mr. Eggleton did 
not intentionally mislead the House, he went on to cite the 
passage from Marleau and Montpetit mentioned above and 
ruled that the motion to refer the matter to the appropriate 
committee should proceed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the member . . . a member or a minister providing 
misleading information to this House prevents the members 
from properly performing their duties. The member from 
Rosthern asked questions related to SGI’s use of private 
investigators on May 27. Later that day the member faced a 
difficult scrum based on the information provided by the 
minister in the House. 
 
Yesterday this House found out that the information provided 
by the minister was false. This false information made it 
difficult, if not impossible, for the member for Rosthern to 
perform his duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any attempt to mislead the House is a contempt of 
this House. Mr. Speaker, this House cannot allow either the 
ministers or the department officials to provide false 
information to this Assembly. 
 
An investigation by the Committee of Privileges and Elections 
to determine how this occurred and how widespread this 
practice is must be established. Further, the committee should 
report its findings to this House along with recommendations to 
prevent these breaches from happening again, and impose 
penalties on the officials providing false information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has admitted in the House that he 
provided misleading information, information that he had 
received from his officials. This provides the prima facie 
evidence that a breach of privilege and contempt of this House 
has occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that you allow this motion to proceed to 
determine the extent of this breach of privilege and contempt of 
the legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister’s performance and SGI’s must be investigated by 
a proper agency to conduct a contempt of this Assembly. That 
should be an agency of this House. That agency, Mr. Speaker, is 
the Committee of Privileges and Elections. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that you will be 
required to make a ruling as to whether there is a prima facie 
case of violation of privilege of the House as brought to your 
attention by the House Leader from the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve listened carefully, although I’m not 
previously advised of the matter being brought to the House, I 
listened to the words of the Opposition House Leader. He refers 
to Erskine May and the references there related to privilege of 
the House having to do with deliberately misleading statements 
or conspiracy to deceive. 
 
I point out, Mr. Speaker, that in those references, it refers to the 
conduct of a member of the House, that is . . . that is the 
particular conduct or behaviour which is referred to in those 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

 

references in Erskine May. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this day, as we are all aware, the minister 
stood in his place and advised the House that . . . along with his 
apology to the House, that he had presented to the House 
information that he believed to be accurate, but which he 
subsequently learned to be incomplete and incorrect. Mr. 
Speaker, I understand that the minister has done the honourable 
thing at the earliest possible opportunity. After having learned 
that he had been provided inaccurate and incomplete 
information, he stood in his place and advised the House of that. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the appropriate case is 
that there is no prima facie case. Privileges of the House have to 
do with members of the House and the hon. member opposite 
would like to suggest that that should be extended. I suggest 
that that is not the case and that there is not a prima facie case 
of violation of privileges of the House before us. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I did . . . or I want 
to confirm that I did receive today a letter from the Opposition 
House Leader at approximately 9:53 a.m. I did not have time to 
peruse it in detail until the member lead me through it shortly 
and I thank the member for the letter and for the explanation 
that he has just given. 
 
The . . . I want to bring to members’ attention on page 3 of our 
own rule book about privilege when: 
 

A member who proposes to raise a question of privilege 
shall first advise the Speaker of his intention so to do and 
the subject matter thereof, at least two hours prior to the 
regular daily opening of the Assembly. 

 
And it’s item 6(2) which says: 
 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Speaker shall have the 
right to waive notice. 

 
I . . . Because of the intervening events that have happened 
today, members, I wish to extend to . . . pardon me, I wish to 
use the Speaker’s right to waive notice of that two hour period 
and I wish to deal with the matter at this time. 
 
The . . . I also want to mention that I heard, as everybody did, 
very clearly, the statement of apology by the member from . . . 
by the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation and I thank 
him for the apology as members did. And I heard from that 
statement that although he apologized for misleading the House 
that he did not do so in a deliberate or knowing manner. 
 
Having heard both the request for the statement of . . . for the 
motion of privilege and the statement by the minister, it is the 
job of the Speaker to rule whether or not there is sufficient 
evidence, whether there is prima facie evidence for an item like 
this to proceed to a motion. 
 
I must say that in this particular case the member did not 
establish sufficient case that there was any intention or ill will 
or deliberate attempt or that the member knowingly misled the 
House. 
 
Furthermore, I would like to say that with respect to the 

evidence the member gives about statements that happened 
outside of the Assembly, the Speaker will not rule on any 
statements that are made or any action that is taken outside the 
Assembly. 
 
I would therefore rule that the prima facie case is not 
established. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 
joining us in the east gallery, we have 16 grade 4 students from 
the school in Whitewood. And, Mr. Speaker, they are joined by 
their teacher, Ms. Fischer, and chaperones Ms. Belogh and Ms. 
Browatzke. 
 
They are just going to be here for a few minutes. I look forward 
to meeting them shortly for photos and just a brief discussion. I 
trust they’ll enjoy the proceedings of the Assembly that they 
will note taking place here shortly. 
 
And at this time, I ask members to join me in welcoming the 
students from Whitewood. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:15) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasant duty today to rise and move second reading of the 
Bill that amends The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2000 budget, that was two years ago, 
announced this government’s plan to reform Saskatchewan’s 
personal income tax system. Our objective was to achieve a 
simple, fair, and competitive tax system that would be more 
responsive to the needs of Saskatchewan people and strengthen 
the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
To meet this objective our government introduced a multi-year 
tax reform initiative as part of our long-term vision for growth 
and opportunity in Saskatchewan. 
 
And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, it was so encouraging today to 
hear the latest job figures from Statistics Canada which showed 
that in Saskatchewan there are 11,000 more people working 
today than there were a year ago. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, it 
also indicated that it is the second highest number of jobs ever 
in the province of Saskatchewan. So that’s very encouraging, 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
On January 1, 2001, the determination of Saskatchewan income 
tax was simplified. The flat tax which had been introduced by 
the previous government, the debt reduction surtax, and the 
high-income surtax, and the Saskatchewan tax reduction were 
all eliminated. 
 
These have now been replaced with a simple, three-rate tax 
structure and provincial tax credits which generally parallel the 
federal tax credits. The new provincial income tax system also 
introduced a universal, dependent child tax credit and a 
universal supplement to the age tax credit. 
 
And I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that since it has been two 
years since we introduced tax reform, many, many people 
across the province have noticed filling out their tax returns this 
spring for the 2001 tax year, which is the first full year of a 
three-year plan, that their income tax situation is much, much 
better than it has been in the past. 
 
And of course it will be even better for 2002 and for 2003 as a 
result of this Bill. Because what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, for 
the third year in a row, is to bring about further income tax 
reductions for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I should say, Mr. Speaker, that the 2002 changes have 
already been implemented so people will see that when they file 
their income tax returns next spring. And the 2003 changes are 
on track for implementation on January 1, 2003. 
 
These changes will include a significant expansion in the 
income tax brackets in addition to the reduction in the tax rates; 
and increases, Mr. Speaker, to the child tax credit and the 
seniors tax credit. And the major point, Mr. Speaker, is that all 
income tax payers are benefiting from tax reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our multi-year, personal tax reform initiative 
delivers meaningful tax relief to Saskatchewan residents. We’ve 
heard voices lately say that most of our emphasis should be on 
cutting corporate taxes and that we should be transferring some 
of the corporate tax load onto individuals and families. We’ve 
taken the opposite approach, Mr. Speaker. We have been 
cutting business taxes somewhat through reductions in the 
small-business tax credit and raising the threshold before which 
corporations pay the corporate capital tax. But, over much 
opposition, we’ve emphasized personal, individual, tax reform 
for individuals and families to help out the individuals and 
families in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Others have a different view. They feel that we should 
concentrate on simply tax reductions for corporations and 
raising corporate . . . or I should say sales taxes on individuals. 
We’ve heard that from the more conservative voices. And we 
don’t want to take that approach, Mr. Speaker. We’re trying to 
reform personal taxes in Saskatchewan. 
 
The introduction of higher personal tax amounts is removing 
thousands of lower-income earners from the income tax rolls. 
So far income tax reform has put $330 million per year more 
into the hands of Saskatchewan people. This final stage of tax 
reform in 2003 will provide a further $78 million in tax 
reductions. 

And I should also add, Mr. Speaker, that one of the things that 
had been a problem I think in our income tax system before was 
the flat tax which was brought in by the Devine government, 
which this government did away with, with tax reform. Because 
what that flat tax often did was to really hit people who have 
low incomes very hard with an income tax bill. 
 
And when we abolished the flat tax, that took 55,000 
low-income people off of the tax rolls altogether, Mr. Speaker. 
At the same time we brought in the sales tax credit to give 
low-income people a credit every three months, along with the 
GST (goods and services tax) credit that they receive, to 
compensate them for the expanded sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an average Saskatchewan family today is paying 
$854 less in provincial income tax than they did in 1999, and 
almost a full third less than they did in 1993. Mr. Speaker, the 
average family in Saskatchewan pays $1,300 less in income tax 
today than they did in 1993. 
 
I’d like to repeat that, Mr. Speaker, because it’s often not 
understood that income taxes have only been going in one 
direction in this province, which has been down. Income taxes 
have been reduced every year in this province, I believe, for the 
last five years. And the average family, Mr. Speaker, pays 
$1,300 less in income tax today than they did in 1993. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — . . . these changes being introduced today 
will provide a further $180 to the average family in annual tax 
savings, Mr. Speaker, a further $180 on top of $1,300. And I 
should point out to anyone watching that these tax changes have 
been opposed every step of the way by the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has also introduced a number of 
initiatives to improve the competitiveness of Saskatchewan’s 
business tax regime. We’ve reduced the small-business income 
tax rate from 10 per cent in 1991 to 6 per cent today. 
 
We’ve increased the annual amount of income eligible for the 
lower small-business rate from 200,000 to 300,000. That just 
took effect January 1 of this year, Mr. Speaker, because we’re 
trying to help out small business. And once again, we’re doing 
that notwithstanding the opposition of the opposition. 
 
We’ve also introduced a number of tax incentives targeted to 
specific segments of the provincial economy, including 
manufacturing and processing, the film industry, and the 
resource sector. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do more 
for families and businesses as our fiscal resources permit. 
 
This Bill introduces amendments that will implement the 
income tax initiatives announced in the 2002 budget. And with 
your permission, I will now describe the business tax initiatives 
that are being implemented through the income tax amendments 
contained in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1995 our government introduced two major 
initiatives in support of the province’s manufacturing and 
processing sector. The manufacturing and processing profits tax 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

 

reduction lowers the provincial corporate income tax rate on 
manufacturing and processing profits to as low as 10 per cent. 
The investment tax credit for manufacturing and processing 
encourages the acquisition of manufacturing and processing 
capital assets. 
 
And I should just take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to explain that 
the purpose of lower manufacturing and processing taxes is to 
say that we want there to be more manufacturing and 
processing value added to food products, to produce food in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it has been working. What we have seen in 
the last number of years has been a doubling of manufacturing 
in Saskatchewan; roughly the same, I think, with food 
processing — much more investment, many more jobs in 
manufacturing and processing. 
 
And I think this is one of the reasons why we have 11,000 
people more working in Saskatchewan today than we did just a 
year ago, because we’re trying to encourage manufacturing and 
processing in our province. And that’s what these tax changes 
do, Mr. Speaker. In addition to trying to help out individuals 
and families, we’re trying to help out the manufacturing sector 
and the processing sector. 
 
We’re also trying to encourage investment in research and 
development and the expansion of knowledge-based industries 
through the scientific research and experimental development 
tax credit introduced in 1998. 
 
What does that try to do, Mr. Speaker? It tries to encourage 
companies to invest in research and development which 
ultimately leads to economic development. The credit reduces 
Saskatchewan corporate income tax in the year eligible 
expenditures are incurred. Unused tax credits may be carried 
forward for seven taxation years or carried back three years. 
 
To improve the ability of smaller knowledge-based companies 
to access this credit, the carry forward provision is being 
extended to 10 taxation years. And what that means, Mr. 
Speaker, is you may have a business that starts up and they’re 
investing in Saskatchewan but they’re not yet profitable, and so 
they don’t have any income tax against which to deduct the 
value of their credit. 
 
We’re saying that they used to have up to seven years to make a 
profit, to pay income tax and they could then claim their credit 
against that income tax. Now they can take up to 10 years, to 
encourage businesses to invest in research and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that our personal tax reform and 
our business tax initiatives are part of a long-term vision for 
growth and opportunity in Saskatchewan. We believe that a 
competitive tax regime which helps individuals and families 
and not just the corporate sector as some of the conservative 
forces called for, is central to our plan to create the economic 
growth needed to secure our Saskatchewan quality of life. We 
believe we’re doing what is right, what is fair for people, what’s 
fair for ordinary people and middle-income people, and what 
makes sense for our province and our people — building a 
stronger, more prosperous Saskatchewan for everyone to enjoy. 
 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I note that this Bill also includes some 
technical amendments that were requested by the Canada 
Customs & Revenue Agency, usually referred to as Revenue 
Canada. These technical amendments will clarify certain 
provisions, correct references to the federal Income Tax Act, 
and parallel federal legislative changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very pleased to answer questions 
concerning the amendments to The Income Tax Act, 2000 when 
discussing this Bill at Committee of the Whole. And with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, any tax reduction is a good tax reduction, Mr. Speaker. 
However, Mr. Speaker, that tax reduction should not be offset 
by a corresponding tax increase someplace else. 
 
And that is exactly what is happening in this case, Mr. Speaker. 
While the minister is reducing the income taxes a little bit, he in 
turn is causing taxes to be raised in other areas. He is 
downloading, Mr. Speaker, on municipalities. He is 
downloading onto boards of education. He is downloading onto 
post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. And he’s even 
downloading costs onto our health care system at the local 
levels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the downloading by the Minister of 
Finance, he is causing municipalities, both rural and urban, to 
raise their property taxes to offset that loss of revenue from the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, boards of education across this province are 
raising their mill rates on property to pay for the necessary 
educational components for our children. And those costs are 
being driven up to individuals because of the minister’s 
downloading. 
 
We’ve just heard, Mr. Speaker, how tuition fees are going up by 
as much as 8, 9, 10 per cent at our universities because of 
underfunding by the province — downloading, Mr. Speaker, on 
our education system at post-secondary levels. 
 
(11:30) 
 
So while the minister may be dropping taxes in one area, he’s 
causing taxes or costs to be raised in another. More enough, Mr. 
Speaker, enough to more or less offset his income tax drops. 
Mr. Speaker, when you do that, when you lower one area and 
raise another and it balances out, it does nothing to stimulate the 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is talking a little bit about a job 
increase. Well, Mr. Speaker, one month increase in jobs does 
not offset many months of losses. Mr. Speaker, it does not 
offset the 20,000-job loss last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member . . . the minister talks about taking 
55,000 low-income people off of the tax roll. At the same time, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s raised the cost of SaskPower, of power costs 
to them. He’s raised the cost of heating to those same people. 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

He’s raised the cost of telephones, Mr. Speaker. He’s raised the 
cost of gasoline. And he has raised the cost of rents to those 
people, Mr. Speaker, because of the property tax increases. 
 
Now depending on your level of income, Mr. Speaker, you may 
or may not pay taxes. But it doesn’t matter what your income 
level is, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter whether you’re rich or 
poor — you pay for power, you pay for heat, you pay for 
telephones, you pay for gasoline, and you pay your rent or 
housing costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what he has done at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, is 
charged more people at the low-income level that he is claiming 
to protect, Mr. Speaker — costing them more than what any 
potential savings could have had to them through a lowering of 
the income tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government . . . the minister keeps saying that 
the opposition is opposing. No, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to 
the small-business tax, we would completely eliminate it. 
Because small business, Mr. Speaker, is the engine that drives 
job creation in this province. If he wants to stimulate this 
economy and get some job creation, eliminate the 
small-business tax, Mr. Speaker, would be a good step towards 
it. 
 
There are a number of groups, Mr. Speaker, concerned about 
this particular piece of legislation and how the costs are 
shifting, Mr. Speaker, and how this minister is downloading on 
people in this province. Therefore I would move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is necessary to amend this Act to improve 
benefits to plan members, to maintain equality for plan 
members, and to address housekeeping issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if a member of the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Plan becomes disabled, the member has the option to contribute 
to the plan. If after two years the member is totally disabled, the 
member may apply to the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Commission for a waiver of contributions to the pension plan 
while disabled. 
 
The waiver is retroactive to the first date of disability. While 
contributions are waived the member continues to accrue a 
pension benefit respecting that service. If the member’s 
disability was the result of a workplace injury and the member 
receives benefits from the Workers’ Compensation Board, the 
board begins to set an amount aside equivalent to 10 per cent of 
the Workers’ Compensation Board benefit after the member is 
disabled from work for two years. These funds are held in the 
reserves of the Workers’ Compensation Board where they earn 
interest. 
 

Upon the member turning age 65, these funds are used to 
purchase an annuity that will then provide retirement income. 
Offsetting the pension under the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Plan, associated with the same period of pensionable service as 
the Workers’ Compensation Board benefit, ensures that a 
member of the Municipal Employees’ Pension Plan does not 
receive two pensions for the same period of disability. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the intent of the amendment is 
simply to ensure that whatever the disabled pensioner receives 
will be one pension, and not actually two pensions in relation to 
the same period of time. 
 
Under the terms of the Municipal Employees’ Pension Plan a 
member can make contributions retroactively for a period of 
service with an employer and/or a period of approved leave of 
absence. 
 
The process of acquiring and paying for past service is known 
as purchase of prior service. It is desirable, Mr. Speaker, to 
allow plan members to purchase prior service with any 
participating employer of the pension plan versus a specific 
employer of the plan. 
 
This amendment, Mr. Speaker, reflects the original intent of the 
benefit. 
 
There are two categories of members participating in the 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Plan — firstly, general 
members, and secondly designated members. Designated 
members are police officers and firefighters who have been 
designated by their employer under the terms of the pension 
plan. These members pay a higher contribution rate than general 
members do in order to have the opportunity to retire earlier 
under the terms of the pension plan. The normal retirement age 
for general members is age 65, but it’s age 60 for the designated 
members. 
 
Police officers and firefighters contribute to the pension plan as 
general members unless their employer designates them under 
the terms of the pension plan. If a police officer or firefighter 
contributes to the Municipal Employees’ Pension Plan as a 
general member, and subsequently becomes a designated 
member, the individual becomes entitled to a general member 
pension and a designated member pension, each payable on 
different dates. This causes retirement planning difficulty for 
the individual. This Bill addresses this issue, Mr. Speaker, by 
giving general members who become designated by their 
employer options regarding the payable dates of their pension 
benefit. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, years ago a minimum monthly pension 
was established under the pension plan for rural municipal 
secretaries who are now referred to as rural municipal 
administrators. At present, no rural municipal administrators 
qualify for the guarantee and likely none ever will. This Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, therefore repeals this provision. Rural municipal 
administrators will receive the benefit they earn under the 
pension plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to comply with the Income Tax Act of Canada and 
for valuation purposes, the Municipal Employees Pension Plan 
needs to separately account for the assets associated with 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

 

defined benefit pensions and money purchase annuities. The 
separation of the assets will be achieved through actuarial 
methods. Based upon the results of an actuarial valuation, the 
commission will determine its ability to provide inflation 
protection to individuals who purchased annuities from the 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak on 
Bill No. 66, An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Act. 
 
In general terms, it’s very . . . pensions are a very important and 
critical part of our society and as we . . . as we know and have 
been told by the experts that future people, because of 
demographics of our population, there’s going to be a greater 
and greater strain on our Canada Pension Plan. And people are 
being told and more and more people are beginning to look 
after their own pension requirements in the future. 
 
And it’s very important that the . . . this particular pension is 
run properly and adequately so that individuals, when they start 
to retire in the next, well 5, 10 to 15 years, when the bulk of the 
baby boomers do retire, that these individuals have adequate 
pensions and are able to have a good standard of living after 
they have retired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, interesting to note that they’re including 
firefighters and police officers and I accept the explanation of 
the minister in that concern. As we know, firefighters and 
police officers have a relatively higher risk in their profession 
and the job, both health-wise and safety, and it is important that 
they are able to retire somewhat earlier than the average person 
because of their circumstances of their job. 
 
Also, the minister had talked about the RM (rural municipality) 
administrators and the amendments made to the RM 
administrators being included in The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Act. 
 
Interesting to note that the minister spoke of actuaries and, as 
we found out with the Workers’ Compensation Board, how 
important that their numbers are accurate and how important 
that the proper information is given to the actuary so that the 
actuary can make the proper designation and proper calculations 
so that the fund is properly administrated and there are funds 
available when people retire and need to draw on the pensions. 
 
So I would like to speak to the stakeholders. Our critic will look 
at this Bill in much greater detail, and at this time I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Financial 
Services Commission Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Act. 
 
This Bill creates the Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission, a body that will integrate the three major 
organizations that regulate financial services in Saskatchewan: 
the Saskatchewan Securities Commission, and the financial 
institution section of the consumer protection branch, and the 
pension benefits branch of the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important piece of legislation that will 
benefit businesses, consumers, investors, and the province. 
Businesses, consumers, investors in the financial services 
industry will have a single point of access to the financial 
market regulators. It will allow for more responsive, 
coordinated, and effective decision making with respect to all 
aspects of financial regulation. 
 
It will provide Saskatchewan with a stronger voice in national 
financial market regulation issues. It will allow for 
Saskatchewan to respond more efficiently and effectively to 
emerging trends and regulatory initiatives in an ever-changing 
marketplace. 
 
It will eliminate gaps and overlaps, and minimize inconsistent 
treatment of similar financial products under the current 
regulatory structure. And it will provide for the advantages and 
efficiencies gained by the pooling of the knowledge, expertise, 
and experience of the existing regulators. 
 
The creation of the Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission follows a trend towards consolidation of the 
regulation of financial services that is occurring at provincial, 
national, and international level. In particular, Ontario and 
Quebec are currently considering legislation creating a single 
financial services regulator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission will oversee the following institutions: credit 
unions; insurance companies; trust, loan, and financing 
corporations; and security dealers and advisors. 
 
And the following financial services will be covered by the Act: 
lending in general, financing and trust companies, trading in or 
advising with respect to securities, the administration of pension 
plans, the sale of insurance products, and mortgage and loan 
brokering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new commission will have a broad mandate 
and will therefore require members possessing a wide range of 
skills and experience. The commission will consist of no more 
than seven members including a Chair appointed by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council. Initially the responsibilities of 
the commission will be in the nature of coordinating and 
overseeing the regulatory services provided by the current 
regulators. The creation of the new commission will be 
accomplished with existing resources and it will not be 
necessary to increase current staffing levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of the government to pass 
regulations under this Act to assign the current responsibilities 
of the Securities Commission to the new Saskatchewan 
Financial Services Commission. In addition the commission 
can, over time and after consultation with business, consumers, 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

and regulators, assume regulatory functions with respect to 
other financial services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes that industry 
self-regulation is an important part of our current regulatory 
system, and this Bill will allow for a continued role for 
self-regulators. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Broad consultations have been conducted concerning this Bill. 
The government engaged the services of a consultant who 
conducted extensive interviews with business representatives 
and regulators. My officials have held numerous meetings with 
interest groups and business representatives over the past two 
years. In addition a consultation paper was forwarded to a large 
number of stakeholders last fall, many of whom have provided 
a detailed response to the proposal. Support for this initiative, 
Mr. Speaker, has been overwhelmingly positive. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 59, The 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act, as 
mentioned by the minister, looks on surface that it is quite a 
good idea. It’s bringing together, integrating, a number of — 
three I guess — other commissions or agencies into one 
single-point access when it comes to financial service issues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we think that’s a very good idea. I mean any 
time that you can look at making government smaller, we think 
that’s a very good idea. If we can make government more 
accessible, easily . . . easier accessible for the general public, we 
think that’s a good idea also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was a little concerned, though, when I heard the minister say 
that, I guess on one side which is good, that they didn’t look 
like they would need any more staffing or budget to roll this all 
into one Act. The concerning part is . . . disconcerting part is 
may be they could use less staff. Perhaps is it a way of reducing 
— having a single-point access — rolling these three 
departments into one, or commissions into one. Is that a way 
may be an opportunity to may be make government a little 
smaller? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think if there is one thing that we realize over 
and over again over the past winter when we were holding 
different meetings around the province, is so many people said 
that it was difficult to know what you needed to do to — to 
whether it’s to start a business, getting loans, that type of thing. 
And it seemed like there was at times just too much 
bureaucracy and this is may be an opportunity to try and loosen 
that up and lighten that up for people doing business in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister also talked about broad consultation, and that 
they’ve done a number of . . . a lot of consultation with interest 
groups around the province. And we would applaud him on 
that. 
 

The only concern that we would have is we heard that very 
same statement from the Minister of Labour when she was 
talking about The Labour Standards Act that they brought in 
and the broad consultation they had. And then you talk to the 
very people that it’s affecting, Sask Pork, and they said they 
were kept out of the loop. So when this government says broad 
consultation, we take that with a grain of salt, Mr. Speaker. And 
until we are able to do our own consultation and see whether 
the interested parties were actually spoken to and consulted 
with, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we would adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
also thank you to the members for allowing us to bring this in 
just a little bit out of the cycle here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to rise today to move 
second reading of amendments to The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act. The Automobile Accident Insurance Act is the 
universal vehicle insurance plan administered by SGI on behalf 
of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Its primary purpose, Mr. Speaker, is to provide basic auto 
insurance coverage for all Saskatchewan drivers at very 
affordable rates. The Auto Fund operates the . . . on a, I should 
say, a break-even basis over time. It neither receives money 
from nor pays dividends to the General Revenue Fund. It’s 
basically a trust fund for Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
As such, it’s vitally important that the Auto Fund respond to the 
needs of Saskatchewan people. SGI understands it has a 
responsibility to provide the programs and services 
Saskatchewan people demand. To do that, SGI needed to find 
out exactly what it is that people want. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, SGI, through a formal customer feedback 
campaign last year, directly asked its customers how SGI could 
serve them better. The results were clear. Customers told SGI 
they had the following specific areas of concern. Customers 
said: one, give good drivers discounts on their insurance 
premiums; secondly, improve no-fault insurance; and third, 
keep auto rates low. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to the legislation I will 
outline today act on that customer feedback and will address 
each of the issues raised by SGI’s customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first of the amendments I would like to outline 
today will allow SGI to respond to the number one desire of its 
customers — the introduction of discounts on vehicle insurance 
premiums. For a number of years, the motoring public in 
Saskatchewan has made it quite clear they’d like recognition for 
drivers who have kept our streets and roadways safe. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act will be amended to allow for the introduction of 
the Safe Driver Recognition program. Owners of personal use 
vehicles with private and farm class plates will be eligible for a 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

 

discount under the program. That accounts for about 72 per cent 
of the province’s vehicle population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note that most Saskatchewan drivers . . . 
excuse me . . . are safe drivers. Under Safe Driver Recognition, 
two out of three Saskatchewan vehicle owners will receive a 
discount on their vehicle insurance. That’s about 350,000 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
The proposed amendment allows for the introduction of a safety 
rating scale. All Saskatchewan motorists will receive the safety 
rating on the scale, based on their driving record since 1995. 
Safe drivers with a positive rating will get a break on their 
vehicle insurance to a maximum of 7 per cent. SGI’s records 
show that 55 per cent of eligible Saskatchewan vehicle owners 
will receive a discount on their plate insurance of 5 per cent or 
more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while auto insurance premiums are increasing 
across the country, we are pleased that not only are we putting 
$60 million back into the pockets of Saskatchewan vehicle 
owners in the first 12 months of this program, we are also not 
increasing insurance premiums this year. That’s a double 
savings for 350,000 Saskatchewan vehicle owners. Through this 
amendment, the government is responding to the number one 
issue of Saskatchewan motorists, that is, to reward and 
recognize safe driving. 
 
But customers tell us it’s just as important that bad drivers pay 
their fair share. New financial penalties will begin to be 
assessed once the program is in place. These new penalties will 
replace current drivers’ licence surcharges. Certain incidents 
will cost drivers points on the safety rating scale, such as 
at-fault accidents, certain traffic violations, and traffic-related 
Criminal Code convictions like impaired driving. The more 
incidents a motorist has, the more demerit points will be 
assessed, resulting in higher financial penalties per incident. 
 
As I stated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this system will ensure higher 
risk drivers pay their share, helping to offset costs of discounts 
for safe drivers. As well, the safety rating scale will make the 
rating and penalty system simpler to understand. Motorists will 
see for themselves how their driving habits affect their auto 
insurance costs. 
 
Finally, I want to remind the House once again that we’re 
implementing Safe Driver Recognition with no rate increase in 
2002. 
 
While drivers in other provinces are facing rising premiums, 
drivers in Saskatchewan are paying among the lowest vehicle 
insurance rates in Canada and this program will further lower 
rates for those with safe driving records. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Safe Driver Recognition will help the Auto Fund 
continue to meet its goal of providing among the lowest vehicle 
insurance rates in Canada. SGI will also meet that goal by 
implementing the next proposed amendment dealing directly 
with improving auto injury insurance in this province. 
 
SGI customers identified another main area of concern in the 
customer service feedback campaign, that is the desire to 
improve no-fault insurance. The following amendments respond 

directly to this customer issue. 
 
The personal injury protection plan, commonly known as 
no-fault insurance, was introduced in 1995. Mr. Speaker, 
no-fault insurance met its initial goals — it helped control rising 
injury claim costs, enhanced fairness, and improved injury 
benefits. However, no program is perfect. 
 
Included in the 1995 legislation was a five-year independent 
review to assess the system and to provide recommendations on 
areas where changes to the program should be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the independent review was conducted by the 
Personal Injury Protection Plan Review Committee. Following 
a thorough review of Saskatchewan’s auto injury insurance 
program, the committee concluded that the basic principles, 
benefits, and administration of the program are sound and 
should be continued. 
 
However the committee also conducted — or concluded, I 
should say — that improvements must be made, namely to 
provide improved benefits and service, and enhanced role for 
tort law. The government agrees that the program is sound but 
there is significant room for improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act details specific areas where no-fault 
insurance will be improved to ensure the program provides 
injury benefits that are more fair and equitable. 
 
One of the most important proposed changes will provide 
additional benefits for people who were — who are, I should 
say — very seriously injured in auto crashes. It will increase 
medical and rehabilitation limits to $5 million from the current 
level of $573,000. This new benefit limit will also be 
retroactive to the program’s start date. This means any person 
who has been seriously injured in a crash since January 1, 1995 
will now have up to $5 million in medical and rehabilitation 
benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In another effort to improve benefits to those seriously injured, 
the amount of benefits for those who sustain a catastrophic 
injury in an auto crash will increase. The maximum permanent 
impairment benefit will increase to $175,000 from the current 
$143,000. 
 
It is proposed, Mr. Speaker, that changes also be made to 
income replacement. This benefit is provided to people who 
cannot work due to their injuries and pays up to 90 per cent of 
net income based on a maximum gross salary of $58,000 per 
year. Overall the proposed changes in this area will provide 
more choices for calculating the benefit for injured people to 
ensure greater fairness. 
 
Personal situations will be taken into account better providing 
for injured people who are caregivers, self employed, and 
farmers. For example, in the case of small-business owners and 
farmers, it is proposed that they be able to choose a substitute 
worker benefit that allows them to hire more workers or a 
specialized contractor during busier seasons. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, self-employed people who’s business cannot continue 
because of their injury will be entitled to compensation for a 
limited time for fixed expenses that continue after their 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

accident. 
 
Another proposed change will ensure those who suffer a 
catastrophic injury receive an income replacement benefit no 
less than industrial . . . no less than the industrial average wage. 
This is an increase over the current minimum benefit which is 
equivalent to the minimum wage. 
 
I’d now like to turn to proposed changes to the death benefit 
provided to surviving spouses and dependent children. It is 
proposed, Mr. Speaker, that death benefits be calculated on 
income for the year prior to a person’s death, providing for 
those who may have recently lost a job or were on leave at the 
time of the accident. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, dependents of low-wage earners will be 
provided with a death benefit comparable to federal support 
guidelines for a minimum wage earner. As well, the definition 
of dependent will now include a disabled dependent over 21 
years of age. 
 
In the case of the death of a child, no payment is sufficient 
compensation for such a tragic loss, Mr. Speaker. However it is 
proposed that an increased death benefit be provided to the 
parents of a child under 21 who dies as a result of a motor 
vehicle accident. We understand that when a death occurs it is a 
difficult time for a family and proposed changes will take this 
into account by increasing the amount paid for funeral expenses 
and providing a benefit for vocational counselling for the 
surviving spouse and for grief counselling for the entire family, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d now like to focus on a group of proposed changes that deal 
with a key issue, the right to sue. The introduction of the 
no-fault system in 1995 took away the right to sue except for 
limited tort action for economic loss. In return, it provided a 
high level . . . it provided, I should say, high-level benefits to all 
Saskatchewan motorists regardless of whether they were at fault 
for the accident. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the following group of key amendments deals 
with the issue of law suits and proposes an expanded right to 
sue, including for pain and suffering in certain circumstances. 
 
The first proposed change relates to impaired drivers. It will 
give an injured person the right to sue an at-fault and convicted 
impaired driver for pain and suffering. The impaired driver will 
continue to be denied a permanent impairment benefit. If it is 
their second offence in five years, they will also be denied an 
income replacement benefit. 
 
A similar amendment is proposed regarding intentional acts. An 
injured person will now have the right to sue for pain and 
suffering in cases where the driver is convicted of using their 
vehicle to deliberately harm the injured person. An injured 
driver who is convicted of using their vehicle to intentionally 
cause injury to another will be denied both income replacement 
and permanent impairment benefits. 
 
The final proposed change regarding the expanded right to sue 
will allow an injured person to sue for all losses including for 

pain and suffering against certain institutional third parties 
whose negligence contributes to a crash. Third parties that will 
be liable under this proposed new legislation include vehicle 
manufacturers, repairers and suppliers of parts, and licensed 
drinking establishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, changes are also proposed to the appeal system to 
make it more effective and customer friendly. Currently an 
injured person can dispute any decision made by SGI by 
requesting an internal review. If they are not satisfied they can 
then proceed to optional mediation or to the Court of Queen’s 
Bench. 
 
SGI and Saskatchewan Justice are working on the develop . . . 
on developing a new appeal system where the injured person 
will retain the right of access to the Court of Queen’s Bench or 
alternatively, to an independent appeal tribunal which will 
report to a different minister of the Crown. SGI is working 
towards helping the new appeal system . . . I should say SGI is 
working towards having the new appeal system in place by the 
start of 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, implementing the proposed amendments will 
ensure that no-fault insurance continues to meet its goals — that 
is, to provide among the best injury benefits in Canada at very 
affordable rates for Saskatchewan residents. But more 
importantly, no-fault insurance will better meet the needs of 
those who are injured in auto crashes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that we take action to improve 
no-fault insurance. Equally it is important that we recognize 
that some people want a very different type of injury insurance. 
During the customer feedback campaign, some people clearly 
indicated they want the ability to sue an at-fault driver for pain 
and suffering when they are injured in an automobile accident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is listening to Saskatchewan 
residents and it is responding by making changes so that its 
programs and policies better meet their needs. To that end, I am 
pleased to put forward a further amendment to The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act that will allow all Saskatchewan 
residents to choose the auto injury insurance product that best 
meets their individual needs. No-fault insurance will be 
complemented by a new tort based product modelled on the 
premier option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Coalition Against No-fault Insurance put the 
premier option before members of this House as the auto injury 
insurance plan they felt would best serve Saskatchewan 
residents. As the premier option recommends, the new auto 
injury insurance product will reintroduce the right to sue an 
at-fault party for pain and suffering. It will introduce that right 
and keep insurance premiums for the product affordable by 
offering a lower level of defined benefits than are available 
under no-fault insurance and by having a deductible for pain 
and suffering awards. 
 
Defined benefits are those benefits that an injured person has 
access to regardless of who is at fault for the accident. Defined 
benefits under the tort based product will include a provision 
for lost wages up to $300 per week. They will also include 
provisions for homemakers as well as a benefit for those not 
employed if they are confined by their injuries. Those who 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

 

choose this product will also have access up to $20,000 to cover 
medical and rehabilitation costs. If the person suffers 
catastrophic injuries, that maximum increases, Mr. Speaker, to 
$150,000. 
 
The tort product also includes death benefits similar to those 
provided by no-fault insurance. It is proposed that spouses be 
eligible for a minimum $45,000 in death benefits. 
 
It is complemented by a death benefit for dependent children 
equal to 5 per cent of the deceased’s weekly income for each 
child. 
 
The tort product also provides a benefit for those who suffer 
permanent injuries as a result of an accident to a maximum of 
$10,000. If an individual suffers catastrophic injuries, the 
maximum permanent impairment benefit payable increases to 
$130,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is proposed that the defined benefits within this 
product be indexed to the cost of living so they will rise with 
any rise in the cost of living. Let me emphasize at this point, 
Mr. Speaker, that the benefits that I have just outlined are the 
benefits that any person with tort coverage would have access 
to should they be injured in an auto accident. 
 
In addition, where there is an at-fault party, an injured person 
would be able to sue. They would be able to sue for economic 
losses, that is any actual losses the injured person incurred as a 
result of the collision above the defined benefits that I have just 
outlined. 
 
They would also be able to sue for pain and suffering. As the 
premier option recommends, awards for pain and suffering 
would be less a $5,000 deductible. 
 
This new product, Mr. Speaker, will be available to every 
Saskatchewan resident. And the process to choose it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member from 
Watrous on her feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my honour to introduce to you and to the rest of the Assembly a 
school group in the east gallery. 
 
There is 21 grade 4 and 5 students from Watson, and they’re 
accompanied today with their teacher, Chris Hancock. And I 
don’t have all the names of the parents, but I see a number of 
parents in the gallery. 
 
So it pleases me to welcome them to the Assembly and I would 
like all the members to join with me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 57 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member from Watrous, Mr. 
Speaker, I thank you for the break. 
 
All Saskatchewan residents over 18, Mr. Speaker, will be able 
to elect this new coverage by going to any SGI motor licensing 
issuing office or they can make the election by mail. Parents 
will also be able to make this election for their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI does not want anyone to be without insurance 
as a result of the introduction of choice. By having all 
Saskatchewan residents maintain their no-fault coverage until 
they decide to make a change to tort, it ensures that they will 
always have injury insurance coverage. 
 
I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to introduce this proposed 
product as it gives Saskatchewan residents the ability to 
compare two quality auto injury compensation plans and to 
choose, Mr. Speaker, which one best meets their individual 
needs and the needs of their family. 
 
This government has chosen to take a new approach, a made in 
Saskatchewan approach, namely allowing a choice between two 
different types of insurance products. But I remind members, 
both are quality insurance products. It is, we believe, the best 
way to meet the needs of residents who want two very different 
types and kinds of protection. 
 
Further, at introduction, premium for the tort product will be 
identical to that for the no-fault insurance product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the proposed amendments to The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act that I’ve 
outlined here today directly respond to the needs and desires of 
Saskatchewan people. We are listening to what they have to 
say, and we are responding through this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of amendments to The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
for me to speak on No. 57, a Bill to amend The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act. It’s a very lengthy Bill with many, 
many amendments as the minister has outlined in his very 
lengthy speech just now. 
 
And there’s a number of questions that come up, but I’d like to 
agree with the government and they have done a survey of 
customers. And it’s very important that they got feedback from 
the customers of SGI to get the proper information and because 
this . . . ever since no-fault was introduced in 1995, it was very 
controversial at the time, there was many people had a lot of 
problems with no-fault and they continue to have problems with 
no-fault. And so it’s very important that when the amendments 
are passed that the government does get it right and make the 
proper changes to this Bill that satisfies the many, many 
concerns that the customers and the people of Saskatchewan has 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

with the no-fault. 
 
The minister outlined a number of areas talking about discount 
of vehicle premiums, safety driver recognition programs, and 
areas like that. And I think it’s very important that we recognize 
and reduce the premiums of people that have a very safe driving 
record. And they go the extra step to have a excellent safety 
record. Most people are very concerned about that but things do 
happen where individuals have accidents that are outside their 
control. 
 
Also the minister spoke of the safety rating scale, and I believe 
the minister mentioned a maximum of 7 per cent discount based 
on the scale. 
 
It is encouraging that the minister’s announced there’s no 
premium increases this year because there’s a number of areas 
in other parts of government that is increasing, and this is a 
direct cost to individuals’ lifestyle and the cost of living, and 
also the cost of doing business in the province — is the cost of 
licensing vehicles and insurance. 
 
The minister spoke in length about streamlining SGI no-fault, 
and it’s going to be very interesting to see all the particular 
items that are going to be put in place, hopefully, to streamline 
SGI because there’s a number of concerns that citizens have 
concerning the operations of SGI. And one has to always keep 
in mind the value for money that the customer is getting; and 
then the people of Saskatchewan are the customers of SGI and 
the customer — the saying goes — is always right. So it’s very 
important that the customer is getting proper value for their 
money. 
 
And then the minister also spoke of having an option of the tort 
based law versus the no-fault, and there’s a number of questions 
arise out of that. The minister is going to have to, to outline how 
other people in accidents . . . As an example, people that are 
passengers in a vehicle, if one vehicle is under no-fault, another 
one is under tort, how does that relate to the passengers in either 
vehicles as far as claiming disabilities income or claiming 
insurance as far as injuries are related? And so, you know, also 
other areas of concern — pedestrians who are just walking and 
if they’re struck by a vehicle, how the two systems relate to 
those individuals as well. 
 
There’s one point that the minister pointed out is concerning 
deliberate injuries. And I know a case that I . . . we’ve probably 
all heard of the cases in the news where an individual actually 
ran into another individual, pinning them between two vehicles, 
breaking, I believe, breaking the individual’s legs. And under 
no-fault — that’s the system that we had at the time . . . and 
how unfair it was that this individual did a deliberate criminal 
act. But as far as insurance was concerned, it was considered 
no-fault and the individual didn’t even have the right to sue, 
even though the individual was charged and, I believe, 
convicted of this terrible, terrible crime. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I had mentioned, this is a very lengthy Bill 
and our critic for SGI, the member from Swift Current, will 
thoroughly analyze this Bill, will consult with the stakeholders 
of the province concerning this Bill, and we will definitely have 
many, many more questions in the future days about this Bill. 
 

And I’d like to now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(12:15) 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Consequential Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 

2002 apportant des modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Consequential Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just earlier today introduced The Saskatchewan 
Financial Services Commission Act, an Act that creates the 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission. The Act itself 
— that’s probably the reason it has that name, Mr. Speaker — 
the Act itself contains most of the consequential amendments. 
 
However, amendments are also required to a bilingual Act, The 
Co-operatives Act of 1996. This Bill makes the necessary 
amendments to that Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to reply 
concerning Bill No. 60, Sask financial services. It appears that 
it’s very similar to Bill 59, Sask financial services, and it deals 
with co-ops. And so again, we would . . . we will discuss this 
matter with the stakeholders and have many questions in the 
future days. 
 
So at this time I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Members’ Conflict 
of Interest Amendment Act, 2002. Mr. Speaker, the members of 
this Assembly will be aware that in 1993 this Assembly 
unanimously passed legislation that introduced, for the first 
time in Saskatchewan, a comprehensive regime whereby the 
members of the Legislative Assembly could govern their own 
conduct in a transparent and demonstrably fair manner. 
 
The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act sought to establish a 
balance between the responsibilities of a member to this 
Assembly with those other responsibilities that they may have 
in their private life. That Act introduced an independent 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner to assist members in the 
preparation of their public disclosure statements and to provide 
advice as to what their responsibilities were under the Act. 
 
The Act also set out certain prohibited activities that existing 
members — and in some cases, former cabinet ministers — 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

 

could not pursue. While this legislation has been a significant 
success in terms of increasing transparency, it has recently 
become clear that changes are required to the Act to close 
certain gaps which have been identified, most notably in a 
recent report by the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides for extending the existing 
general six-month limitation period for the offence provision to 
two years from the day of the expiry of the contract or benefit in 
question. 
 
It expands the scope of the cooling-off provisions to provide 
that former cabinet ministers are prohibited from lobbying 
government on their own behalf or on behalf of any other 
person during the 12-month cooling-off period. 
 
It also implements a restriction for a former member of cabinet 
from becoming an associate with any person that has received a 
contract or benefit from the government. 
 
It also expands the scope of inquiry of the commissioner to 
mandate the commissioner to include comment on the conduct 
of any former member or any current or former public servant 
or Crown corporation employee. 
 
The Bill also provides an ability for a former member of cabinet 
to apply to the commissioner for an exemption from the 
12-month prohibition of post-cabinet conduct. It provides the 
ability for the commissioner to grant an exemption where the 
commissioner is satisfied it is not contrary to the public 
interests to do so, with subsequent full disclosure of such 
exemption to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the solemn responsibility of the members of 
this Assembly to govern themselves in a manner which 
enhances the confidence of the public. In so doing, a balance 
must be struck to ensure that those who enter public life are not 
unduly hindered in returning to private life. The central policy 
theme of this legislation is to ensure that any potential conflicts 
of interest are declared and, equally importantly, disclosed to 
the public so they may face scrutiny under the light of day. 
 
It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, we’ve introduced an ability 
for a former cabinet minister to seek an exemption from the 
Conflict of Interest Commission. This initiative, which has been 
in place in Alberta for some years, provides for some additional 
subtlety whereby circumstances that were not foreseen by a 
blanket prohibition can be addressed on a case by case basis by 
the commissioner where appropriate. 
 
This is entirely consistent . . . (inaudible) . . . government 
contract provisions, for sitting members are currently dealt with 
under the Act, and it is consistent with the commitment to 
transparency and disclosure which I previously noted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also amendments in this Bill that will 
provide an ability for the Speaker to file reports under the Act 
while this Assembly is not in session, and for transmission of a 
report of the commissioner to the Speaker where the 
commissioner has commenced an inquiry at his or her own 
initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is committed to ensuring that 

public confidence in its elected members be promoted in every 
reasonable manner. These amendments are consistent with steps 
taken in other jurisdictions and will keep Saskatchewan’s 
legislation in the forefront of Canada’s conflict of interest 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
for me to speak on Bill 63, An Act to amend The Members’ 
Conflict of Interest Act. 
 
The minister raised a number of questions. Now as a member 
elected in 1999, I have filled out three of these conflict of 
interest forms. And it became very apparent that each year that I 
did it, it was fairly lengthy and took considerable time to do. 
And I know that a number of members have said it was a 
tendency just to write on the form, same as last year because 
nothing had really changed. And the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner always pointed out that we needed to fill the 
form out completely and which we always did. 
 
But it would be a great benefit to have a short form and just 
include the areas that need to be changed on the short form and 
be added to the total form that we have filled out in previous 
years. So I hope that is what the government intends with this 
change of the form. 
 
Another area that was pointed out — I don’t believe the 
minister has considered this as amendments — but the deadline 
to the have the form filled out has always been, for some time, 
March 31, and all of us also have to have our taxes done. And it 
seems that it would be of a great deal of benefit to members to 
have an extended . . . or change the deadline to fill the conflict 
form out to take into effect our tax position and for the past year 
and so it coincides with Revenue Canada and declaring our 
income and expenses as we do every year. And so that’s one 
area where I would like the government to reconsider and 
changing the deadline date for filling out the form so that it 
makes it a little easier for the members to do that when they do 
their income tax. 
 
Now the other area which is very important, as we know, is the 
conflict areas where former members and former cabinet 
members having the opportunity to do business with the 
government that they used to be in. And as we know, in the case 
of Mr. Upshall, it became a very serious matter where the rules 
and the laws of the time were skirted and circumvented to . . . 
while technically within the rules, but at the end of the day we 
realized that they were not properly upheld. And the perception, 
well, and the reality of that individual’s case, was that he did 
circumvent the rules but no action could be taken against the 
individual because of the . . . not being reported within six 
months. 
 
So I think it’s of great interest to the public and to members on 
both sides of the House that these changes be clarified and 
strengthened so that it’s very clear what the rules are and what 
can and cannot be done. Because it is true there’s a balancing 
act that we must take here because members are not . . . do go 
. . . come from the business world and enter politics, then leave 
politics and go back into the business world. 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

And so there should be certainly an opportunity for members to 
be able to contract and work at government jobs, or do contracts 
for a government. But it must be very clear for the public that 
there is no conflict taking place. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we will consult with the stakeholders and 
discuss this Bill in greater depth. But I would like to move to 
adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased today to move second reading of a Bill to amend 
The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and 
Technicians Act and to make an amendment to The Architects 
Act, 1996. 
 
In today’s economy architects as well as applied science 
technologists and technicians play an integral part in shaping 
the landscape of our society. The work of architects and of 
applied science technologists and technicians, though unique, 
does at times require a co-operative approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before the Assembly today acknowledges 
the exclusive scope of practice granted to architects while at the 
same time recognizing that members of the Saskatchewan 
applied science technologists and technicians work in areas 
related to architects. 
 
The Bill is important to protect the public interest by providing 
scope of practice protection to Saskatchewan architects, as well 
as title protection to applied science technologists and 
technicians. Mr. Speaker, all affected groups are satisfied that 
these new provisions will ensure that each of them can continue 
to practice their professions in the best interests of the public. 
 
As such I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and 
Technicians Act and to make an amendment to The Architects 
Act. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when we’re dealing with pieces of legislation that deal with 
particular trades and professions, it’s very important, Mr. 
Speaker, that all those who are in that field or in associated 
fields, Mr. Speaker, be aware of what changes are taking place 
and what impact those changes are going to have not just on the 
particular people mentioned in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, but also 
on all those that are in somewhat the same field that can be 
affected. 
 
You know, you look at various pieces of legislation that come 
down dealing with the professional bodies such as, as an 
example, chartered accountants, Mr. Speaker, because you have 
various groups of accountants that belong to different 
organizations. 
 
And the same in dealing with this Bill dealing with applied 
science technologists and technicians. You know, you have 
various groups, Mr. Speaker, that are associated in these fields 

that you need professional regulation, professional bodies to 
regulate those trades, what their rights and duties are, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that the proper accreditations take place. 
 
But there’s also those in other fields that have . . . that are 
affected by those changes, Mr. Speaker. And they need to know 
just how that is going to affect them and their field. On this 
particular one it deals with how this Bill deals with people who 
may hold themselves out to be architects. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it affects the technicians, it also affects 
architects, and both groups need to be comfortable that the 
changes being put forward here will not adversely affect them 
in the proper performances of their duty, Mr. Speaker. And 
those are very important items. 
 
We all know how important these people are to society in 
maintaining the functions that they deal with, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, so that we can have a chance to learn 
whether or not all of the groups, as the minister has stated, are 
in agreement, we need an opportunity to contact those groups or 
vice versa, to have those groups contact us to make sure that 
they are comfortable with these changes. 
 
And while it doesn’t seem that the changes are all that great, 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes a small change in wording can have a 
very significant impact on how an Act is applied . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the deputy minister . . . the Deputy 
Premier says that they are very comfortable. Well we have to 
wait to see, Mr. Speaker, whether or not that is the case. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate at 
this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(12:30) 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
The Assembly assumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 44 — The Animal 
Products Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve had a little bit of time on this side of the House to take a 
look at Bill No. 44, and read through the comments that the 
minister had when he first introduced the Bill. 
 
And he told us that it updates the process for the appointment of 
inspectors to reflect the current needs for enforcement of the 
Act and its regulations. And the minister also explained how it 
puts in place an arbitration process for settling disputes between 
the custom feeders and animal owners. 
 
Basically, if I’m understanding it correctly, it gives the minister 
the power to appoint inspectors instead of having to go through 
the Public Service Commission or the cabinet, which would 
give him more freedom to appoint people not employed by the 



June 7, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

 

government, as inspectors, in emergency circumstances such as 
the control of animals to prevent disease. 
 
And I could see where this would probably be quite beneficial 
for the province, Mr. Speaker. It would give some flexibility to 
the minister in the case of an emergency. We are hearing more 
and more of different diseases that are becoming concerns, so it 
would give the minister some flexibility to react quickly in the 
case that there was an outbreak in our province. 
 
And we also know that consumers are demanding far more 
health and safety regulations and precautions to be taken in the 
food industry. So we, in the province, have to be quite aware of 
that and take the steps necessary to meet the needs of the 
consumers so that we’re quite competitive in the marketplace. 
 
The Bill also further . . . there is further changes to the Bill that 
the minister had told us about, but just to stay on track with the 
food safety end, there are a few questions that I would like to 
ask the minister which can be done in Committee of the Whole. 
They’re regarding the details of the inspection portion of the 
legislation and how it can affect the people of Saskatchewan, 
both the producers and the consumers. Although it appears to be 
something that would be quite beneficial there are a couple of 
questions that I wouldn’t mind asking, but that can be done in 
Committee. 
 
And the other change that the minister had mentioned was that 
under the current legislation, custom feeders have a lien on 
animals in the case of unpaid charges. And he said that there is 
nothing in place to settle disputes over these charges, so that 
this will address that issue, Mr. Speaker. It puts in place an 
arbitrations process and a mechanism for distribution of monies 
raised for sale of disputed animals. 
 
So the minister told us that it was representatives from both the 
producers and the livestock dealer organizations who asked for 
these changes to be made and I believe that to be true. 
 
And hopefully the arbitration process that he’s proposing in this 
Bill will indeed prove to be useful in assisting the conflicting 
parties in being able to settle the disputes in a more . . . or a less 
costly manner, rather, and in a far more fair and easy manner. 
 
So without saying too much more on the Bill, Mr. Speaker, a lot 
of the questions that I have can be addressed in Committee of 
the Whole. So with that, I will pass the Bill on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 50 — The 
Department of Agriculture and Food Amendment Act, 2002 
be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
get up and speak to this Bill again. This is another Bill that I 
don’t feel that there would be a lot of difficulty with. It puts in 
place the mechanism for winding down the Agri-Food Equity 
Fund. And that was in a fund that was established in 1994 to 

promote value-added ag industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s a fund that I think has been, you know, the government 
has trumpeted this fund as a grand success and driver of 
economic development in Saskatchewan. And I believe there 
are a number of very positive and good projects that have 
accessed this fund. So the questions, which again can be asked 
in the Committee of the Whole, is why is the government 
choosing at this point in time to shut it down? 
 
And in his speech, the minister told us the assets of the equity 
fund would be transferred to the Ag Credit Corporation. But my 
understanding is that that is also another fund that is in the 
process of being wound down. So in the future he suggested 
that he will partner with more firms through CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation) for value-added initiatives. 
 
And I guess that’s where the concern comes in, Mr. Speaker, is 
we’re seeing more authority being shifted to CIC to get directly 
involved in the economy, so we have a number of questions. 
The equity fund from my . . . the Agri-Food Equity Fund that 
was in place, from my understanding, did not take equity 
positions as much as CIC tends to want to. So that’s a concern 
that we wish to question the minister on when we have an 
opportunity. 
 
And we do recognize on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that the province needs greater access to venture capital. And 
we have not seen a lot of initiative on this government to make 
movements towards the province and the industries in the 
province being able to attract venture capital into our province 
from outside sources, which is why we end up with a problem 
only too often where developers are turning to government for 
financial needs and help, instead of being able to find it. And 
there’s a number of reasons for that, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 
spoken to it a number of times in this House, how it is difficult 
to attract capital dollars to our province for our different ag 
industries. 
 
The case of what’s presently happening in the ethanol industry 
where CIC is taking an equity position in the ethanol industry is 
a prime example of why we have some concerns with the 
Agri-Food Equity Fund being put under the jurisdiction and 
governance of CIC, and why we think if it’s not handled very 
carefully, that it will be yet another . . . seen as another deterrent 
to attracting investment dollars to our province. 
 
It seems that whether it’s in agriculture or in anything else, that 
the NDP’s economic strategy has been a disaster in this 
province and it’s not creating jobs, although they do have — for 
the first time in a number of months — a positive job creation 
record and we’ve heard a lot about that today. So 
congratulations on finally doing well for one month . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, if only they could continue that 
it would be good news for the province. 
 
By our GDP (gross domestic product) numbers, we haven’t 
really expanded our economy and we’re still looking at people 
that are continuing to leave, so we’re a little concerned about 
how CIC plays in the investment sector. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m also going to move this Bill to 
Committee of the Whole as we have a number of questions that 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2002 

 

I wish to ask the minister at that time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 51 — The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill is a follow-up of a previous Bill that has already been 
introduced and spoken to and passed through the House, so a lot 
of the research that we had done on the first Bill also covered 
areas that are in the second Bill. 
 
And we believe this Bill is a very positive move towards what 
we need to be looking at in this province. We realize that the 
minister has consulted with a number of groups on this Bill, and 
I’ve talked to members of those groups and some of the people 
that were directly involved in the drafting of this Bill and the 
requests that are in it. 
 
What the Bill does, to my understanding, is allow the 
corporation operating feedlots to become members in the 
producer co-op associated with feedlots. And this would allow 
the feedlots access to new sources of financing, and I know that 
that’s what cattle feeders in the industry are asking for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’ll give them the same loan guarantee programs that they, you 
know, are not currently eligible for under the feedlot structure. 
So it’s very important to help the cattle industry to access 
financing, and I believe it’s a very good move on the part of the 
government to allow this. 
 
It’s an industry, that I’ve said a number of times on this side of 
the House, that we need to look at how to help expand in the 
province — although I can’t help but say I’ve also mentioned 
that we’re going to go backwards here a little bit, because we’re 
refusing to address the issues of the drought and the water and 
feed shortage. 
 
So although we may do small steps to help the industry grow, 
there’s a huge step that’s causing . . . or a huge blockade that’s 
causing problems for its growth that need to be addressed as 
well. 
 
So having said that, I’m also going to pass this Bill into 
Committee of the Whole. There is a couple of questions that I 
would like to ask at that time, but I think this is an important 
Bill and will be helpful to the cattle feeders of the province. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would like to take a moment 
to thank the members for their diligent attention to the work in 

this Assembly and wish all members and their staff a 
well-deserved weekend. This House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:43. 
 


