















































Hansard: June 24, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2261 
 June 24, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of northeast Saskatchewan 
concerned about the condition of Highway No. 23 west from 
the junction of No. 9 to the town of Weekes. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
No. 23 in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Porcupine Plain and 
Weekes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
shortcomings of the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon are all 
from the city of Saskatoon and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with concerned citizens concerned about the 
overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Langenburg and Churchbridge. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today to present on behalf of citizens of the 
province regarding prescription drugs in the province and the 
costs of them. The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Indian Head, 
Odessa, and Vibank. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today to 
rise on behalf of residents of the city of Swift Current who are 
concerned with the hospital facility in that community. And the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its 65 per cent share of funding for a 
new regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from the good citizens from Marquis, a petition to improve 
Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and 
also to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
bring forth a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 
concerned with commercial fishing on Besnard Lake. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nation representatives to 
bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation and 
to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Tisdale and Zenon Park. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from citizens concerned about the lack 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

of cellular telephone coverage in rural Saskatchewan. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service to all 
communities throughout the Wood River community. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Meyronne. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 8, 11, 18, 129, and 134. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 73 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: will the 
minister please provide which communities that have water 
and sewer plants that the provincial government runs and 
operates? 

 
And also on my feet, a similar question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: what are the 
rates the government charges to communities that have 
water and sewer treatment plants that the government runs 
and operates? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
In your gallery this afternoon are two individuals, one of whom 
is well known to this Assembly and that’s Ken Magnus, special 
adviser to the coalition government. 
 
But the first . . . but beside Ken Magnus of course is his 
daughter, Desiree. And Desiree completed a degree at the 
University of Regina in political studies last year. She has just 
completed her course studies at Calgary — actually she’s not 
completed that yet — in government relations. And she’s back 
here for a week to visit with her dad, and she’ll be going out to 
Tisdale later to visit with her mom. 
 
And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome her and 
Ken here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Last Mountain Lake Cultural Centre Opens 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Last Saturday, I had the pleasure of attending 
the grand opening of Last Mountain Lake Cultural Centre, a 
facility that will promote the fine arts culture of Saskatchewan. 
I might add it was a beautiful day for the grand opening event 
attended by over 200 people. 
 
The opening of this new centre came as a result of over 5,000 
volunteer hours of work renovating an old school building 
moved to the site two years ago. They’ve transformed this 
grand old building into a gallery which will highlight the work 
of Saskatchewan artists as well as to serve to inspire future 
talent in the fine arts and literature. 
 
One part of the building will be housing the library for the 
residents in the area, while there’ll be rooms for artists to paint, 
sculpture, make pottery in. And also a big part of this building, 
they’re going to have the Elsie Shirley Art Gallery. 
 
With that, I’m pleased to say that Ms. Elsie Shirley was on hand 
to cut the ribbon to open the new culture centre, as well as 
cutting the ribbon for the gallery named after her. Ms. Shirley 
was a driving force towards opening this new culture centre for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Talking to the residents there, she put in apparently many, many 
hours over the past many years for that. It’s important to note 
that in addition to the 1,000 hours of work already done to 
establish this new facility, that the board of directors and the 
staff of Last Mountain Lake Cultural Centre will be a volunteer 
effort. 
 
I would like to congratulate all the organizers and volunteers 
who have worked so hard to bring this important cultural centre 
to the province of Saskatchewan. I would ask that all members 
of this House join me in a tribute to Ms. Elsie Shirley and the 
communities of Regina Beach and Buena Vista. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retail Sales in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan consumers just don’t believe the 
message of gloom or the revelation of doom preached by the 
members opposite. They keep conducting their daily lives with 
confidence and optimism despite the Sask Party warning that 
the sky is falling. Perhaps they act this way, Mr. Speaker, 
because the sky is not falling and because on these nice warm 
and wet summer days there is more to feel good about than the 
reverse. 
 
And don’t just trust me, Mr. Speaker. Instead let’s see what else 
our trusty, objective friends from StatsCanada are saying about 
the Saskatchewan economy. They are saying, according to last 
Friday’s Leader-Post, that our retail sales in Saskatchewan were 
up in April by 7.4 per cent over March and by a whopping 9 per 
cent over a year ago. 
 
Consumers spent 728 million on retail sales in April; and over 
the first four months of the year $2.6 billion, or an increase of 
6.6 per cent over last year. 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. These numbers, combined with the 
11,000 new jobs in May, sound pretty good to me. But then I’ve 
never really been an apostle of doom; rather I’ve always been 
pretty optimistic about Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Outstanding Young Farmer Award, 2002 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, today I ask the Assembly to join 
with me in congratulating the winner of the Saskatchewan 
Outstanding Young Farmer award for 2002, Shirley and Peter 
Voldeng from Naicam, Saskatchewan. 
 
Peter and Shirley are the management team behind Fairway 
Farms Limited, a 1,000 sow, farrow-to-finish family hog 
operation. The operation employs eight full-time staff, two 
summer students, two part-time high school students during the 
remainder of the year, a barn manager, and an office manager. 
Twenty thousand animals are marketed annually and they 
consume 8,000 tonnes of feed. 
 
Shirley graduated with a civil engineer degree and Peter with an 
engineering physics degree. They left their engineering careers 
in 1993 to return to the family farm in Naicam. 
 
The farm offered the best fit for their goals and values — the 
independence of business management and ownership and the 
flexibility of a work schedule and a family involved in the 
community. 
 
I am proud to say that Peter was one of the presidents of the 
Saskatchewan Party, and his goals of growing the province by 
growing the people is a theme we all believe in. Please help me 
to congratulate Shirley and Peter Voldeng of Fairway Farms in 
Naicam. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

La Ronge Student Wins Scholarship 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to announce to the 
Assembly that Ashley Dubnik of La Ronge, a 17-year-old 
student, has been awarded a two-year merit scholarship to 
attend Lester B. Pearson College of the Pacific in Victoria. In 
September, she will join 200 other students representing each 
Canadian province and 83 other countries to participate in the 
college’s International Baccalaureate Program. 
 
Pearson College is a unique institution established in 1974 as 
Canada’s tribute to the former prime minister and Nobel Prize 
winner. Its mandate is to promote international co-operation and 
understanding in a challenging academic environment. To 
ensure that all students are selected on their personal merit, each 
attends the college on a full scholarship. 
 
Ashley is the second student from Northern Saskatchewan to 
attend, thanks to a generous scholarship fund provided by 
Cameco, COGEMA, Mudjatik Thyssen Mining, and Northern 
Resource Trucking. The first was Real Carriere of Cumberland 
House, who graduated this spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ashley and her family are originally from 

Uranium City and still spend their summers there. She is a true 
citizen of northern Saskatchewan and will represent our 
province well in this international setting. 
 
I know all members will join me in congratulating her and 
wishing her well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Asquith Resident Wins Spot on Canadian National Team 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seventeen-year-old 
Nadia Brecht of Asquith has been selected to the 2002 
Canadian National Junior Women’s Sabre Team, and will 
represent Canada at the world championships in Antalya, 
Turkey in April. Nadia, a past Saskatchewan provincial 
champion who first started fencing in 1991, was on the 
Saskatchewan Women’s Foil Team, which placed fourth at the 
1999 Canadian Winter Games in Cornerbrook, Newfoundland. 
 
She switched to sabre in 2000 and earned a bronze medal in 
Under 17 Women’s Sabre in the 2000 Canadian National 
Championships in Quebec City. At the 2001 Nationals at 
Saskatoon in June, she earned Silver in the Under 17 Women’s 
Sabre, Bronze in the Under 20 Women’s Sabre, and sixth in 
Senior Women’s Sabre. 
 
Nadia secured a place on the Under 20 Canadian National Team 
with a ninth place finish at the Junior World Cup in Havana, 
Cuba and a thirteenth place at the Junior North American Cup 
in South Bend, Indiana. Nadia trains at the Asquith Garde 
Fencing Academy in Asquith, where her father, Doug Brecht, 
coaches her. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Nadia on an outstanding 
accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Realtors Celebrate 90th Anniversary 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, I had 
the pleasure of taking part in a portion of the 90th anniversary 
celebrations of the Association of Regina Realtors, an 
organization that has grown along with this city through all of 
our dramatic changes beginning, ironically enough, with the 
Regina cyclone of 1912. 
 
As Regina has grown from a pile of bones to a gorgeous 
modern city, the association has gone from Gestetner sheets of 
available houses to Internet listings to the new LAND (Land 
Titles Automated Network Development project) system 
together into the 21st century, you might say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as a group very much involved in the advancement and 
well-being of its city, the Association of Regina Realtors has 
been working with the North Central Community Society in my 
constituency in sponsoring a rear lane numbering program. The 
realtors were looking for a sponsorship program related to 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

property, and this is it. They have agreed to pay for the cost of 
the project which will assist all emergency vehicles in making 
quick, timely responses to calls for assistance, be they back 
alley or front street. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they were out there in the flesh on Saturday 
helping put those numbers up. Barry Dundas of the North 
Central Community Society says that they have done . . . 
already done 400 houses and will do 400 more in the coming 
year. 
 
This is just one of the many community services provided by 
the Association of Regina Realtors, including scholarships to 
the University of Regina. I congratulate them on their longevity 
and on their commitment to our city. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cheryl Daisley Wins National Science Fair 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Cheryl Daisley, a 17-year-old grade 11 student at Hudson Bay 
Composite High School, took home a bronze medal at the 
Canada-Wide Science Fair held this year at the University of 
Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
 
This is the third consecutive year that Cheryl has won a medal. 
Her first was a bronze medal from Kingston in the year 2000, 
followed by a silver medal that she won in London in 2001. 
 
Her project this year: Why Rub Salt in an Open Wound? This 
was an investigation of the effects of salt on various grains. She 
was trying to find an alternative for road salt. 
 
Besides the bronze medal in senior biotechnology, she received 
$200 cash and a $1,000 scholarship from the University of 
Western Ontario. In the specialty award, she took home a senior 
prize of $1,000 in the Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada 
Award. 
 
Over 430 students advanced from 90 regional science fairs to 
compete for cash, medals, scholarships, merchandise, and 
summer employment prizes. They were judged on the quality of 
their exhibits, the knowledge of the science behind them, and 
their ability to communicate their ideas. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Cheryl on 
her medal and wish her continued success in the future. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fujifilm Masterpiece Award 
for Photographic Excellence, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
few weeks ago I gave a statement about a friend and former 
neighbour and in fact classmate, Donna Greschner, former 
Saskatchewan Human Rights commissioner, law professor, and 
outstanding teacher. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that talent runs deep in 
the Greschner family and that Donna’s brother, Mark, has also 

been recognized for excellence in his profession. 
 
Mark is a photographer with Artec Photographic Design here in 
Regina and he has recently won the Fujifilm Masterpiece 
Award for photographic excellence for the year 2001. 
 
The Masterpiece Award recognizes photographic excellence in 
several distinct categories. It is the highest honour that any 
photographic manufacturer awards for photography without 
regard to the type of products used to create the picture. 
 
Mark received the award from the Society of the Professional 
Photographers of America for a photograph in the wedding 
album category. It will be included in a fine art portfolio boxed 
set to be published by Marathon Press in the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just one more example from one more area 
of endeavour where Saskatchewan people are excelling — 
excelling here in Saskatchewan, I should add, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I said, I take particular pride in this accomplishment 
because of the closeness between the Greschner and Sonntag 
families. I congratulate Mark for winning this outstanding 
award. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Assistance for Farmers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
everywhere I went this weekend, people were asking about the 
farm package, and they’re not too impressed with any of it. 
 
They’re not too impressed with the federal government and for 
sure they’re not too impressed with the weak leadership of this 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government and this Premier. 
And they’re wondering, Mr. Speaker, are farmers going to see 
any of this money or is all going to be ate up by accountants 
and administration? 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the NDP managed to find any more details out 
on the farm package? How will it be paid out? When is it going 
to be paid out? And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, how much 
will end up in Saskatchewan farm families’ pockets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 
about Saskatchewan communities this weekend too, and when 
many of the constituencies . . . or many of the communities of 
which the member from Saltcoats serves in, of which I didn’t 
see him at any, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’m not sure which ones he was speaking of, Mr. Speaker, 
but I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve been talking to lots 
of farmers as well. And one of the things that the farmers in 
Saskatchewan tell me, they say, you need to be careful about 
the member from Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, because the last time 
the member from Saltcoats was in Ottawa negotiating a trade 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

 

package we were working on AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance), Mr. Speaker. And so the member 
opposite, member from Saltcoats, was very quick, Mr. Speaker, 
to go in a different direction when the pressure was on. 
 
So I’m very pleased that the Saskatchewan Party is still very 
much of the process, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of this week 
we’re going to know, Mr. Speaker, what in fact the level of 
funding for Canadian farmers is going to be — what portion of 
that will be for Saskatchewan, how much will be in the safety 
nets, how much will be in the other parts of the package. 
 
And everybody that I spoke to this weekend, Mr. Speaker, in 
rural Saskatchewan said this province and this Premier should 
not be signing a package where in fact we’re going to be 
assuming the trade injury. And I hope the member from 
Saltcoats is still there too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d like to 
tell the minister, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve outlasted about the last 
five Ag ministers on that side . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And I’ll be here long after he’s gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing. Farm groups like APAS 
(Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan) seem to 
know more about the details of this package than the NDP 
government. APAS is saying the package will only contain 
about $4 an acre for Saskatchewan farmers. But Ontario farmers 
are going to receive about $25 per acre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that accurate? How on earth did this NDP 
government manage to negotiate a deal that sees Ontario 
farmers receiving about six times what Saskatchewan farmers 
will receive? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday I said to the 
member from Watrous, which I’ll say to the member from 
Saltcoats today, that the amount of dollars that will come to 
Saskatchewan and to Canadian farmers this year, if this package 
passes, will be minusculey small, Mr. Speaker, minusculey 
small. 
 
And that amount of money, Mr. Speaker, today, we have today 
on the table 5.5 billion already in dollars for farmers in Canada, 
and over a six-year period, a 6.6 billion. The federal 
government is offering us up 8.2 billion — $1.6 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, for six years. That is woefully short, Mr. Speaker, and 
an insult to Canadian farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite. You know, you’ve outlasted 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member persists in 
diverting his attention from speaking to the Speaker to speaking 
to the member. And I remind him of this and I ask him to speak 
directly to the Speaker. You’ve got about another 10 seconds. 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member from 
Saltcoats that he’s outlasted a number of Ag ministers, Mr. 
Speaker, but he has served on more political parties in 
Saskatchewan than we . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are becoming accustomed to 
doing with less than every other farmer in this country because 
of that government. For 10 years, Mr. Speaker, that government 
and a number of past Agriculture ministers, the former premier, 
and now especially this Premier, they’re being asked to do with 
less once again. 
 
What is wrong with Saskatchewan? Why do our farmers have 
to consistently put up with less than every farmer in this 
country, Mr. Speaker? What, this time, is this minister going to 
come back with when he goes to meet with the federal officials? 
What are you asking; what are you expecting to come back 
with? 
 
Mr. Minister, farmers are relying on you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Now what 
goes for the minister goes for the critic. The critic might want to 
rephrase his last two sentences because he was not on the 
record, but he would do so please by speaking through the 
Chair. 
 
Once again, 10 seconds to the critic. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister tell us today what he plans on coming 
back with; what he hopes to come back with. And just once, 
Mr. Speaker, will he represent our farmers so we get our fair 
share of the pie, just once, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I listened very carefully to the debate on 
Thursday where the Leader of the Opposition stood in his place 
and said to the Assembly and Saskatchewan farmers and 
people, and he read — and I have in Hansard today — he said: 
 

I, the Saskatchewan opposition leader for Saskatchewan, 
engaged in the debate in agriculture on trade injury on May 
1 of this year (Mr. Speaker). 

 
May 1 of this year. This government and this party and this 
minister have been on trade injury now for the better part of an 
entire year, Mr. Speaker, on the better part of an entire year. 
And we’ve convinced Saskatchewan and Canadian people, Mr. 
Speaker, to move in that direction, Mr. Speaker, to compensate 
Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers for trade injury. Many, 
many issues that we’ve taken forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, from Saltcoats, you’re the 
king of transition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — And I say to the minister, and I say to you — 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — That the member from Saltcoats, Mr. 
Speaker, is the king of transition in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
He’s seen more leaders turfed on their, on their heels than we 
can imagine. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I said, the 
Saskatchewan Party transition team’s at work today to move 
that opposition leader to the backbenches or out of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Insurance Claimants 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is for 
the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning the minister and the president of SGI 
released the report by PricewaterhouseCoopers on SGI’s 
surveillance procedures, but unfortunately after two weeks and 
over 50,000 taxpayers’ dollars, the public still has no answers 
as to what criteria, what policies and procedures SGI follows to 
determine when an SGI personal injury claimant should be put 
under surveillance. 
 
PricewaterhouseCoopers says industry best surveillance 
practices are followed by SGI. Mr. Speaker, will the minister 
explain, is it industry best practice for SGI to put Virginia Cook 
under video surveillance because of one unsubstantiated 
anonymous phone call suggesting Ms. Cook was training 
horses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all before I begin to answer the question, I’d like to take 
the opportunity to formally table the report that was made 
public this morning by PricewaterhouseCoopers, if I could do 
that so all of the Assembly could have that. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say also if the member opposite is saying 
that there is no credibility in the report, I want for the members 
in the Assembly and for the public of Saskatchewan to note, 
Mr. Speaker, that PricewaterhouseCoopers is a worldwide firm 
that employs more than 146,000 people, that operates in 148 
countries, Mr. Speaker, and a firm that does . . . that has done 
business for over 150 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if that member is prepared to say that that firm doesn’t 
have credibility in doing an independent report, Mr. Speaker, let 
her be absolutely clear about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago in the 
rotunda, SGI officials told the media that it would not be SGI 
surveillance policy to videotape family members of an 
insurance claimant, especially if the insurance claimant was not 
clearly around when the video was shot. Yet today this $50,000 
report says that the surveillance performed in Virginia Cook’s 
case was conducted in accordance with SGI’s policies and 
procedures. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there is significant portion of Virginia Cook’s 
videotape where the investigator admits in his notes that he 
does not have a positive ID (identification) on her and where he 
tapes Virginia’s fiancé and people going in and out of his place 
of work. In fact this makes up four days of this surveillance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a direct contradiction. To the minister: is it 
or is it not a policy of SGI that family members of a claimant 
should not be videotaped if the claimant is clearly not in sight? 
And did PricewaterhouseCoopers actually view Virginia 
Cook’s surveillance tape? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me say first of all, Mr. Speaker, 
that, and as I’ve stated earlier on, that SGI is certainly regretful 
if there are individuals who, when surveillance is being 
conducted, feel traumatized, Mr. Speaker, or in any way feel 
victimized. That is not the intent. But clearly it is the intent of 
SGI, as I think it is probably for most insurance companies, to 
investigate when they believe that fraud or misrepresentation of 
a case has taken place. 
 
That was the policy of SGI, Mr. Speaker. That is the policy of 
SGI, Mr. Speaker. And it will be the policy of SGI into the 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — . . . saying we have no answer from this 
minister. We’ve been asking these questions for weeks and no 
answer from this minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $50,000 of taxpayers’ money was spent on a 
report that concluded Ms. Cook’s personal injury representative 
in Weyburn communicated erroneous information to the 
claimant with regard to whether or not videotaping had been 
performed. 
 
The report states the letter provided to Ms. Cook contained, and 
I quote, “inaccurate information.” It says, and I quote: 
 

. . . we suggest that issuance of the letter to Ms. Cook with 
information to the contrary demonstrated a lack of 
professional judgement on the part of the PIR. 

 
The PIR (personal injury representative) ordered the 
surveillance, Mr. Speaker, and was in contact with the PI 
(private investigator) throughout the investigation. Mr. Fogg 
said this morning that she had a memory lapse. How gullible 
does the minister and his officials think the people of this 
province are? 
 
To the minister, is it acceptable for a PIR to give taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan incorrect information, and will the PIR be held 
accountable for her actions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in 
summary, let me say again that the report clearly stated that 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

 

there were areas of improvement that SGI should work towards, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also say that generally the report 
summarized says that SGI certainly follows best practices of the 
industry, Mr. Speaker, and meets or exceeds in many instances 
practices of the industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to the specific questions that that member asked, it 
is regretful of course, and is noted in the report, is regretful of 
course that misinformation was provided to Ms. Cook, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly that was not the intent; it was not deliberate. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the president of the corporation will 
determine whether or not appropriate remedial action will be 
taken. 
 
But I think the important point, Mr. Speaker, is that SGI follows 
best practices, and in most cases, exceeds best practices of the 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Did 
PricewaterhouseCoopers have the tape and did they watch the 
surveillance videotape of Virginia Cook? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure where this 
opposition is coming from on this issue. Is the opposition now 
again going back to their position, Mr. Speaker, that says that 
we should not — our insurance company or any insurance 
company — should not now again investigate where they 
believe that there is an incidence of fraud, Mr. Speaker, or 
misrepresentation of the facts? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in any case when investigation is conducted, it 
isn’t always the case that we find out that those individuals are 
misrepresenting the fact. Lots of times when an investigation or 
an audit is conducted it confirms that the claim was in fact 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But having said that, SGI will continue to do investigations 
when they believe that misrepresentation or fraud has been 
committed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, again no answer from the 
minister. Mr. Speaker, this report cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan $50,000 to tell us that extensive video 
surveillance of SGI personal injury claimants and their family 
members is perfectly okay; $50,000 to tell us personal injury 
representatives can provide a client with incorrect information 
and face no consequences. 
 
We spent over $50,000 of taxpayers’ money to hear that SGI 
officials didn’t have a clue whether they hired private 
investigative firms or individuals to conduct surveillance or not, 
because their information systems aren’t up to track that 
information right now. They’re not right. 
 
And we spent $50,000 to learn that the minister made a big 
assumption about the number of surveillance cases SGI 
conducted in any given year, and passed that assumption on to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this report is a whitewash and no one, not the 
minister and not SGI officials, are being held accountable for 
this mess. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: what actions is he going 
to take to address incompetence by this minister and SGI 
officials? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge that 
$50,000 is a lot of money, Mr. Speaker. But the report, Mr. 
Speaker, makes a number of recommendations and SGI will 
certainly improve in those areas. As has been the case in the 
past, they’ve moved to better reporting practices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think the report goes beyond, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
recommendations. It certainly . . . I believe, probably the most 
important point of the report, Mr. Speaker, is it provides the 
public of Saskatchewan confidence that their insurance 
company is in fact conducting surveillances in an appropriate 
way and is either meeting or exceeding industry standards, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if that member is suggesting that SGI should 
just go out and fire individual employees, Mr. Speaker, that 
may . . . who have co-operated, I should say parenthetically, 
with the independent investigator, Mr. Speaker, who have 
co-operated fully; and the consultant has acknowledged that this 
is an honest mistake — if that member is saying that we should 
now fire those individuals, that is not the practice of SGI. It 
might be their practice but it’s not the practice of SGI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Harassment Complaint 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we just heard about a $50,000 whitewash report from SGI 
where the minister can’t even answer the simplest of questions. 
And now an article in The StarPhoenix is suggesting that the 
investigation of the former Environment minister was a 
one-sided whitewash as well. 
 
Doug Cuthand said he has spoken with Pearl Yuzicappi and a 
number of other sources and here’s what he found, quote: 
 

The government investigation failed her and instead . . . 
was more like an inquisition. Character witnesses were 
called for the minister, including three cabinet . . . 
(ministers) . . . Yuzacappi . . . wasn’t asked to provide 
character witnesses. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is this an accurate description of the investigation? 
Why was the former minister allowed to call character 
witnesses? To the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’re seeing a pattern here. As I’ve 
indicated . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’ll tell you the pattern, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
tell you the pattern. It’s an opposition that will call into the 
question the integrity . . . Today alone they’ve called into 
question the integrity of public servants in this province; 
they’ve called into question the integrity of 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Mr. Speaker, in this House. And now 
today they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would like to 
be able to hear the full response. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, and of course when they 
don’t like an answer they just . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’m still finding it difficult and 
I would ask members to turn the volume down a little. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition hollers 
from his seat when he doesn’t like the answer to the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before in this House and have said 
publicly and will say again, the fact of the matter is that in this 
circumstance we engaged an individual who is widely known in 
Canada for the work in workplace complaints; a woman whose 
credentials I think are beyond question. She submitted the 
report, Mr. Speaker. She chose which elements of that report 
should be made public. We’ve done so and the case is closed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there certainly is a pattern of whitewash and cover-up 
by this government according to Mr. Doug Cuthand. Mr. 
Speaker, the article goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

Allegations were made about Yuzacappi’s intentions, 
accusing her of wanting a better job or a payout. 
 
They even accused her of playing the race card, even 
though Yuzacappi never once raised it. It is obvious the 
government closed ranks on her and protected itself. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all along the Premier has said he followed this 
process so that others would feel comfortable in coming 
forward in the future. But according to this account by Doug 
Cuthand, it sounds like Pearl Yuzicappi was under 
investigation, not the former minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this an accurate account of the Premier’s 
$25,000 investigation and if so, who was under investigation 
here, the minister or the staff member she reportedly slapped? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — When we engaged Ms. MacKenzie to do 
this work, we asked her to do an investigation of the event that 
occurred in the minister’s office. Ms. MacKenzie did an 
investigation of that event. I am not privy to those individuals 
she talked to or did not talk to. I am privy to the fact that this 
woman is widely recognized in this nation as an expert in her 
field. For this reason, and precisely this reason, we went out of 
province. We went to an expert in the field to draw on that 
expertise. 

When we did so, the opposition suggested that was the right 
thing to do. Now they’re suggesting, I guess, that this was not 
the right thing to do or that she was not in fact the right 
individual. 
 
The facts of the matter are, Mr. Speaker, I believe she was the 
right person for the occasion. I think she has done good work; 
she’s provided her report. She suggested which elements of it 
should be made public — they were made public, Mr. Speaker. 
And again the case is closed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the case is not closed. We 
still have the bill to pay. The taxpayers have a bill to pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the cost to taxpayers 
continues to mount. We now know four — four of the former 
minister’s staff are sitting at home doing nothing and drawing a 
full salary. Taxpayers are paying a hefty price for this Premier’s 
bungling, incompetent leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix article says the Premier was: 
 

. . . more interested in damage control . . . than . . . (in) 
justice . . . (He says that) He was more concerned that . . . 
(the minister) had spoken to the press than he was about the 
substance of the issue. 

 
And it goes on to say that, “He placed politics before reason and 
justice.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier was more interested in covering up 
the damage to his government than in doing the right thing. But 
in the end he couldn’t even get that right, Mr. Speaker. He 
wasted 25,000 taxpayers’ dollars and he still had to fire the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, why should taxpayers be forced to 
pay for the Premier’s incompetence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I repeat, precisely, to give assurance to 
members of this legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan 
that nothing was being put aside or used for political advantage. 
It’s precisely for this reason that we engaged a woman of Ms. 
MacKenzie’s stature in the country to do the work. 
 
But I’ll tell you again, Mr. Speaker, why it is that day after day 
after day, this opposition wants to raise issues like this in the 
legislature. It is because . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana and the member for Rosthern 
to kind of try to tone it down a little. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Why are these questions being raised, 
Mr. Speaker? It is in my view because this opposition does not 
want to talk about 11,000 new jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan; this opposition does not want to talk about a 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

 

credit rating upgrading from Moody’s of New York; and 
obviously this opposition doesn’t want to talk too much about 
agriculture in that we haven’t heard one new, one new idea, for 
the state of agriculture in Saskatchewan or Canada during the 
course of this session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that’s why we want to go back to files that we’ve closed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the history of this government has been to whitewash and cover 
up. Whenever they call for an investigation of one of their 
misdeeds, Mr. Speaker, they always go out of province but they 
give them a very, very narrow focus in which to deal with. 
 
The minister wouldn’t . . . minister of SGI wouldn’t even 
answer whether Price Waterhouse had access to the tape, Mr. 
Speaker. What information did Marilyn MacKenzie have on 
this case? She didn’t interview any character witnesses for Pearl 
Yuzicappi, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s one cover-up after another to cover up the 
Premier’s bungling and incompetence. 
 
If the Premier does have nothing to hide in this, if the report is 
so good, release it to the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It’s an interesting circumstance when the 
member from Cannington seems to know precisely who was or 
who was not interviewed in the course of Ms. MacKenzie’s 
work, when I am not privy to that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Part of the confidentiality of this kind of work is to assure 
confidentiality to the people that Ms. MacKenzie would work 
with. We know exactly, we know exactly how this group would 
function in government. We had one of them this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, the member of Weyburn, stood in public in front of 
cameras suggesting that a public servant in this province should 
be fired — with no basis. She accuses that and attacks a public 
servant, Mr. Speaker. I note that. 
 
I note the comment of that, of that opposition, I think the 
member from Wood River who talks about the skunks in this 
. . . the government that they’re going to get rid of if they get in 
here. 
 
I’ll tell you how they operate, I’ll tell you how they operate. 
They don’t bring in credible individuals. They’ll just do this on 
their own, attacking public servants, attacking the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to follow an appropriate process. In 
this case PricewaterhouseCoopers, one of this continent’s 
pre-eminent firms, now being accused of providing whitewash 
by that opposition. It’s unbelievable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 213 — The Tobacco Control 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move 
first reading of Bill 213, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 
2002 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members, I think this is enough. 
If there’s anything important left to say, I’m sure you can put it 
on record later. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 214 — The Balanced Budget Act, 2002 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at this 
time I’d like to move first reading of Bill No. 214, The 
Balanced Budget Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today on behalf 
of the government to table written responses to questions no. 
383 through 386 inclusive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 383, 384, 385, and 386 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 57 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join into the debate on Bill No. 57, the auto 
insurance amendment Act, better known as no-fault, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a real significant piece of legislation. 
No-fault insurance was put forward by this government seven 
years ago I believe, in 1995. And I remember, at that time when 
no-fault insurance was coming in, the controversy that 
surrounded it. There are a lot of people very concerned with the 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

whole issue around no-fault insurance and how it was going to 
impact them if they were ever in an accident, collision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the old system, although it had its faults, I guess I 
could say it wasn’t perfect and it was expensive. And I know 
that after dealing with SGI a number of times and listening to 
some of the concerns that SGI had. The old system was . . . 
could have been looked at as being very expensive. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the whole question around no-fault insurance and 
whether this was the proper way to go, Mr. Speaker, was a huge 
debate in the province at that time and has continued to be a 
huge debate in this province ever since, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This piece of legislation, as I mentioned, of course takes a lot of 
the accidents and claims out of the court system. It’s settled 
through SGI on a balance sheet type thing where they say that 
you’re eligible for so much, Mr. Speaker, and it really doesn’t 
address a lot of times the pain and suffering that a lot of 
accident victims go through. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remember at the time we were talking 
about no-fault insurance, in 1995 I believe is when it was 
introduced, some of the concerns around it. There were other 
provinces that were in the no-fault insurance program. They had 
moved from a tort type system into a no-fault program and had 
been in that program for a while. And there were some major 
concerns coming from other provinces. 
 
I don’t know if there was a province that had implemented the 
no-fault insurance program that didn’t have a group form in that 
province shortly after with . . . showing concern, and 
complaints, and injustices that were taking place in those 
provinces through the no-fault insurance program, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Mr. Speaker, those — I guess we could call them lobby 
groups — were strong in other provinces. It didn’t take long for 
this province to — once we introduced the legislation — to get 
those same type of groups active in our province because, Mr. 
Speaker, the no-fault insurance program did have some major 
flaws, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess it’s refreshing to see that the government, after 
seven years of forcing this program on residents of 
Saskatchewan, is perhaps finally listening to some of the 
concerns that the Coalition Against No-fault has put forward. 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if there is an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) in this province over the last seven years 
that hasn’t had a constituent come to them and complain about 
the program as it is in existence today. As the program was put 
into existence seven years ago, Mr. Speaker, and I . . . As I have 
only been a sitting member for the last three years, Mr. Speaker, 
I know I’ve had calls, many calls on the injustices of no-fault. 
And certainly I’m quite sure that a number of the members that 
were in this Legislative Assembly before me had numbers of 
calls regarding it. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I think there was so much 
concern around the no-fault legislation when it came into place 
in 1995, seven years ago, I think there was so much concern 
around it that it wasn’t only people from the street, people that 
had . . . involved in collisions that were raising concern about it, 
I believe there is some members on the government side that 
were very concerned about the introduction to no-fault 
insurance, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve got some reports and 

certainly some evidence that that was the case, that certain 
members on the government side were saying, this is not the 
program to go to. 
 
They’re having trouble in other provinces. We realize that the 
tort system is very expensive. But to throw that out completely 
and go to a no-fault insurance program with the troubles that we 
have seen in other provinces is just irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 
To think that you can just address it by changing the whole way 
the system had worked and go into a no-fault insurance system, 
Mr. Speaker, is irresponsible of that government of that day. 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it has taken seven years before 
this government has acknowledged that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now, the government is looking at 
introducing this legislation and looking at opening up the 
no-fault legislation and allowing people to opt into a tort-type 
system, Mr. Speaker. And that is, I think, a recognition that the 
system that they had put into place many, many years ago was 
faulty. Even though it’s called a no-fault system, I think it had 
definitely many, many faults. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . one of the issues that I remember at the, at the 
time, when no-fault was coming into place, was the whole issue 
around people that were involved in collisions with impaired 
drivers. The person was impaired, driving while impaired, 
sometimes extremely impaired no doubt, probably two, three 
times the legal limit, and they go through a red light because 
they . . . of course their senses are dulled and they’re not quite 
sure, they’re disoriented and they’re not sure where they’re 
going and they collide with a person that is going through a 
green light. 
 
For example, I know of a couple of situations back in my days 
dealing with traffic safety where a person would be going 
through a green light and an impaired driver went blowing right 
through a red light, and in the one situation, I know there was a 
fatal, multi-fatal where a couple of people were killed, but the 
people that survived the collision had severe injuries, real 
severe injuries, and there was lots of pain and suffering that 
went on. And unfortunately this person had no ability to take 
any recourse on the impaired driver. The impaired driver was 
not looked at as at fault per se, because the victim could not sue 
the driver — the no-fault system wouldn’t allow for that. 
 
And really, I remember for years and years we have been 
working to try and reduce the number of impaired drivers in this 
province, and in one fell swoop with the no-fault . . . 
introduction of no-fault insurance, it seemed to condone 
impaired driving. 
 
Now I know that was not the intent of the legislation, but 
certainly a person that was convicted of impaired driving in a 
collision didn’t have to worry about the victim coming back on 
him because of a result of his actions — being out on the road 
driving while impaired and getting into a collision, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So there was some major, major problems with the no-fault 
insurance, and that being one of the more common issues — 
that a person could be on the road driving illegally. And it 
didn’t have to be impaired driving. It could be driving while 
suspended, it could be a number of . . . driving under the 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2271 

 

influence, it could be over .08. It could be a number of issues 
where a person was driving that shouldn’t have been on the 
road causes a collision. And I could just say I was fortunate 
enough through those years to have not been involved in a 
collision. 
 
But what would you feel like if you’re involved in a collision 
where a person that was impaired, should have never been on 
the road in the first place, gets into a collision with you and you 
have absolutely no recourse but what SGI is allowing for pain 
and suffering — no recourse to go back after that driver because 
of his actions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know there was case after case after case. 
We had many, many e-mails and calls into our office regarding 
no-fault insurance, as did, I’m sure, the other 57 members that 
sit in this House have issues on no-fault insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well finally this government has recognized, as I mentioned 
after seven years, that there is a problem and they’re looking at 
opening up the no-fault insurance and going . . . giving drivers 
the option of no-fault or moving towards a tort type of system. 
This Bill allows the people to opt into a so-called tort system or 
the premier option. It has a $5,000 deductible for pain and 
suffering, plus the option to decide whether or not to pursue 
court action. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And I realize that at the time that no-fault insurance came in, 
some of the lawsuits that were being handed out, some of the 
lawyers that would take a collision and a accident victim and 
they’d go to court and they’d sue the driver. And SGI would 
then have to, because they were the insurer, have to make some 
very, very huge payments. And it was getting so that it was 
almost unbearable. I mean insurance rates were rising I guess 
throughout the nation because some of the lawsuits were going 
higher and higher and higher. And this was the way that the 
government thought that they could somehow counteract that. 
 
But what they failed to realize is that yes, they kept a lot of the 
. . . they kept the settlements down, but through legislation not 
through what was just. Perhaps it was just for a person to be 
awarded a sizable sum because of the collision that they had 
been in. 
 
We’ve had many groups look at this Bill. The Law Society has 
some questions about Bill 57, the insurance companies have 
questions as well. Insurance companies want to know if the plan 
is workable or how they will be able to explain the differences 
in the two systems to the customers. And that does raise some 
concerns. 
 
You know, you’ve got two systems running parallel now. 
You’ve got the no-fault system here which we’ve been under 
for the last seven years. And you’ll be having a parallel system 
run that allows victims to sue — a tort-type system. And how 
will those two systems run parallel? And it does raise a lot of 
questions. 
 
I’m certainly no lawyer but I know a number of lawyers will be 
concerned. How does it work if a person comes through the 
province and is involved in a collision with a person that’s 

under the no-fault system, or the person is involved in a 
collision with a person that has opted for the tort system? How 
is that all going to work out? How will the court systems 
adjust? There are a number of questions to be answered. 
 
And unfortunately I don’t think we want to pass the Bill 
through right away to say, see how it operates and then answer 
the questions after there’s been a collision, after there is . . . 
somebody’s felt that they could sue and now can’t sue, and 
there’s just a number of questions that surround that. 
 
A big question here is also why it has taken the NDP seven 
years to admit that they were wrong — seven years. Since 1995 
members from this side of the House have been bringing forth 
cases and as I’d mentioned, e-mails and faxes to our office. Had 
a number of people come in and visit in our office and really 
have some concerns. 
 
The one fellow that I can think of is a fellow that I’ve known 
for many, many years, a young fellow — just a year or two 
younger than I am, very young — and he was in a collision 
many, many years ago. He has been off work for a number of 
years. It was a fellow that I remember quite well. They lived 
relatively close to where I was born and raised. He was a 
hockey player. I remember playing hockey against him many, 
many times and the odd time with him. And he was involved in 
a collision . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and he was involved 
in a collision — he was a very good hockey player, as a matter 
of fact, and unfortunately was involved in a collision — and as 
a result of this collision he hasn’t been able to go back to where 
he was working before. He’s got some neck and spinal injuries 
and he’s had some real, real problems with dealing with SGI. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ve pursued the case different times 
for him and it seems like we run into roadblock after roadblock. 
But one of the issues was is that he had no other option. He had 
to deal with what the ruling of SGI was. There was no further 
option that he could take this case further and perhaps go 
through the court system to try and gain some further 
compensation for the collision. 
 
He couldn’t go through the court system and go after the driver 
that was at fault in this collision because according to the fellow 
that I’ve talked to, he was at not . . . he was not at fault. The 
person went through a stop sign or a yield sign and they were in 
a collision. And as a result, this victim has no option to pursue 
any further. The ruling of SGI was where it was at. 
 
And he’s just run into all sorts of trouble with SGI and the 
victim has had nothing but trouble and, as a result, is still in a 
bit of a battle with SGI and is very, very interested in the whole 
no-fault coalition . . . the coalition against no-fault and has been 
to many of their meetings and followed them very, very closely, 
and I know is waiting very interested . . . is very interested in 
this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while there are many parts of the Bill that are laudable, there 
are many, many questions that need to be answered. And, Mr. 
Speaker, until some of the lawyers, until some of the people that 
are involved with no-fault can see the Bill and ask more 
questions, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does need to be held up for a 
while so that people have a chance to hear their voice. 
 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

I think that is one problem that has happened over the last seven 
years is that there have been many, many complaints. But 
unfortunately this government has failed to listen to the 
complaints of many, many of the citizens of this province 
regarding the no-fault insurance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I would move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 57, the no-fault insurance Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 61 — The 
Regional Health Services Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise 
this afternoon to make a few comments about Bill No. 61, The 
Regional Health Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity in the last little while to 
look through the Act to some degree, and certainly to go 
through the comments that the minister made, the member from 
Regina Lakeview, in regards to this Bill, why this government 
felt so strongly that they needed to bring this Bill in. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, this government, this NDP 
government, has decided that after spending the tens of 
thousands of taxpayers’ dollars in this province to study health 
care, they commissioned Ken Fyke to bring a report to them, as 
we see by this Act now obviously that that report is doing 
nothing more than gathering dust in our archives. 
 
And that’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because certainly the 
report had some good parts to it. Certainly on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, there was some aspects of the report that 
brought a great deal of concern to us, but there was a bit of a 
game plan in there that, from a provincial standpoint, that this 
government could have used when we look at health services 
and the delivery of health services in this province. 
 
And as we look at this Act, Mr. Speaker, and then reflect back 
on the report by Mr. Ken Fyke, it has a great deal of concern 
that this government has done nothing more than file that report 
and decided to go their own route anyway. They’ve decided to 
go their own route anyway, Mr. Speaker, and for all intents and 
purposes, do nothing. They’ve taken a deck of 32 cards and 
thrown 20 of them away, and will say, well we’ll just play with 
12 cards now. But the reality is that’s basically what they’re 
going to do. 
 
It makes you very concerned that those . . . us members on this 
side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why this government 
felt so strongly that they needed to reduce the amount of health 
regions, health districts in this province — reduce from 32 
health districts, down to 12 health regions. Regions now this 
government is going to call them, Mr. Speaker, and what they 
hope to accomplish from that. 
 
We certainly know that this government feels very strongly that 
we’re over-governed in this province. Of course, those of us on 
this side of the House are convinced, and we know that to be 

true by talking to our constituents, that the people of 
Saskatchewan feel quite strongly they’re over-governed by the 
NDP government, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
They feel quite strongly it’s not a matter of being 
over-governed by health districts, it’s not a matter of being 
over-governed by municipalities, it’s not a matter of being 
over-governed by school boards, it’s a matter that they feel 
over-governed by this NDP government with the regulations 
and the legislation that they have in place to control virtually 
every aspect of our life in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s what the people of Saskatchewan are concerned about, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is not the reduction in health districts 
down to 12 health regions that people are concerned about. The 
fact of the matter is the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
were highly concerned that the 32 health districts that are 
already in place really had very little teeth — very little teeth, 
Mr. Speaker — and were not able to operate their health 
districts in an appropriate and prudent manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard comments in the past by previous 
Health ministers prior to the present Health minister where they 
felt quite strongly that the present health districts really should 
have no more authority than to order the broccoli and which 
brand of bathroom tissue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so it leads us to be concerned then, if this government feels 
quite strongly that if you’re going to have health districts — or 
now under this present legislation, should it ever get passed, is 
that we’re going to 12 health regions — if you’re not going to 
allow them the authority to make day-to-day decisions, to 
become part of the decision making, Mr. Speaker, then what is 
the point of even having them? 
 
Because at least in the past there was some opportunity with the 
32 health districts when we have elected health boards. And of 
course in the past these boards, two-thirds of them, eight out of 
twelve on the health districts were elected. Four of them were 
appointed by this government. 
 
Of course this government always has to find ways and means, 
Mr. Speaker, to be able to appoint, to be able to appoint their 
friends into positions of so-called authority, to make them feel 
as though they’re having some sense of responsibility to protect 
their government. 
 
But what is important here, I think, to remember is that at least 
under a democratic process, at least under a democratic process 
there was an appearance that the 32 health districts had some 
authority. 
 
Of course when you study the Act and understand clearly the 
responsibilities of the district health boards and the 
responsibilities of the Health minister, it was quite easy to 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that the real responsibility lies 
actually with the minister. The real responsibility has always 
lain with the minister and that the 32 health districts really had 
no responsibility, and it was very unfortunate. 
 
Some very good friends of mine over the years have been 
involved with the health districts, Mr. Speaker, and certainly it 
was one of the things they clearly pointed out to me was the 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

 

frustration that they had with being able to provide quality 
health care — quality health care, Mr. Speaker — in our area of 
the world. And for myself I found that very disconcerning that 
this government felt so strongly about having weak and 
ineffective health districts that they had to strip them of power 
and lay the responsibility at the feet of the minister. 
 
And now what we see, what we see here, Mr. Speaker, is an Act 
that it even goes even further — it goes even further. This Act 
starts out very clearly and the minister states that from now on 
there will only be 12 health regions, that health will be provided 
on a more regional basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well let’s take a look at these health regions just a little bit, and 
I want to refer to my area, Mr. Speaker. There’s been an 
amalgamation — a forced amalgamation — by this NDP 
government of the Prince Albert Health District and the 
Parkland Health District, which takes in a very large area of 
central Saskatchewan. Those were two very large health 
districts to begin with and now they’ve been amalgamated. 
 
But what’s . . . what we find very concerning — we’re very 
concerned about this, Mr. Speaker, up in the Prince Albert area 
— is that this government just seems to have taken the existing 
. . . the previous boundaries and simply eliminated a line in 
between them, in between health districts and formed these new 
health regions. 
 
So what we have in the Prince Albert region is that we have a 
region that it comes about halfway between Prince Albert and 
Nipawin and goes almost, almost to North Battleford, Mr. 
Speaker, taking in several communities west of Blaine Lake. 
Mr. Speaker, Blaine Lake is about halfways between Prince 
Albert and North Battleford. 
 
So you can see that there’s kind of a natural, probably a natural 
boundary in there, although Blaine Lake’s more natural trading 
area is the city of Saskatoon. But the boundary for the Prince 
Albert health region goes even farther west than that. It goes 
halfways between there and North Battleford. 
 
And so then we have communities, Mr. Speaker, whose natural 
trading pattern is the city of North Battleford, who are inside 
the Prince Albert health region. This is going to make things 
very disjointed for those communities, Mr. Speaker, and it 
causes a great deal of concern on this side of the House why 
this government, if they wanted to reduce the amount of health 
districts that were in this province, Mr. Speaker, that they 
wouldn’t have taken a look at this issue in a more holistic 
manner and actually used the city of Prince Albert’s natural 
trading patterns rather than just go holus-bolus about creating 
health regions. 
 
(14:45) 
 
But even of greater interest, Mr. Speaker, is that when we take a 
look at the Prince Albert health region is the appointment of the 
board members, and certainly the board members have been 
appointed from the entire region on a reasonably representative 
basis. But the chairman of the board of the Prince Albert health 
region is . . . lives closer to North Battleford than he does to 
Prince Albert. And so then, Mr. Speaker, this chairman of this 
new board, this new regional health board that’s going to be 

created, has much more familiarity with the city of North 
Battleford than he will with the city of Prince Albert. 
 
And I think that the people, the citizens of Prince Albert, the 
34,000 people that live in Prince Albert, should be and are 
concerned about this, Mr. Speaker, that why this NDP would 
appoint someone who has clearly indicated in the past that his 
primary . . . he feels his primary responsibility, Mr. Speaker, is 
to support the NDP Party at all costs and he was appointed to 
this position because of affiliation with this NDP Party and not 
because of his ability to deliver quality health care in this 
province, is now, is now going to be chaired by a person who 
lives almost to the city of North Battleford and he’s the Chair of 
the Prince Albert . . . Prince Albert health region. 
 
We already had problems in the past around this issue, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly we saw before when at least two-thirds — 
sixty-six and two-thirds per cent of the health . . . district health 
boards were elected — at least there was some sense of, some 
sense of democracy involved around this although the people 
from the Prince Albert Health District were very concerned that 
. . . with the four appointments that were always brought 
forward for the board. 
 
Because in the past, as people of Prince Albert region already 
know, that there was one appointment to the Prince Albert 
Health District Board who actually lived outside, outside the 
district. And it was actually from the town of La Ronge. Well 
the town of La Ronge already had their health district. So the 
town of La Ronge had representation on the . . . on their health 
district but they had representation on the Prince Albert Health 
District. 
 
And I’m sure if we take a look around the province as how 
that’s unfolded, it . . . did it happen in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Saskatoon Health District? Were there . . . was 
there people from Prince Albert appointed to that board to 
represent the city of Prince Albert there? 
 
And it’s these kind of concerns that are being brought forward, 
Mr. Speaker, that lead us on this side of the House to believe 
that this kind of an Act, brought forward in a willy-nilly type of 
fashion, is that . . . What this government is doing is bringing 
about legislation, is bringing about legislation, Mr. Speaker, to 
hide the fact that they’re completely devoid of new ideas. Their 
idea bank, their bank of ideas, is completely depleted and now 
. . . So they come up with Acts like this to make it . . . at least 
give an appearance. They’re trying to give an appearance that 
they know what they’re doing. And of course when you go into 
the Act, you go through the comments that were made by the 
minister, you find out that what we have here is a government 
just scrambling in circles trying to come up with some new 
ideas, and not doing a very good job of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the biggest concerns around this whole idea, Mr. 
Speaker, of having, of having these new health regions and the 
eight-member boards that are going to be in place — we 
understand that they have an eight-member board — is that 
they’re going to be entirely appointed. They’re going to be 
entirely appointed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has become, has become so fearful of 
democracy that when they created these . . . Regional Health 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

Services Act is that they felt, in order to gain the upper hand in 
regard to this situation, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re going to 
have to appoint these health boards so that they can have their 
own people, their own people in there, Mr. Speaker, looking 
after that, covering up for this government and their own 
incompetence, rather than have the people, rather than have the 
people of the region, Mr. Speaker, become involved in the 
election of these managers, these managers of the . . . of our 
regional health services. 
 
And that’s a great deal of concern to us on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. Why would this government be so fearful 
of democracy that they’re going to have to have appointed 
boards, appointed boards, Mr. Speaker? Why could they not 
have had fully elected boards? And why are they . . . feel so 
strongly that you have to get away from local elections to break 
down the democratic process in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
It leads us on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, to be very 
fearful of the motives of this NDP government, when a 
government becomes so devoid of new ideas that what they 
have done is attack the very democratic process of this 
province. 
 
Now this . . . the minister has also stated that he wants to help, 
he wants to help these regional health authorities, Mr. Speaker, 
so that they have a broader range of ability to be able to tap into 
the strengths of the region, to tap into the strengths of the 
region, Mr. Speaker. And so what the minister is doing, and as 
we see by this Act, Mr. Speaker, is that he is establishing a 
community advisory networks. In each region there’ll be a 
community advisory committee. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the best process . . . those of us on this side 
of the House in the opposition party, the Saskatchewan Party, 
clearly understand the best process for advising, advising the 
members of the regional health authority is an election. If you 
do that, Mr. Speaker, that solves the problem of people trying to 
understand what’s going on in their communities, rather than 
get locked away in a little backroom and trying to promote the 
agenda of the NDP in this province when it comes to health 
care. 
 
So they’re establishing community health committees to advise, 
to advise the health districts on the needs of the region. It leads 
you to wonder, Mr. Speaker, why we would need an appointed 
regional health authority; we’d need to have an appointed 
community advisory committee in order to run our health 
regions, Mr. Speaker. We’re back to where we were before. 
 
They were concerned that there was, there was too many health 
districts in this province; there was too many people being 
involved in the delivery of health care in this province from an 
elected capacity. And so then what they’ve done is completely 
get rid of the elected authority and replace them entirely with an 
appointed authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that this NDP government is highly in 
favour of appointing their party hacks and flacks, the party 
faithful, to positions of cover-up for their initiatives — or lack 
of initiatives would be a better term, Mr. Speaker — complete 
lack of initiatives in regards to health care. And so you appoint 
party hacks and flacks who then come forward and they’re 

going to carry around, carry around the paint can, Mr. Speaker, 
with the whitewash. And of course this government, this NDP 
government is extremely familiar with whitewash. They’re 
applying it to the regional health services now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course, being as that they’re familiar with it, involved 
with the former minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) and certainly dealing with it now 
with the present minister of SGI and the CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), who seems . . . they 
seem to be more interested in whitewash than they are in 
providing services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it leads us to be very concerned on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, when you see an Act like this, Bill No. 61, where 
this government is trying to, trying to give the appearance that 
they know what they’re doing. 
 
Of course when you go through the Act, you go through the 
minister’s comments, you can see that this is a government just 
stumbling along and certainly we’re very familiar with that on 
this side of the House. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are well aware of it. They get through the media 
that we have a government here stumbling along. 
 
We take the farmers of Saskatchewan. Instead of being 
represented appropriately in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has been bumbling along and hiding, hiding in 
Regina, hiding behind pieces of legislations like this Bill No. 
61, telling the people of Saskatchewan that we have a vision 
and we have a plan, until you read what their plan is and it’s 
completely devoid of ideas. And what they’re doing is breaking 
down the democratic process in this province. 
 
And it leads us to be very concerned on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, why this government feels so strongly that they 
need to work towards, need to work towards the undemocratic 
process of appointed health boards. Because we know very well 
on this side of the House that democracy is alive and well in 
this province. And to find that out, Mr. Speaker, all we have to 
do is ask the Premier to simply cross the pond over to the 
offices of the president of CIC and ask for permission to call an 
election. And then we’ll . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The member is diverted 
somewhat from the motion under discussion and that is Bill . . . 
second reading of Bill No. 61, The Regional Health Services 
Act. So I would just bring the member back to order. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I understand that the 
government is extremely upset when you get looking at this Bill 
and knowing that they are very concerned about the 
de-democratization of the province of Saskatchewan. It almost 
leads you to wonder where they’re going to go next. Are they 
going to start appointing, start appointing municipal councils? 
Are they going to start appointing health . . . or school councils? 
 
So when you see that . . . when you see a Bill like this where 
they are appointing health boards in this province, you wonder 
on this side of the House . . . we’re really certain on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, the direction, the future direction this 
province is . . . this NDP government is going. And that’s why 
we, on this side of the House, when we see a Bill like this think 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

 

it’s absolutely crucial that the president of CIC call an election 
in the very, very near future. 
 
We also see, we also see, Mr. Speaker, that what this NDP 
government in their ability to deal, to actually deal with issues, 
is that they are going to create a surgical registry. They are 
going to create a surgical registry, Mr. Speaker. They want to 
know who . . . They want to know who is in the waiting system 
for surgery in this province. 
 
Now one of the things we already know, Mr. Speaker, is that 
the health care professionals in this province are fully aware, 
Mr. Speaker, of who is requiring surgery. So requiring . . . so 
putting in place a surgical registry is merely another 
bureaucratic mumbo-jumbo in order to provide opportunity for 
the minister to become more involved in the health care system 
in this province. 
 
What we’ve been requesting on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, amply led, amply led, Mr. Speaker, by the member 
from Melfort-Tisdale, who has indicated very clearly that he 
has a much better direction for health care in this province than 
the present minister and certainly a much better, clearer 
direction for health care in this province than the entire NDP 
caucus, is that what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is reduce, 
reduce the waiting lists for people requiring surgery and not 
setting up a registry so that we know who they are. It’s 
irrelevant; it should be irrelevant to those of us who are elected 
and to the Department of Health who they are and what kind of 
surgery they require. 
 
What’s relevant, what’s extremely relevant in regards to this 
issue, Mr. Speaker, is that the problem be taken care of. We 
need to . . . We have a problem with too long a waiting list for 
surgery in this province, Mr. Speaker, and this government 
instead of taking care of and looking after these people and 
making sure that they get the surgery that is required so that 
they can lead healthy, normal lives, what this government is 
planning to do is to register them, is to register them. 
 
Now we’re already having a problem in this province. We have 
a federal government that wants to register guns, and we’ve got 
a provincial government wants to register people who require 
surgery. I think it would be more appropriate if we started 
having governments who actually looked after the issue in 
regards to surgery rather than have them registered. 
 
Because we know very well, we know very well, Mr. Speaker, 
on this side of the House, on this side of the House, the 
members here have been very clear in the direction that when 
we become the government there will be shorter waiting lists in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s going to happen 
when we become the government and not have to worry about 
registering, registering people, Mr. Speaker, to find out who 
requires surgery and what the surgery is required for. 
 
What is amazing as we look at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
minister in his preamble has talked about consultation, 
consultation with our health partners. We’d sure like to know 
on this side of the House a very clear picture of who that 
minister consulted with or even better yet, Mr. Speaker, who his 
officials, who his officials might have consulted with. 
 

Because on this side of the House when we have consulted, 
when we have consulted with health care professionals, health 
care professionals, Mr. Speaker, about this issue of health care 
in this province, we have a very clear understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, what the issues are in regarding to delivering quality 
health care in this province inside, inside the fiscal restraint that 
this government is operating under. 
 
And certainly there is a restraint in this province. Although we 
know that this government has certainly been willing to throw 
dollars at the health care system, it is certainly not manifesting 
itself back into those people who are requiring health care 
services in this province. And that concerns us a great deal. 
 
(15:00) 
 
We have, I believe it’s been mentioned many times, Mr. 
Speaker, that we . . . the Saskatchewan government on a per 
capita basis has the second highest health care costs in the 
country of Canada. We have the second highest health care 
costs in the country of Canada and yet, and yet we look at what 
this minister is offering. He’s offering surgical registry and 
talks about consulting with health care partners, and yet we 
have the longest . . . we have the longest surgical waiting lists in 
Canada. 
 
And so how does this kind of an Act translate from reducing 
surgical waiting lists in the province of Saskatchewan? Or is the 
reality of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that the Government of 
Saskatchewan, this NDP government led by the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale — sort of led. He takes his marching 
orders certainly, we understand on this side of the House, from 
the chairman of the Crown Investments Corporation. Is that 
what is happening here is that they are simply shuffling the 
deck? Shuffling the deck and cutting the deck in half. 
 
They’re going from 32 health districts to 24 . . . or to 12 health 
regions, and they think that this will make health care in this 
province much better. Well certainly on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, those members over here — the Saskatchewan 
Party — understand very clearly, very clearly, that it’s going to 
take much more than that to fix health care in this province. 
 
And what it will probably require, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to 
require an election to fix health care in this province. And 
certainly the people of Saskatchewan are looking forward to 
that day because health care . . . health care needs to be fixed 
now, Mr. Speaker. We can’t wait for another four years or eight 
years until this government — NDP government — might 
decide that they want to do something. 
 
And certainly the people of Saskatchewan know that they’re not 
going to have to wait that long. When we take a look at this 
Bill, this Bill No. 61, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
— now that they’re becoming better acquainted with it — know 
very well that this NDP government, completely devoid of 
ideas, has decided that we’re just going to shuffle the deck 
around a little bit and from then on we’ll hope that people won’t 
notice that surgical waiting lists in this province are the longest 
in Canada, that they’re actually growing. 
 
There’s been a significant loss of nurses in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is what the NDP government is hoping to do 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

with this Bill, is hide the fact of their mismanagement and 
incompetence of the health care system in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important that we take 
a look for a minute here at how this might affect the Prince 
Albert Health Region, this kind of a Bill. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was very proud when I first read 
the Ken Fyke report and he talked about the city of Prince 
Albert and the health care services that could be — that could 
be — in Prince Albert. 
 
Now we look at this Bill and we see what is not going to be in 
Prince Albert, and we take a look at the Fyke Commission 
report and understand what should have been in Prince Albert. 
Ken Fyke talked about Prince Albert being a tertiary centre for 
northern . . . for central and northern Saskatchewan. That’s 
what he talked about in that report. 
 
Is there anything, is there anything in this Bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s going to lead the people of Prince Albert to 
understand that there’s going to be quality, higher quality health 
care for central and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to point out very clearly 
in this House that there is no indication in this Bill that anything 
like that is going to happen. The health care professionals in 
Prince Albert, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have been trying to provide 
a health care facility and system for the Prince Albert and 
district that would be second only to Regina and Saskatoon. But 
it’s been like they’ve been beating their heads against a brick 
wall unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because every time 
they try to come up with new initiatives, this NDP government, 
and this minister and his officials in the Department of Health 
have done everything they could . . . done everything they 
could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to hold back the Prince Albert 
health region from achieving the goal that they’ve been working 
so hard to attain. And that is to provide high quality health care 
for central and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s absolutely no reason, and the members on this side of 
the House and I’ve spoken with this a multitude of times, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, with the member from Melfort-Tisdale about 
the issue of having a tertiary centre in Prince Albert serving 
central and northern Saskatchewan. And he agrees absolutely 
with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people of Prince Albert 
and the people of northern Saskatchewan — the people of 
northern Saskatchewan — deserve a tertiary health care system 
in Prince Albert that will serve to a very large degree the health 
needs, the pre-eminent health needs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
people from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s what is significantly missing in this Bill. And I think 
it’s important for this NDP government to understand that 
again, that again they failed the people of the Prince Albert 
region. And certainly we know, we understand, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the people of Prince Albert, the citizens of Prince 
Albert are very, very concerned that because of the lack of 
progress in this Bill to work towards quality health care and the 
reduction of, the reduction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of surgical 
waiting lists in this province, that this health care Bill does not 
address the needs of the . . . of a significant loss of nursing staff 
in this province. 

And certainly we understand very clearly on this side of the 
House, and the people in the Prince Albert — city of Prince 
Albert, and the Prince Albert Health District understand very 
clearly that what this government has decided to do is simply do 
a quick two-step and hope everybody will forget the problems 
that are facing the people of Saskatchewan when it comes to 
quality health care — to high quality health care in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, of course the members of us on this side 
of the House, certainly in getting an advanced step on the 
members on the government side of the House have actually, 
have actually done some work on this Bill. We’ve provided this 
Bill to the interested personnel, people in this province who are 
very concerned about health care. And certainly they’ve come 
back to us stating very clearly their concerns in regards to this 
Bill. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we find very interesting about 
this process is that these people are saying, you know, we need 
to study this Bill even more, because we believe that we can 
come back with some very good ideas to create quality health 
care in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s incumbent upon members on the opposition side 
here to do that. We are going to do that; we are going to take 
the advice of the people involved in health care in this province 
and work towards achieving the goal of quality health care. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the people of 
Saskatchewan have that opportunity to participate in working 
through this Bill. And so I think it’s important, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we continue to wait to access that important 
feedback that is so necessary to debate a Bill such as this Bill 
No. 61. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 62 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 62 — The Health 
Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 
apportant des modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur 
la santé be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure again to rise this afternoon when we looked at the 
previous Bill, Bill No. 61, and now we’re looking at Bill No. 62 
which is the consequential amendments Act in regards to the 
health statutes in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We understand . . . And certainly the minister was very clear in 
his remarks that when you make changes to the health regions, 
to the health districts, to go from 32 health districts in this 
province and how they are to operate, that they’re not to be 
elected, that they’re to be appointed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
there’s to be advisory committees involved with these health 
regions, that there’s going to have to be some other changes that 
are going to have to be made, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so what we have here then is the consequences of that. And 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

 

there’s a myriad of Acts that are going to have to be changed to 
accommodate this fancy two-stepping by this NDP government 
in trying to hide the fact that they’re devoid of ideas when it 
comes to health care in this province. 
 
And I think it’s important as we look at Bill No. 62, is that the 
people of Saskatchewan have the opportunity to understand, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how many other Acts are actually affected 
by these changes by Bill No. 61, Mr. Speaker, and why we need 
Bill No. 62. 
 
And so we have in front of us The Health Statutes 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2002. Certainly we 
understand that one of the issues in regards to this is that the 
Act is both in English and in French and that requires 
legislation in regards to that. 
 
But that there’s more to . . . than that, you know, there’s more to 
it than just the bilinguality of this Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There’s changes, there’s changes that are going to be have to be 
made to The Co-operatives Act. The Co-operatives Act in this 
province are going to be significantly affected, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, by the changes to this regional Act, Bill No. 61 that 
has been proposed by the Minister of Health. 
 
And it leads you to kind of wonder on this side of the House if 
people really have had the opportunity . . . Have these boards, 
have these co-operative health boards out there . . . and certainly 
we have one in the city of Prince Albert. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to, you know, to say that — and I’m quite 
proud of it — that my dad actually served on that co-operative 
health board in Prince Albert and was actually a very good 
friend of one of the doctors at that health clinic, maybe a name 
of some familiarity, might have some familiarity with this 
name, and that was Dr. Orville Hjertaas who was a close family 
friend. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it leads us to be very 
concerned that this Act with its . . . what we can also see has 
actually two facets to it. One is the multitude of consequences it 
has with other Acts in this provinces . . . in this province. But in 
the meantime, when we look back on Bill No. 61, we see that it 
actually does very little to address the concerns of health care in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take a look at this and we worried about the 
effects that . . . this government is worried about the effects it’s 
going to have on The Co-operatives Act. You know what we 
know on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is that the people 
who work with the co-operative health clinics in this province, 
their major concern, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of 
Saskatchewan receive timely and appropriate health care. That’s 
their main concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s not in any of this . . . these Acts, be it Bill No. 61 or 
Bill . . . most specifically Bill No. 62. What is in here that is 
going to reduce surgical waiting lists? What is in this Bill that is 
going to address the need for more nursing staff, professional 
nursing staff in this province? Well there’s nothing in here. 
That’s what co-operative clinics are concerned about, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there’s quality and timely health care in this 
province. And there’s nothing in this Bill to address that need. 
And that’s what’s important here that we need to remember, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so how . . . the people of the co-operative health clinics are 
asking us for the opportunity, they’re asking for the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to be able to provide us with more 
information on their interpretation of the Act and the effect it’s 
going to have upon them under the co-operatives Act. To them 
that’s secondary, Mr. Speaker. What’s most important is that 
they are very, very concerned about the effects, the negative 
effects, that Bill No. 61 is going to have upon them in 
delivering quality health care, high-quality health care in this 
province. Because it talks about reducing the amount of health 
districts down to 12 health regions in this province, that these 
members be appointed from the NDP pool of party faithful. 
 
And what they’re concerned about is that it’s just going to 
continue to be more of the same. Not so much a shuffling of the 
deck, Mr. Speaker, as we often see the NDP do when they bring 
some Acts that they brought forward, is simply a shuffling of 
the cards, but they’re actually getting rid of how many cards 
that the people of Saskatchewan they get to play with. 
 
And so then we know, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, 
that co-operative health clinics in this province are very 
concerned that these Bills do not address health care and the 
delivery of health care in this province, but rather are designed 
to give the facade that this NDP government might know 
something about what they’re doing when it comes to health 
care. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are not fooled by 
this NDP government. They know very well that the only thing 
that’s going to fix health care in this province, Mr. Speaker, is a 
general election. Because that’s what it’s going to take, Mr. 
Speaker, is a general election to fix health care in this province. 
It’s not going to be changes to the co-operative health Act. It’s 
not going to be changes to the health care in this province, and 
Acts such as this, that Bill No. 61 or Bill No. 62, but it’s going 
to take the general election. And the members on this side of the 
House are looking forward to that day. And the members of that 
House . . . this House on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
are looking forward to that day being here sooner than later. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now we also see under this Bill, Bill No. 62, is that there’s 
going to have to be some changes to The Interpretation Act 
which will correctly define the phrase, a duly qualified medical 
practitioner. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s odd that they’re going to 
have to do some more redefining. It seems like this government, 
every time they bring a Bill forward, they bring something new. 
And it’s not very long before they’re bringing changes to it . . . 
who understand very clearly that you bring people in to help 
you write your Bills and bring them forward in a timely and 
dutiful fashion, and then within two or three or four years, this 
government is bringing them back with changes to them 
because they’ve left this out or forgot something else. 
 
And here we see this again, is that once again they have to, they 
have to make changes to regulate the podiatric surgeons within 
The Medical Profession Amendment Act. And so that leads us 
to be a great deal concerned about how many, how many other 
pieces of legislation has this government brought forward 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

where there’s been mistakes made and they’re going to have 
make corrections. 
 
Well the best way to expediate that process, Mr. Speaker, is to 
call a general election, and certainly the members on this side of 
the House then will do a very expedient process of making sure 
that all Acts in this province are taken care of in an appropriate 
manner and that the people of Saskatchewan are able to 
understand them and that they will serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we also see that they’re going to have to make a multitude 
of other changes, Mr. Speaker, under this, this Health Statutes 
Consequential Amendment Act 2002, Bill No. 62. They’re 
going to have make changes to The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act. They’re going to have to make changes to The 
Vital Statistics Act. 
 
Well here we go again, Mr. Speaker — Vital Statistics Act. 
This government obviously . . . I, would wager, Mr. Speaker, 
that they have to make changes in The Vital Statistics Act so 
that . . . so what they can do, what this government can do is be 
able to keep track of who’s on surgical waiting lists in this 
province. 
 
We need to spend less time . . . this government, Mr. Speaker, 
needs to spend less time wondering who’s on a surgical waiting 
list, what they’re on a surgical waiting list for, and actually start 
dealing with the issue of getting people off of surgical waiting 
lists. That’s what this government needs to be doing. And stop 
worrying about changes to The Vital Statistics Act and get 
down to the business, Mr. Speaker, of taking care of the people 
of this province and their health care needs that the people of 
Saskatchewan so desperately need in this very trying time under 
this NDP government. 
 
And so, and so, Mr. Speaker, because of the intimate 
relationship between Bill No. 61 and Bill No. 62, I think it’s 
important that, that we don’t lose sight that these, these two 
Bills need to move in tandem. And there’s still some work to be 
done, Mr. Speaker; that there are people out there who are still 
getting back to the Saskatchewan Party about how this, how this 
Bill, Bill No. 61, and consequently Bill No. 62, is going to 
affect them. 
 
And because of that importance of that relationship that, at this 
time, I think we need to keep the two of them tied intimately 
together, and so then I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 70 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 70 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
opportunity to speak to a Bill this afternoon that has raised 
considerable concern in the constituency of Cypress Hills. 

Bill No. 70 is entitled An Act to amend The Labour Standards 
Act. And as I have noted on previous occasions, Mr. Minister, 
some of the most difficult legislation, some of the most 
controversial legislation that is brought before this House by 
this government has been exceedingly short. You wonder how 
any government could move on such difficult legislation with 
such brevity. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that it’s because the less they say about 
their legislation, the easier it will be to run from the 
consequences, and possibly leaving the more onerous 
provisions of their decision making to the regulatory part of any 
Bill. 
 
Bill No. 70, An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act, Mr. 
Speaker, is one page long and includes just a very few brief 
portions. 
 
The one that we’re most concerned about today, Mr. Speaker, 
though is section (3.1)(c). It says: 
 

“(3.1) For the purposes of subsection (3), the following are 
deemed not to be within the meaning of farming, ranching 
or market gardening. 

 
And the following three categories are: 
 

(a) the operation of egg hatcheries, greenhouses and 
nurseries; 

 
(b) bush clearing operations; 

 
(c) commercial hog operations”. 

 
That’s an unusual group of enterprises to be lumped together in 
this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. But we want to 
deal specifically with the commercial hog operations that this 
particular Bill addresses. 
 
One of the other things I noticed about this singularly short 
piece of legislation is that this Act is going to come into force 
on September 1, 2002. The assumption I’m sure by the 
government is that they could push this through without too 
much difficulty and have it proclaimed and into force by late 
this summer. 
 
And if we looked at the consequences of this piece of 
legislation, the timing of it coming into force might actually be 
the smallest problem with this piece of legislation. Because 
there are a number of factors that have arisen as a result of 
looking at the ramifications of this legislation, that might have 
fairly significant detrimental consequences for this province as 
a whole and certainly for the economic opportunities available 
for hog production, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from some of the 
material that was provided to the official opposition by the 
organization that represents hog producers in this province. And 
basically what they want to do in this short piece of information 
is to lay out what exactly is the issue, why is it that the 
Saskatchewan pork producers are taking such umbrage at this 
particular piece of legislation? 
 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

 

If I may, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from this document, it’s 
only about 10 lines long: 
 

In a November 2001 speech to the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, Deb Higgins, the provincial Minister 
of Labour, announced that The Labour Standards Act 
would be applied to the pork industry. 
 
Given lack of consultation with, and analysis of, the 
agriculture sector as promised in the 2001 Throne Speech 
and to the ACRE committee, this announcement was 
alarming. 
 
Immediately following the announcement, Sask Pork 
initiated communication with the government regarding 
this situation. In fact, producers were granted two meetings 
with the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization, as well as the Minister of Labour. 
 
During January, a series of subjective interviews by a 
consultant were conducted to determine who the legislation 
would apply to and how this would be done legislatively. 
 
In late April an employer/employee committee was 
established to determine consensus on the application. 
Employers included three pork producers representing the 
spectrum of the industry. Employees included one hog barn 
worker for Saskatchewan’s only unionized, commercial 
hog operation and two non-industry employees — one from 
the Grain Services Union and one from the 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union. 
 
The “two sides” of this consensus building committee 
never met face to face and the discussions were cancelled 
after the first round of separated issues/presentations when 
the Department of Labour presented definitions for the Act. 

 
The organization, Sask Pork, that represents pork producers in 
this province wanted to provide that summary of background 
information so that it could be made clear to those of us in the 
official opposition and to the general public who are concerned 
with this particular issue how this so-called consultative process 
unfolded. And it would appear from this brief summary that 
consultation was the last thing on the minds of the government. 
 
Consultation was for public consumption, a process that looked 
legitimate. But in reality, Mr. Speaker, it did not meet what 
anyone would call the test of fairness. It didn’t represent the 
standards that are required to achieve a fair, consultative result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the industry is very concerned that the public 
know and that we as legislators know, that with respect to 
action over the last few months to apply the Act to their 
industry, that they have clearly stated to the Minister of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization, as well as to the 
Minister of Labour, the six following points. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, it is discriminatory from the industry’s 
point of view to segregate the pork industry from the rest of 
agriculture and within itself. 
 
Two, there must be clarity as to how this legislation will affect 
the 95 per cent of producers that are actually mixed operators. 

Three, there must be clarity as to the intention to bring the rest 
of agriculture under the Act. I think that’s a very important 
point, Mr. Speaker. This Act talks about the hog industry in 
particular but it is the thin edge of the wedge when it comes to 
applying labour standards to the rest of the agricultural activity 
in this province. 
 
There must be clarity regarding how the government intends to 
define the family farm and how they intend to ensure the family 
farm is not affected by legislation. 
 
Number five, there must be clarity as to how this legislation 
will affect Hutterite colonies, which actually represent, Mr. 
Speaker, 22 per cent of the provincial production. And in terms 
of application and competitiveness to the Hutterite colonies, this 
legislation is unclear. 
 
And number six, there must be a thorough economic analysis to 
determine how this legislation will affect the growth and 
development of an industry that the Department of Agriculture, 
Food and Rural Revitalization has itself promoted and 
supported. 
 
There’s a number of recommended actions from the pork 
industry that the general public could take to raise awareness of 
this issue and I’m not going to get into a lot of that this 
afternoon. But I think that what the items I’ve just presented 
clearly indicate is that there is a significant amount of concern 
as to where this type of legislation might lead in the agriculture 
sector. There are at least six clearly defined areas, by Sask Pork, 
that need to be addressed, they need to be clarified, and which 
are completely ignored in this very brief piece of legislation. 
 
And I think that when I look at the pork production in my own 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, there are not very many so-called 
commercial operations. But we don’t even know for sure what 
commercial operations are. The Act doesn’t define them. And I 
guess I would know that . . . I would believe that by anybody’s 
standard a commercial operation would have to do with a 
business enterprise. But most of farming these days, Mr. 
Speaker, is considered a business enterprise. 
 
And in the constituency of Cypress Hills, we happen to have 
more Hutterite colonies than any other constituency in the 
province. At last count I had 18, and another one was being 
constructed. So we’ll be close to the 19 or 20 Hutterite colonies 
in the constituency of Cypress Hills. 
 
Now as this particular piece of information points out, Hutterite 
colonies represent 22 per cent — 22 per cent — of the 
provincial production in hogs. Is this legislation going to affect 
and be applied directly to Hutterite colonies? I have no way of 
knowing; the Hutterite colonies certainly have no way of 
knowing. It’s not mentioned in the Act at all — there’s no 
definition, there’s no clarity, there’s no way of knowing 
whether this kind of legislation will be directed to Hutterite 
colonies. 
 
Now on the sheer basis of size of operations — numbers of pigs 
from farrowing right through to finishing, Mr. Speaker — 
Hutterite colonies, by the layman’s perception, would have a 
commercial hog operation. 
 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

So to have clearly ignored that particular element with this 
piece of legislation, I think, is troublesome — not for just the 
colonies that I represent, but for any colony in this province. 
But more than that, Mr. Speaker, it’s also going to be a serious 
cause for concern for mixed farming operations in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a large number of farms that have 
diversified over the last decade or so, taking advantage of 
opportunities in pork production; maybe having timed the 
market so that they could get into the production of pork when 
prices were low, when costs would be minimized, so that when 
the turnaround in pork values happened, they would be able to 
capitalize on that changing price structure. 
 
So we have a number, a large number of mixed family farm 
operations in this province that are significantly at risk due to 
this particular piece of legislation. And once again, there’s no 
definition of what a family farm is, there’s no definition of what 
a commercial operation is, and there’s no way of securing any 
kind of certainty for the family farm operators in this province 
through this piece of legislation. 
 
I think it’s incumbent on the government to be much more frank 
and much more upfront about its ultimate intentions with the 
people of this province than this particular piece of legislation 
accomplishes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s one of the things that 
concerns the people of this province more and more on a daily 
basis. Too many times this government brings forth legislation 
with all kinds of platitudes and all kinds of hoopla and all kinds 
of promotion, but what they leave unsaid, Mr. Speaker, is much 
more of concern to the people that are going to be affected than 
what they say upfront. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s gotten to the point where the people of this 
province cannot trust the intentions of the government based on 
the legislation that they bring to this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a travesty of justice to say to the people of 
this province, trust me. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
simply do not trust this government any longer and they have 
good reason not to trust them. Because too often, too often this 
government has come to this House with all kinds of plans and 
all kinds of promotion and all kinds of legislation that simply is 
irrelevant to the needs of the people, or even worse — or even 
worse — is negative, is consequentially negative to the people 
to whom the legislation is addressed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we just don’t feel that we can support this 
legislation on the face of it. The legislation is weak, it’s 
underwritten and, Mr. Speaker, it is flawed in many other ways 
as well. 
 
The consultation that was talked about by the minister in the 
past . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The consultation 

process that the Minister of Labour indicated was so successful 
in many of her opportunities to defend this piece of legislation, 
was a sham. It was a complete and total sham. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t have an honest process when the parties 
who are going to be affected most by the legislation aren’t even 
at the table. Mr. Speaker, what kind of fairness does that speak 
to? What kind of consultation is that when the parties most 
affected aren’t even at the table? Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members will have ample 
opportunity to have their views put on record, but right now the 
floor belongs to the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The industry was 
invited once, the meeting was cut short, everybody was told to 
go home, and the government was going to go ahead and do 
what they wanted to do anyhow. That’s consultation? Is that the 
kind of government we want? Is that the kind of intent? Is that 
the kind of fairness and integrity we expect from the 
government? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would have to stand here and defend the interests of the 
pork producers on that ground alone, regardless of how The 
Labour Standards Act might affect the industry. Simply said, 
the process, the consultation that was spoken of by the minister, 
was patently unfair and unacceptable in this day and age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of a media release presented by Sask 
Pork related to this particular part of the discussion that we’ve 
embarked on this afternoon. It’s dated May 14 and if I may, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to read this into the record. It’s datelined 
from the city of Saskatoon and it reads as follows: 
 

Sask Pork, an industry organization representing 
Saskatchewan’s pork producers, took issue today with 
remarks made by the Minister of Agriculture in the 
Legislature on Monday. 
 
Joan Steckhan, Director of Industry Development for Sask 
Pork, disagreed with the Minister of Agriculture that a 
consultation process on employment standards for the hog 
industry is underway. 
 
“Unfortunately, (and I’m quoting here, Mr. Speaker) . . . 
“Unfortunately, on May 1 after only one meeting, the 
Minister’s consultant cancelled the consultation process 
mentioned by Minister Serby. He told our representatives 
that there would be no further meetings,” Steckhan said. 
“From the point of view of producers, there is no 
consultation process taking place.” 
 
“Our industry has repeatedly asked the Minister of 
Agriculture for meaningful consultation on this issue,” 
Steckhan stated. “If the Minister of Agriculture could get a 
real consultation process started, producers would be very 
happy.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, if you can take this particular press release at face 
value — and I will — if you can take it at fact value, the 
producers were saying that they were prepared to negotiate. 
They were prepared for a meaningful consultation process. 
They were prepared to deal with this issue in a fair and 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

 

appropriate manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem here is that the government decided 
that they knew better, that they knew what they wanted to 
accomplish, that they had an agenda, that they had a purpose to 
fulfill, that they had a promise to keep, and that they would do 
what they had to do for their own benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not just a flawed process; this is a corrupt 
process. And I don’t believe for one minute that the people of 
Saskatchewan will continue to accept this kind of imposition on 
their lives and on their livelihoods without a serious 
consequence to this government. 
 
There is a price to be paid when you trample over people’s 
rights. There is a price to be paid when you ignore the best 
intentions and the best will of the people you are supposed to be 
representing. There is a price to be paid today and not just 
integrity. There is a price to be paid at the electoral ballot box at 
some day in the future, and that day, Mr. Speaker, is coming. 
This is just one example of the way this government has run 
roughshod over the rights and needs of the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things you would think this government 
would consider is the consequences of their actions, especially 
when we heard earlier this year the results from the ACRE 
committee, the Action Committee on the Rural Economy. It 
was a committee of large numbers, roughly 50 people, who 
were specifically hand-picked by this government, who were 
given a wide-ranging opportunity to look at the needs of rural 
Saskatchewan, to address the issues of rural revitalization in the 
agricultural sector and in other sectors as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that committee spent approximately a year and a 
half studying every angle, every issue that was presented to 
them for the best results of this province’s rural economy. One 
of the things that that particular committee hesitated to 
undertake was a full position on labour standards as they would 
apply to hog production in this province. 
 
So here we have the government’s own hand-picked committee 
charged with the responsibility to undertake a serious study of 
the issues affecting rural Saskatchewan and after 18 months of 
deliberation the committee does not come back with a 
recommendation on labour standards in the hog industry — 18 
months of study and no decision. In fact the ACRE committee, 
after looking at that issue for a considerable amount of time and 
with some very serious scrutiny, decided that much more study 
was required. 
 
And one of the reasons that the committee wanted to look at 
that issue in a more intense way and for a longer period of time 
is they realized, the members of that committee realized, that 
any rush to an imposition of labour standards on the hog 
industry in this province would be detrimental to the efforts of 
rural revitalization in this province. 
 
Labour standards of this level are not imposed on barns in our 
neighbouring provinces. Those are the barns that we compete 
with. Those are the economies this province competes with. The 
potential and the opportunity in the hog operations of this 
province, the opportunities are tremendous, Mr. Speaker, but 

we are in a situation now with this particular legislation that 
will put us at a competitive disadvantage with our immediate 
neighbours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard that before. In fact that’s a common 
theme. We’ve heard time and time again that our neighbours to 
the east and to the west have an advantage. It’s not a natural 
advantage, it’s not even a legislated advantage really. What we 
have done in this province is handicapped our own selves. We 
have succumbed to the temptation to undermine the advantages 
that we have. This province has greater reason to succeed in the 
production of pork, far greater than either Manitoba or Alberta. 
And what have we decided to do? We’ve decided to impose a 
set of standards on our hog industry that are going to be more 
onerous than either of the provinces to the east or the west and 
we are competitively disadvantaged unnecessarily. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could have, we could have waited. The 
government did not need to rush into this decision. We could 
have waited for the final report by the ACRE committee on this 
very important issue. 
 
We paid the people, we paid the people who sat on the ACRE 
committee substantial sums of money to put together their best 
effort on behalf of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We chose many capable people. We chose industry leaders. We 
chose people who had academic qualifications. We had people 
of all political persuasions on that committee. It was a 
well-intentioned, well-structured committee. 
 
And we have decided, apparently, not to wait for their 
recommendations on this very difficult and sensitive issue. We 
have decided — and I’m speaking on behalf of the government 
when I say that; they have decided, I guess would be a better 
pronoun — to rush ahead and let the most considered opinions 
languish. They aren’t waiting for the best minds to come to the 
forefront on this particular issue. They have decided to charge 
ahead and impose this legislation on the industry without 
hearing from the experts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that begs the question: why? What’s the rush? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the nub of this particular issue. 
It’s not that labour standards are necessary right now. It’s not 
that our pig operations and our hog producers across the 
province are abusing their employees. It’s none of those factors, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The factor that comes to the forefront, when you consider the 
evidence and you consider the timing, the factor that comes to 
the forefront is that the Premier needs a clear and concise 
fulfillment of a promise that he personally made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the only impetus. That is the only factor 
that could drive a government to introduce this kind of 
legislation in this rushed way, without thinking this whole thing 
through, without waiting for the best possible advice from the 
select committee that was charged to look at this very issue. 
 
This is a simple, this is a simple issue, Mr. Speaker. There is a 
promise to be fulfilled on behalf of the Premier made to people 
whose support he required in seeking the leadership of this 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

governing party. There is no clearer answer to that particular 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if every piece of legislation that was introduced in 
this province had that flimsy basis on which to be substantiated, 
we would be in dire straits. We’re in tough enough straits right 
now. But if that was the best reason for introducing legislation, 
given any other situation, we’d be in big trouble in this 
province. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that, knowing that this 
is probably the sole justification for this piece of legislation, we 
are going down a path that is going to bring us to big trouble 
sooner or later. 
 
There has to be a better reason. There has to be a more specific 
reason. There has to be a greater benefit to the people who are 
going to be affected. There has to be a greater benefit to the 
producers that are going to have to meet the standards. There 
has to be a clearer benefit to the workers and the businesses of 
this province before legislation of this type is of real good 
consequence. And we haven’t got that. We haven’t got that in 
this particular piece of legislation at all. In fact we don’t even 
know for sure where this legislation will lead us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I brought with me this afternoon a letter that was 
sent by an individual I happen to know who I will not name. 
But I’d like to read this letter. It was faxed to the Premier. And 
with it I’d like to do some comparisons between what one of the 
major pig producers in our province is offering to employees 
and what the standards are as provided by The Labour 
Standards Act. 
 
If I may, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read this letter dated May 
2002, and it reads: 
 

Dear Premier Calvert: 
 
The expansion of pork production has been good for 
everyone in the province. Pork producers have created lots 
of direct and indirect jobs in Saskatchewan. We need this 
growth to continue. Don’t hurt the industry now. 
 
Pork producers create $290 million of payroll in the 
province and pay over $29 million in provincial taxes and 
$7 million in municipal taxes. This is a significant 
contribution to the provincial economy. 
 
I want to add my voice in support of this important 
agricultural sector. Please consult with Saskatchewan’s 
pork producers before imposing legislation that will impact 
on the future growth of this industry forever. 

 
And it’s signed by the individual in question and his hometown 
is indicated here as well. And, for the record, if the members 
opposite question the legitimacy of this letter, they can ask the 
Premier for his copy. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have here a comparison between 
the labour standards that are imposed by the current legislation 
and the actual standards of benefit given to employees by this 
particular hog operation. 
 

And I’m just going to take a few minutes to do a direct 
comparison. In terms of annual vacation, labour standards says 
that you get 3 weeks after 1 year of service; 4 weeks after 10 
years of service. But this particular producer offers their 
employees 3 weeks after 1 year, 4 weeks after 5 years, 5 weeks 
after 15 years, and 6 weeks after 25 years. That’s a substantially 
better package for the employee. 
 
In terms of public holidays, there’s nine per year and a person 
working on an actual holiday is paid at double time and a half 
according to The Labour Standards Act. In this particular hog 
operation, of course there’s nine per year of official holidays 
and a person working on an actual holiday is paid at regular 
time for nine hours and for extra time for the next eight hours. 
 
In terms of the minimum wage which is what The Labour 
Standards Act suggests as an appropriate starting point — $6.40 
as of the writing of this particular comparison — but the 
particular barn I’m referring to here, the company, has as its 
starting wage, $8 an hour. That’s a fairly significant difference. 
 
Hours of work, after eight hours in a day or 40 hours in a week, 
overtime is paid at time and a half according to labour 
standards. Now this barn offers straight time for all hours 
worked. And I’ll explain how that might look less than labour 
standards minimum requirements, but how it actually may work 
out to be better for the employees in the long run. 
 
In terms of personal days or sick leave days, labour standards 
requires none. But this company offers their employees three 
days a year. In terms of dental, life, and disability insurance, 
extended health insurance, labour standards requires none. But 
this company provides and cost-shares those very insurance 
coverages with their employees. 
 
Workers’ compensation is required under labour standards. It’s 
not required by law, but it is provided by this particular barn. 
Dependent life insurance, none is required under labour 
standards — but it’s company paid by this employer. Health 
benefit plan, none required by labour standards — company 
paid by this employer. A bonus program, none required by 
labour standards — this barn offers a staff option to participate 
in an incentive-based, bonus program which is paid quarterly. 
 
What about the group RRSP (Registered Retirement Savings 
Plan) plan? Well none is required under labour standards, but in 
this particular barn, matching contribution plans exist after one 
year and it’s enhanced at the 5-year and the 10-year increments. 
 
So if we, if we took this particular comparison here, if you took 
a person who worked 90 hours a week every two-week pay 
period, for instance, a beginning employee would receive $608 
at minimum wage including 10 hours at overtime rate, using the 
labour standards wage scale. At this particular barn’s wage 
scale, a beginning employee would receive a higher amount, an 
amount of $270 . . . I’m sorry, of $720. 
 
For a public holiday, under the labour standards wage scale, a 
beginning employee would receive $128 and similarly for this 
barn’s wage scale, the employee would be paid $136. 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall this equates to a difference of $2,984 per 
year higher under this particular barn’s wage scale. That is a 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

 

significant amount of money. And this is being done willingly 
by an employer without the imposition of the heavy hand of 
government. It’s being done because this particular operation 
understands the value of good employees and this barn is 
prepared to pay for good employees. 
 
And I would venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that most employers 
whose livelihood depends on hog operation would know better 
than anybody how important good employees are. A hog barn is 
a very sensitive work environment. Hogs are particularly 
susceptible to disease. And if you have dissatisfied employees, 
if you aren’t treating your employees right, if you’re not 
treating them fairly, you’re subjecting your entire investment to 
huge risk. No pig barn operation is willing to take that chance, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I do believe that the industry, even though in this particular 
case the options through their benefit plans will obviously be 
better for the employees, there is one consequence that this 
particular piece of legislation will effect. If an employer is 
willing to provide this because he wants to, because he realizes 
the benefit to the well-being of his investment by making this 
kind of offer to his employees, what about the imposition of 
The Labour Standards Act that will require certain overtime 
provisions at shorter hours of work, or at a sooner level, or 
won’t allow the flexibility in term of hours worked or shifting 
or those types of things? When an employer is faced with the 
imposition of standards from an outside agency like this will be, 
then in order to make up the difference, the employer’s going to 
have to re-evaluate the benefit plan that that particular employer 
has offered the employees. 
 
And I think that what you’ll see is some changes in scheduling, 
some hours of work changes as required by the new legislation, 
but we’re going to find employees very unhappy with the 
sacrifices they’re going to have to make to the benefits package 
they have been receiving to this date from their employers. 
 
I’m not sure that employees have been told the truth about this 
particular plan. I don’t think they know the consequences and 
quite possibly, Mr. Speaker, if they did know the consequences 
and were given the option of choosing the situation they were in 
— the benefits package from their employer or the benefits as 
being imposed on them by labour standards — I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that the employees would choose to accept their 
employer’s plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record today a part of a 
letter that one of the pork producing companies in this province 
has sent to employees and shareholders alike, because in that 
industry where you have local investment, many times there is 
an overlap. Some of the employees are actually shareholders. 
So I want to read into the record part of this letter that was sent 
to employees and shareholders on May 13 this year: 
 

I especially want to recognize the concerted effort you’ve 
made to improve the quality of loads going to the market. 

 
Here’s an employer who recognizes the value of good 
employees. 
 

The reports we share with you show tremendous 
improvements that are being achieved. Recent stories in the 

news media have reminded me that there are still many 
misconceptions about careers in the pork production 
industry and I want to set the record straight. 

 
I won’t use the name of the company, Mr. Speaker, but I will 
just say: 
 

Our company is a family company and it offers some of the 
best employment conditions and career opportunities of any 
industry in rural Saskatchewan or Manitoba. We have 
confirmed that our wage structure is competitive and we 
endeavour to operate a positive workplace where teamwork 
is emphasized. 
 
As you know, we provide regular employee training 
programs and there are many opportunities for 
advancement. Working conditions in our barns are among 
the best in the industry. We also have a bonus system 
which recognizes the contributions you make to the overall 
performance of the barns. Soon you’ll have an opportunity 
to participate in an employees’ share ownership plan. 
 
These are benefits and incentives you will not find in every 
occupation. We’ve made them a priority because attracting 
and maintaining a highly skilled and innovative workforce 
is key to achieving our vision to be the leading pork 
production system in the industry. 
 
At this time I would like to draw your attention to an issue 
that threatens our future growth. The Saskatchewan 
government is planning to pass a new law imposing 
provincial labour standards on hog producers. This is being 
done without adequate consultation and ignores the unique 
nature of our business. 
 
We have prepared the attached table (which I have referred 
to earlier, Mr. Speaker) which compares an employee’s 
situation under The Labour Standards Act with the 
practices used by our company. 
 
In proposing these changes, the government has painted our 
industry in a negative light when, in fact, the opposite is 
true. It fixes a problem that doesn’t exist. If passed, the 
legislation will accomplish nothing except to drive 
investment out of Saskatchewan and reduce the number of 
jobs in rural areas. We are working hard to convince the 
government to reverse this short-sighted policy decision. 
 
In conclusion, I hope this letter serves as a reminder of the 
tremendous success story that’s being written in the pork 
production industry. We, in this company, are at the 
forefront of an industry that is bringing greater prosperity, 
economic activity, and a host of new career opportunities to 
rural communities. It’s something we can all be proud of. 
 
Thanks again for your efforts and have a great summer. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a letter from an employer who cares about 
his employees and I believe it represents the intentions and the 
best efforts of hog producers throughout this province. I believe 
that the imposition of labour standards is using a two-by-four to 
kill a fly. It’s overkill. And it simply is not what’s necessary to 
achieve the best results for this particular province. 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone through a number of the reasons why 
we think that this legislation is incorrect for this time. We’ve 
taken pains to look at why this particular industry could 
contribute in a much more significant way to this province. 
We’ve taken a look at some of the benefits offered by 
progressive employers in the hog industry. 
 
The insinuation, the insinuation by the government that this is a 
big problem that needs fixing is clearly incorrect. It’s not only 
incorrect — it’s inaccurate. 
 
Which reminds me, Mr. Speaker, haven’t I heard that 
somewhere before? Didn’t we have a minister somewhere talk 
about incorrect and incomplete information? Inaccurate, 
incomplete information. This government thrives on inaccurate 
and incomplete information. And they’re using that to foist 
legislation on Saskatchewan’s hog producers unnecessarily. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this industry is so important to this province that I 
think that we should go over some of the basic economic factors 
that are related to the hog industry and how they contribute to 
the overall economic benefit and well-being of this particular 
province. 
 
I have a copy of a study here prepared by a consulting group 
dated May of this year, and I’d like to just give a little snapshot 
sort of of the industry so that when people hear this discussion 
they realize the significance of the pork production business, 
that it isn’t just a small rinky-dink little operation sitting in 
some farmer’s backyard where he has a dozen hogs running 
around any longer. This is a significant part of the provincial 
economy. And I think that there’s a lot of misconception and 
quite a little misunderstanding as to how important this industry 
isn’t just for today but could be for tomorrow. 
 
In the Prairie provinces, Saskatchewan ranks third behind 
Manitoba and Alberta in terms of hog production. In 2001, this 
past year, Saskatchewan hog production was at 1.8 million hogs 
compared to 3.3 million in Manitoba and 3.6 million in the 
province of Alberta. However Saskatchewan hog production 
hovered around the 1 million mark for a considerable amount of 
time from 1990 to 1997. 
 
But since then hog production has steadily increased and 
production is projected to reach over 2 million hogs annually 
this year. And industry analysts estimate that hog production 
will continue to grow reaching production levels of anywhere 
between 4 and 5 million hogs in the year 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular industry has seen pretty significant 
growth since 1997 but the potential for the next three years is 
tremendous. No industry in this province will grow as quickly 
as the hog industry in the province of Saskatchewan over the 
next three years — no industry. And its significance to the 
province can’t be overestimated, it’s simply . . . it’s too 
important. 
 
In 2000 — in the year 2000 — Saskatchewan surged ahead in 
hog production with hog livestock marketings increasing nearly 
50 per cent to $215 million, with marketings expected to rise 
again for the years 2001 and 2002. 
 
The total employment impact of hog production and processing 

in Saskatchewan is 8,250 jobs — 8,250 jobs related directly to 
hog production and processing. I think I mentioned this figure 
earlier but it generated $289 million in employment income 
alone. 
 
Now if current growth projections are accurate, the impact of 
the hog industry would more than double to 18,563 jobs by the 
year 2005. So that would have the potential to generate, if you 
could extrapolate these figures, something like $650 million in 
employment income alone. That’s simply money going into the 
pockets of employees in hog barns. That’s a significant figure. 
That is a significant economic impact. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And if you look at the ripple effect of that kind of money going 
into the economy of these small communities, you’re probably 
looking at five, six, seven times that amount in effect 
throughout the rural economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford to jeopardize in any way this 
industry. I would beg the government to reconsider the reason 
they’re doing this, first and foremost. 
 
But I would like them to reconsider the rationale. I don’t 
believe there is a strong enough argument to proceed with this 
legislation and if we just took out the Premier’s promise to 
some political supporters, we just got that out of the equation, 
this particular issue would die because it cannot be supported in 
terms of logic or benefit to the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that, I conclude my comments today and I 
would move to adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Liquor Consumption Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me sitting to 
my left is Mr. Len Rog, who’s the assistant deputy minister of 
the revenue division of the Department of Finance. And sitting 
behind Mr. Rog is Mr. Jim Nelson, who’s the director of the 
audit branch of the revenue division of the Department of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, the total purpose of this Act, of course, is to 
implement the changes announced in the Throne Speech which 
is that the liquor consumption tax rate will increase from 7 per 
cent to 10 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, while many people look at that and say that’s just 
3 per cent, when you look overall, 7 per cent to 10 per cent is 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

 

about a 43 per cent increase. Have you or members of your 
department talked with the hoteliers or the brewing industry 
regarding what a 43 per cent tax rate increase might do to their 
business? What effect will it have on the hoteliers and the 
brewing industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I would point out that actually 
this change was announced in the budget speech, not the Throne 
Speech. But I think the member meant the budget speech. 
 
Of course we did not discuss the change prior to the budget. 
But, you know, to put it in perspective, we have had a 10 per 
cent liquor consumption tax in the past in Saskatchewan. And 
when you raise the tax from 7 per cent to 10 per cent, it’s true 
that that’s a 3 per cent increase over and above 7 per cent, but 
on the other hand it’s only 3 cents on $1, Mr. Chair. 
 
And it means that if I buy a bottle of beer in a beverage room 
and if the cost is . . . was $3 before, now the cost would be 
$3.09. And we don’t believe, and we don’t believe reasonable 
people believe, that a 9 cent increase on a bottle of beer is going 
to have a major impact on either consumption or on anyone’s 
business. And that’s our view, Mr. Chair. 
 
I think that liquor consumption will continue in the hotels, 
lounges, restaurants in this province as it did before. And I think 
most reasonable people would realize that that was the case. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. Yes, 
and I understand you are quite correct, of course, that it was the 
budget speech that announced that. And I understand that you 
are unable to or officials in your department are unable to 
consult with the industry regarding a tax increase or potential 
tax increase, but obviously that occurred way back at the end of 
March and there have been two, almost three months already 
since the announcement of this increase. 
 
Mr. Minister, our offices — from the point of view of official 
opposition MLAs’ offices —have received a number of 
concerns from, especially, rural hotels where it is difficult to 
keep those businesses operating currently under the fact that 
rural Saskatchewan is depopulating, and there are less people 
probably in rural Saskatchewan. But also, there’s always a 
concern about a tax increase. 
 
Mr. Minister, has your department received concerns from 
individual hoteliers, lounge keepers, people in the business, 
regarding the fact that this tax has negatively affected their 
business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well there have been, Mr. Chair, some 
anecdotal complaints that nobody ever likes any kind of a tax 
increase. But as I’ve said to the member and the House, and I’ll 
repeat, when you’re talking about having a bottle of beer in a 
bar, and the cost is going to go up by 9 cents, or the cost of a 
$25 bottle of wine in a restaurant is going to cost 75 cents more, 
I do not believe, the government does not believe, and I believe 
reasonable people in our province do not believe that somebody 
is not going to buy a bottle of beer in a bar because they have to 
pay 9 cents more. And they’re not going to refrain from buying 
a bottle of wine, if they can afford to do that in a restaurant, 
because the tax goes up by 75 cents on a $25 bottle of wine. 
 

So the answer to the member is this: yes, people have 
complained. The hoteliers have complained that they think it 
will hurt their business. We will wait and see what actually 
happens. We are not yet through the first quarter of the current 
fiscal year. When we are, we will see what the liquor 
consumption in this province is. 
 
And I would say to the member this, and he and I can perhaps 
sit down and have a bottle of beer together, or a bottle of beer 
each, or red wine, during the summer, and I would quite 
confidently predict, Mr. Chair, that what we’re going to see . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . Great Western beer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — . . . And I hope it is Great Western beer, in 
answer to the member’s interjection, because you know I enjoy 
Great Western beer. It’s a very good beer, brewed right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. In fact I had a few yesterday at my 
constituency barbecue. 
 
But I want to say in all seriousness, I think what we’re going to 
see, Mr. Chair, is it’s easy to jump on the bandwagon of 
anybody that will complain about a little tax increase. But the 
reality is, Mr. Chair, we’re going to see that people are going to 
continue to drink beer in bars in Saskatchewan, they’re going to 
continue to drink wine in restaurants, we’re still going to have 
liquor consumption, and nobody’s business is either going to be 
hurt or shut down because of 3 cents on $1 for a bottle of beer. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, thank you for that explanation 
and I understand it’s a little difficult wanting to make sure that 
we’re heard over all the din in the background. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve had the opportunity to meet with the brewing 
association who are responsible for brewing, you know, beer in 
the . . . in Canada and of course sales in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, as I was 
indicating to the minister, the brewing association has indicated 
that they have done some tracking and . . . of . . . The 
association of course is national and they track provinces 
including Saskatchewan. And they’ve indicated that when 
liquor consumption tax or other taxes increase — and in the 
case of Saskatchewan we’ve seen an additional increase from 
the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority in terms of 
adding, I believe, it was 18 cents to a case of beer — that in fact 
the result to government is that there is less tax. That in the 
short term those kinds of concerns are realized by the fact that 
there is indeed less money for the provincial government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you’re . . . you’ve pointed out that the 
consumption of a bottle of beer or a glass of wine or whatever 
refreshment that is purchased at an establishment is going to 
continue because it’s not a huge amount of dollars. And I think 
you’ve indicated that it might be 9 cents on a bottle of beer. 
That may be true. 
 
But the brewing association is saying that when you compound 
that with an increase from the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, you add in the liquor consumption tax that 
your budget has announced, that in fact the amount of 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

consumption in the province does fall and overall the province 
will receive less dollars in the way of revenue from tax. 
 
Is that something that your officials have had an opportunity to 
study, or have in fact your officials had the opportunity to meet 
with the brewing association and verify that this indeed will be 
true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we have not met with the brewing 
industry although I’m sure that representatives of that industry 
would have met with the people from the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority. And we haven’t seen the study referred 
to but we’d certainly be happy to receive it and also review it. 
 
The experience that we’ve had in the Department of Finance 
and in the revenue division has generally been that liquor 
consumption and beer consumption has been quite steady in the 
province. We obviously don’t believe that liquor consumption 
will go down with a 3 cent increase per dollar on, you know, a 
bottle of beer or a glass of spirits or on wine. So that hasn’t 
been our experience. 
 
If that proves to be the case, that of course will become 
apparent in the public accounts. But we believe, based upon 
experience that we’ve had in the Department of Finance, that 
with an increased tax there will be more revenue to government; 
and we don’t believe that a minor change of that nature, which 
is quite comparable to taxes in some of the other jurisdictions, 
will make much of a difference. 
 
And I might add that, you know, when you order food in all 
other provinces I think except Alberta — or at least most of 
them, anyway — you have to pay tax on the meal you’re 
ordering. And in Saskatchewan, you do not have to pay tax on 
restaurant meals. Certainly you do in Ontario and Quebec, I’m 
not sure about British Columbia, but I think several provinces 
you do. 
 
And our hoteliers and restaurateurs in the hospitality industry is 
not saddled with the tax on food, which they strongly oppose. 
And I reiterate to the member, Mr. Chair, and I reiterate to the 
public, and I will reiterate to the hospitality industry, that we’ll 
see when the public accounts come out that their business is not 
going to be hurt by 9 cents more on a bottle of beer. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, what we’re trying to get across to 
the minister is that when we compound taxes, when we look at 
the increases from SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority), when we look at increases from the breweries, when 
we look at increase from the Finance department, the effect that 
it has on a business is . . . sometimes it’s devastating. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I do want to clarify one thing that I said, was 
18 cents a dozen for an increase from SLGA. In fact, by way of 
information provided to one of my colleagues, the member for 
Last Mountain-Touchwood, the owner of the Markinch Hotel 
indicates this, Mr. Minister. And I quote from his letter to us, 
and he says: 
 

On March 1, 2000, SLGA increased the cost of beer by 40 
cents per dozen, followed by a 30 cent increase by the 
breweries. And on March . . . in March the government 
implemented . . . (I’m sorry) . . . and then on March 27, the 

Finance minister announced a 43 per cent . . . (actually, he 
says) 42.9 per cent increase in the liquor consumption tax. 
 

Those are quotes from his letter. He goes on to say that: 
 

Due to the government’s assault on my business, since 
March 1, 2002 we have been forced to raise our table prices 
from $2.75 to $3.25 per bottle of beer. 

 
You know, Mr. Minister, that’s a 50 cent increase — not 9 
cents. 
 

This increase has forced our customers to boycott the 
business, thinking it is our increase, not the government’s. 

 
(16:15) 
 
He goes on to say that: 
 

On April 20th my hotel was forced to lay off one employee, 
earning $8 per hour, due to the lack of business brought on 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. Unfortunately on 
April 27th the hotel will lay off another employee, also 
earning $8 per hour, due to the government’s assault on the 
hotel industry. Finally, by July I expect to close the 
business and walk away with a large loss. 

 
Mr. Minister, this is a comment from the owner of the Markinch 
Hotel. So there has been a negative effect, not entirely the 
liquor consumption tax, as I’ve pointed out, because I’ve 
indicated that the increase this year is from the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority, is from the brewing association, 
it is also from the liquor consumption tax. 
 
But here we have one example of a hotel in a community — 
sort of the last business that’s there kind of thing — now 
looking at saying, because we have people now who are 
boycotting the business, who are not willing to pay that 
additional dollars, are now not going to be spending it, as a 
result, there are layoffs, more people are out of work. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think the liquor consumption tax has indeed 
contributed to a negative impact on a great deal of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, I ask, what would you say to the 
owner of the Markinch Hotel regarding your tax and the other 
taxes that have been forced on his clients? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, what I would say to the owner 
of the Markinch Hotel is what I’ve already said, that there really 
hasn’t been a large increase in the cost of beer. 
 
But I also want to say to the member opposite, for his 
information, that the markup for beer was not increased by this 
government since 1992. The price of beer was increased several 
times by the breweries, but we did not increase what we took. 
We decided this year that, as other provinces are taking a share 
of increased beer prices, that this province was entitled to do 
likewise. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite, Mr. Chair, that it’s 
easy for the opposition to jump on the bandwagon of 
complaining about any revenue increase — and that’s what they 
will do — but the reality is that what we’re talking about is 9 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

 

cents on a bottle of beer. And I don’t believe that that is going 
to kill somebody’s business. If somebody’s business is going 
under, I don’t believe it would be because of that factor. It may 
be because of that factor combined with a variety of other 
factors. 
 
I can’t comment on the situation of the Markinch Hotel, but I 
simply do not accept the opposition’s view that 9 cents on a 
bottle of beer is going to prevent people from drinking beer in 
this province. And I don’t believe that many . . . that most 
thinking people and reasonable people in this province would 
agree with the opposition on this point, Mr. Chair. I think 
they’re taking a really . . . drawing a long bow with respect to 
what is really a quite minor revenue increase in an area which 
hasn’t seen a revenue increase for 10 years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as I’ve 
indicated, this gentleman indicates that the . . . because of the 
three components that were put in this year, the price of beer 
has gone up 50 cents per bottle. 
 
So it’s not 9 cents, it is 50 cents per bottle. As a result, there are 
people now that are not working, there are people now who are 
not supporting that hotel, and we’re near July and maybe this 
establishment is, in fact, going to close its door as a result of the 
compounding effect of a number of tax increases. 
 
Mr. Minister, speaking of that tax increase, as you’ve indicated, 
you said that other provinces are taking a larger share. Could 
you indicate when your government was . . . began to look at 
the liquor consumption tax increase from 7 to 10 per cent as a 
source of revenue? What time in the budgetary process did you 
actually begin to look at the tax as something that you would 
implement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, we look at all taxes and charges 
in the budget finalization process, which really begins in earnest 
probably in September or October in the year, and various 
proposals are put on the table. 
 
I can’t give the member an exact date when we would have 
started looking at this. But it would have been over the course 
of the fall, and we would have probably finalized the budget in 
February/March . . . January/February/March. We were a little 
bit later than usual this year. And we would have been 
examining it, therefore, over the period of the fall and winter of 
2001-2002 culminating in a decision which was announced in 
the budget address, I believe, on March 27 of this year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if 
your description of the time factor is accurate and that you 
began discussions in 2001, in fact, and maybe confirmed them 
in January, could you explain why there was one price guide 
published and distributed that was dated April 1, and then, 
immediately, there had to be another price guide distributed on 
April 2? 
 
You’ve just indicated that March 27 was the date of budget, 
which everyone in Saskatchewan knows. But you also indicated 
that these kinds of tax decisions are made in January, February, 
and March. If you knew the tax, that the tax was going to 
change —and I understand the confidentiality of talking about 
what that tax increase would be — would you not indicate to 

your . . . to the departmental officials in SLGA and whoever 
distributed . . . distributes those price guidebooks to say, don’t 
produce a book that’s going to be effective April 1, in advance. 
And I understand that you’re . . . that the answer given to one of 
my colleagues when the question was raised in the House was 
well they’re preprinted and we didn’t know what the tax was 
going to be. 
 
You’ve just indicated that decisions and discussions go on for 
months. Would you not have indicated to your officials to say, 
don’t publish a guidebook until the budget is announced? And 
then, yes, there will be a short period of time, but in fact we 
know that April 2 there was another guidebook out. 
 
Mr. Minister, that seems to be inefficient use of taxpayers’ 
dollars to produce guidebooks. It’s caused confusion because 
there’s a guidebook that’s dated April 1, there’s a guidebook 
that’s dated April 2. What kinds of things went on within your 
department that allowed this kind of inefficiencies to take 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well absolutely nothing went on within my 
department that would allow any kind of inefficiencies in that 
regard to take place, Mr. Chair. The member’s question is based 
upon some premises that are not accurate. 
 
First of all, the Department of Finance does not publish the 
guides that the member is referring to. That would be the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. I believe that the 
minister in charge of that authority has spoken to this issue in 
the House. 
 
Secondly, if I heard the member correctly, I believe he 
intimated that I may have made some comments about when 
these guides were published or when they weren’t published, 
and the reasoning behind it. I have never commented in this 
House or elsewhere about the publication of those guides 
because it is not something that comes within the purview of the 
Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I did not indicate 
that your department had published it. I think Hansard will 
show that I said that it was Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority who produced these guides. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think what this shows though is that while 
your department is rightfully not going to produce the 
guidebooks — we understand that and I think everybody in the 
business understands that — but there needs to be, there needs 
to be communication. We have . . . I’m sure there was some 
costs that — the minister responsible for SLGA commented in 
the House that it wasn’t a huge cost — but there was additional 
costs for producing a second guidebook. 
 
Can we not avoid those kinds of things by better 
communication between departments? Or are you indicating to 
the people of Saskatchewan that because of the timing of the 
budget on March 27, that indeed those kinds of situations will 
occur again in the future when there might be another tax 
increase? Or have you looked at this and possibly determined 
what the course of action might be to avoid confusion by having 
two guidebooks produced in two days time? 
 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I can’t speak to the specifics of the 
publication of the guidebooks, Mr. Chair, because those 
guidebooks are not published under the authority of either 
myself or the department with which I’m associated. 
 
But I would say to the member that common sense would tell 
most reasonable people that if a guidebook is being produced, 
somebody’s producing a book of prices, normally they’re not 
producing it in a day or a week or even a month. It probably is 
contemplated several weeks in advance. 
 
And it would seem quite clear that somebody, several weeks in 
advance of the budget, probably was in the normal course of 
events producing a guidebook. Then there was a change in the 
budget so they had to revise the guidebook. Nothing, no big 
story there in my view. 
 
But what I would say to the member is it would appear to me 
that if somebody wants to produce a guidebook in the period of 
a few months in advance of the budget, perhaps it would be best 
in the future not to, and to wait until the budget finalizes all of 
the prices and then to produce the guidebook at that point. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, we’d like to also clarify a 
direction that your government and the department might be 
heading in, and I understand that that might be under the 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority. 
 
But because of the tax implications, and we’re hearing from 
hoteliers that they may be under fire from another area. And 
that is that the Liquor Board stores, both, I guess private 
vendors as well as government stores, are lobbying the 
government to be open on Sundays; to be able to sell alcohol 
from government controlled stores on Sundays, thus putting, I 
think, additional pressures on the hotelier association. Is that 
something that your government is considering? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly that matter is under 
consideration. And I believe that the minister of Liquor and 
Gaming will be making an announcement in due course with 
respect to a decision by the government as to whether the 
Liquor Board stores should be open in some cases on Sunday 
afternoons and perhaps at some other times when they’re not 
now. I can’t provide the member with detail with respect to that 
matter, but I can confirm that I believe that is a matter that is 
under consideration by government. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One final question. 
You’ve indicated that you have not received all of the first 
quarter data, and we understand that. My question then is, last 
year you started the process of a third quarter report from the 
Finance minister’s office and you indicated that . . . of course 
we’ve always had a mid-term report for a number of years. Will 
you be also publishing the first quarter report of this fiscal year 
that will indicate some of the answers to the questions about 
revenue from liquor consumption tax and revenue from the 
tobacco tax and all of the questions that we’ve asked? Will you, 
in fact, be releasing a first quarter report? And, if I might, when 
do you expect that that information will be compiled to allow 
the release of that report as far as the date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is yes, absolutely we intend to 

release quarterly reports and so those reports would indicate 
forecasts for various sorts of taxes including liquor 
consumption tax. And I would imagine the first quarter being 
over at the end of June that, based on past experience, it’s 
probably some time into at least late July or if not, August, 
before the numbers would be available. 
 
But we intend to give as much information as we can on a 
quarterly basis and we hope to have the first quarter report out 
sometime this summer. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(16:30) 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2002 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me this 
afternoon to my left is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who is the assistant 
deputy minister of taxation and intergovernmental affairs. And 
behind Mr. McGregor is Mr. Arun Srinivas, who is a senior 
analyst in taxation and intergovernmental affairs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome to your other officials this afternoon. Not a 
great amount of questions on this Bill, Mr. Minister, other than 
maybe some clarification ones. 
 
You indicated in your remarks that there was a need to define 
what was meant by taxable income earned in Canada, and I 
think that’s what clause . . . or actually new section 7, clause 4 
of the Bill is pertaining to. Could you indicate what was the 
previous definition of taxable income and whether or not this 
has changed dramatically, and as a result of this change, is it 
because of federal changes? Or what has taken place to need . . . 
or require this new definition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the purpose of this amendment is a 
clarification. We have always charged non-Canadian resident 
businesses and individuals on income that they earn in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We have always done that. But this 
amendment simply clarifies in the legislation that in fact that’s 
what we do and that we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the points raised in the Act is that it provides for a sales tax 
credit. Can you indicate how the eligibility for a sales tax credit 
has changed from what was previous? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, Section 39 of the Bill 
provides — or of the Act, I should say — presently provides for 
the Saskatchewan sales tax credit. And that is the credit we give 
to low-income people, which is paid quarterly on our behalf by 
the federal government along with the GST (goods and services 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

 

tax) tax credit that some people receive. And that credit is 
administered by the federal government. 
 
The federal government has made some legislative changes to 
improve their ability to pay out the GST tax credit when 
changes in family circumstances occur. And they want to make 
their changes more responsibly, more quickly. And they want 
us to allow our credit to be changed if there’s another child, for 
example, or a child leaves home and is no longer dependent. 
They want ours to change in the same way. 
 
And the purpose of this amendment is simply to say that the 
provincial credit should be dealt with in the same way as the 
federal credit. And as one is administered differently and 
changed if the family gets bigger or smaller, so should ours be 
treated in the same way. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
think overall, the Act, the changes to the Act are to implement 
the tax . . . announced tax changes in the budget. Would that be 
a correct interpretation of the Act overall — that it is 
introducing the tax changes that were put forward in the 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s correct. I should say not just 
specifically in this 2002 budget, but as part of a plan that really 
began in 1999 and was announced fully in the 2000 budget. 
And basically what we did is, in 1999, we set up a committee 
commonly known as the Vicq committee, but it was the 
Personal Income Tax Review Committee. They made 
suggestions to simplify, make more fair, and have lower 
personal income taxes in Saskatchewan. 
 
And in the 2000 budget, I announced that we would implement 
most of those changes. And I also promised on behalf of this 
government that in 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003 — so it was a 
four-year plan — that we would lower personal income taxes in 
Saskatchewan and increase credits for seniors, people with 
children, some disability credits. 
 
And some of those changes as promised were made for the 
2000 tax year — some of them came into effect 2001, some of 
them came into effect 2002, and these changes are the third 
tranche, if you will, of the major changes to personal income 
tax. 
 
And basically what we’ve done is brought the personal income 
tax system in Saskatchewan from a point in about 1993 where 
we had, I think, the second highest personal income taxes to a 
point today when we have, I think, the third but perhaps the 
fourth lowest personal income taxes. But we’ve obviously made 
great progress. 
 
And so what we’re doing with this Bill is to keep our promise, 
as we did for 2001, 2002, 2003, to reduce personal income 
taxes. And I might add that in some provinces, like Ontario, I 
think one of the Maritime provinces, and even in Alberta with 
respect to some of their business taxes, they had promised tax 
changes and then because of the difficult economic 
circumstances this year, they didn’t bring them in. 
 
But what our government has done, the NDP-Liberal coalition 
government, is to say times have been tough in 2001, but we’re 

very confident about the future and we’re going to keep our 
promise to lower personal income taxes in Saskatchewan. And 
so this Bill does that for 2003. 
 
I’m told by many people around the province and also by many 
chartered accountants, certified general accountants, that their 
people filing income taxes are really noticing a difference. 
 
We think that tax competitiveness for ordinary people — 
families, working people — is very important. We’re keeping 
our promise. And this legislation, to answer the question, brings 
in really the third major part of that promise we made in the 
2000 budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
could you clarify . . . You indicated that this is the third, third 
year of an announced four-year program. We have had a 
number of concerns raised by individuals who for the first time 
of course — 2001 was the year that you calculated the 
provincial tax on income, not on federal tax — that was the first 
year that it was done, was 2001. 
 
There are some people who have reported that even though the 
rates have dropped, declined, that overall, because of the 
elimination of the Saskatchewan tax credit reduction which was 
$200 on the income tax form, and that was . . . that varied based 
on the income that the individual received, there are some 
individuals who have responded that their amount of tax 
payable in 2001 was in fact higher than the year before on 
exactly the same income. 
 
Is this possible, Mr. Minister, because of the elimination of that 
$200 tax credit? Or is it just a . . . some unusual circumstance 
that has created a situation where an individual with exactly the 
same income in 2001 and the year 2000, has in fact been 
charged more provincial income tax for 2001 than 2000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that there are 
some situations where, with respect to testamentary trusts, the 
elimination of the credit that the member referred to would have 
that effect so that the tax of the testamentary trust would go up 
somewhat over and above what it had been. But — and this is 
not something that has been denied or hidden at all — it’s quite 
well-known. 
 
There are a few other instances, I think, where a small number 
of people in certain income categories in the year 2001 would 
have had slightly higher income taxes than in the year 2000, 
although they would have been lower than 1999, and in 2002, 
they would be lower than the year 2000. But as with any 
change, there are some anomalies, and in a small number of 
cases, the income tax load could be a couple of hundred dollars 
higher perhaps in some cases. 
 
However, in the vast majority of cases — I don’t know if it 
would be 98, or probably 98 per cent plus — the savings would 
be considerable. And for an average family of four people with 
two people working, household income of $50,000, their 
income tax in 2001 would be, I think, approximately $900 less 
than in 2000 and 1,300 less than 1993. 
 
But yes, there would be a very small number of cases that could 
be identified in I think one or two situations where in 2001 the 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

tax would be slightly higher than in 2000. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying that 
because in my calculations of the person’s income, and looking 
at the concerns raised by the cases that were brought forward, it 
seemed that indeed their calculations were accurate. They had 
used an accounting firm and they in fact had paid more, so I’m 
glad that you clarified that indeed those circumstances did arise. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I looked at the Web site of Canada Customs 
and Revenue Agency, CCRA, I looked at the rates for 2001 and 
the rates for 2002 that provincial governments were 
implementing. And when I look at the rates for 2001, Mr. 
Minister, with the exception of Quebec, is it true that 
Saskatchewan’s rate for the lowest level — and I recognize that 
the lowest category changes, that some provinces have 
30,000-some-odd dollars, other provinces have 29,000 — but 
that Saskatchewan for 2001 had the highest income tax rate for 
category no. 1, and still would have the highest category rate for 
that first category for 2002. Is that accurate information, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I don’t believe it is accurate information, 
Mr. Chair. And I’ve heard this argument from the opposition 
member and other members of the opposition on several 
occasions in this House, where they get up and they say that 
well the tax rates in Saskatchewan are higher but they only look 
. . . the reason I say it’s not accurate is they only look at part of 
the picture. They talk about the rates but they don’t refer to the 
tax credits that we have. And you have to, in order to compare 
provinces, look at both the rate of tax they charge and the 
personal credits that they give. 
 
And so in Saskatchewan you have to look at the fact that you’ve 
got a . . . the member refers to Quebec for example as having a 
lower rate or at least I believe he said Quebec . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A higher rate. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — A higher rate. But I would point out the . . . 
well perhaps Ontario might be said by some to have a lower tax 
rate. 
 
But what I would point out is if you look at the basic exemption 
for 2002, Saskatchewan the basic personal exemption is $8,000; 
Ontario it’s $7,686. In Saskatchewan the spousal credit is 
$8,000; in Ontario it’s $6,500; in Saskatchewan the senior 
credit amount, gross credit amount, would be $3,728 . . . I’m 
sorry, $4,478 — almost 4,500. In Ontario it’s 37. 
 
In Saskatchewan, if you have dependent children, this year 
there’s a dependent child tax credit of $2,000 which is going to 
$2,500 next year. We’re the only province that has a universal 
child tax credit. In Ontario there is no child tax credit. 
 
And the point is this: you have got to look at the rates that are 
charged and you’ve got to look at the credits that are applied to 
individuals depending upon their family circumstances. And if 
you just talk about the rates and say well, our rates are higher 
than X province, that doesn’t tell you the whole story because 
you have to look at the personal tax credits. 

And so when I say . . . what the opposition is saying when they 
say our income tax rates are higher than some provinces, well 
they are higher than one or two and perhaps three provinces, but 
they’re lower than at least six. Because you’ve got to look at the 
rates combined with the tax credits. And until you look at both, 
you’re not giving people an accurate picture of what our taxes 
are. 
 
And nobody has to take my word for it, Mr. Chair. All they 
have to do is talk to the experts, whether it’s the chartered 
accountants or the investment dealers or the credit rating 
agencies, any number of outside objective observers who have 
said, you know Saskatchewan has really done a terrific job in 
making the personal income tax system more competitive. 
 
And anybody that gets up in this House or goes around the 
province saying the rates in Saskatchewan are higher — 
because they’ll talk about a basic rate of you know eleven and a 
quarter per cent up to fifteen and a quarter per cent without 
talking about the credits that are applied to ordinary families, 
seniors, and children — is not giving the whole picture. And the 
whole picture has to be discussed so that we can have a realistic 
and fair discussion of income taxes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you’ve raised the province of Ontario and I do want to, for 
people in Saskatchewan, to get the full picture. And, Mr. 
Minister, I understand that you’re talking about credits that are 
applied and you’ve given some of the values. 
 
But if I look at the 2001 tax rates for the category no. 1 — those 
people in the lowest category — which as I said in Ontario in 
2001 I believe it was $30,814, and in Saskatchewan it was 
$30,000. In Saskatchewan the tax rate in 2001 was 11.5 per 
cent. Am I accurate, Mr. Minister? In Ontario it was 6.16 per 
cent, Mr. Minister. That’s a full 5 per cent less. And while 
you’ve talked about exemptions and everything, I understand 
that those kinds of calculations will be made. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question for . . . on behalf of people is that the 
Saskatchewan rate for this year 2002, is 11.25 per cent. Could 
you tell me then what the Ontario rate would be for 2002 if its 
last year’s rate was 6.16? You have used Ontario examples so I 
. . . whether you have that information, I’d be pleased to hear 
that from you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I’d be pleased to answer it. The basic 
rate that Ontario has is . . . at that lowest level, I believe is, yes, 
6.05 per cent — 6.05 per cent — whereas the Saskatchewan 
basic rate is 11.25 per cent. 
 
But what I’m saying to the member is don’t forget two things. 
First of all that that family . . . a family in Ontario is going to 
pay sales tax of 8 per cent, whereas in Saskatchewan it’s 6 per 
cent, and they’re going to pay sales tax on many more things 
than we pay sales tax in Saskatchewan. That’s just a fact. 
 
The second point is if we’re dealing with a family with four 
children let us say, they are going to have a child tax credit in 
Saskatchewan of $8,000. In Ontario, they’re going to have a 
child tax credit of zero. 
 
And so you can’t just pick and choose one part of the tax 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

 

system. You have to look at the whole, at the whole picture. 
You have to look at the rates. You have to look at the credits. 
You have to look at what that family is paying in sales taxes, 
which would be much higher in Ontario. You have to look at 
. . . in some provinces, whether you pay a medicare premium, 
which they do in Alberta and British Columbia, which have 
been going up. 
 
I’m not arguing with the member that Saskatchewan has the 
lowest income taxes in the country. We don’t. I’ve said 
repeatedly I believe that there are three provinces that have 
lower income taxes than we do. There are six provinces that 
have higher income taxes than we do. My point to the member 
is when he cites provinces with a lower rate, many of them will 
have a lower rate if you just look at that, but people will still 
pay more tax because the governments there don’t give them 
the same personal and child and senior and disabled and other 
tax credits that come off of income tax in Saskatchewan. 
 
So you’ve got to look at the whole picture. And, Mr. Chair, if 
the opposition doesn’t want to take my word for it, they can sit 
down with chartered accountants in this province — I meet with 
them regularly — who will tell them what I’m telling them. 
That there are three provinces that have lower income taxes 
now than Saskatchewan, but there are six provinces that have 
higher income taxes. 
 
And we used to have the second highest income tax in the 
country but now we’re amongst the provinces that have lower 
income taxes as well as the lowest sales tax for families of any 
province except Alberta, which of course has no sales tax. 
 
So if you just look at the rates, Ontario has a lower rate but the 
difference is not that large when you take into account the tax 
credits, the sales taxes you have to pay in Ontario, and the 
manner of calculating tax in Ontario, which is different than 
ours because the tax credit amount is calculated at a higher rate 
in Saskatchewan than it would be in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I do 
understand that the only way to compare one province to the 
other is to actually use an example and run it through the 
income tax guides for the various provinces. And that would be 
a way of finding out what would be the tax payable on a family 
of four earning $35,000 in Ontario or that family of four 
earning $35,000 in Saskatchewan. 
 
But that’s . . . I don’t have that information, Mr. Minister, and I 
don’t think you do as well at the moment. So we understand 
that comparing ourselves to Ontario and comparing ourselves 
. . . And as you’ve indicated, we were one of the highest taxed 
provinces and we have indicated as an opposition for a number 
years that to grow this province, to ensure that we have people 
coming to this province or for that matter staying in this 
province, we have to, we have to decrease the amount of taxes 
that people pay. 
 
We have to ensure that the take home pay that people have is 
indeed larger than it was in the past. And while you’ve 
indicated that there are calculations that have moved 
Saskatchewan forward, not only just the tax rates that have 
changed as I’ve indicated, but other provinces have changed 
their tax rates, Mr. Minister. 

And as you’ve indicated, if we look at our tax rate, only the tax 
rate in Saskatchewan, it is still one of the highest. But when you 
build in some of the other credits, indeed the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer has benefited, has benefited by the fact that we’ve 
moved up a couple of notches. 
 
And with that, Mr. Minister, as I’ve indicated to you before, 
we’re happy to see a tax reduction program for taxpayers. As 
you’ve indicated, it’s our third year of a four-year. We look 
forward to the announcement that indeed you will follow up 
with the final year of tax reduction. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — And does the minister have any further officials 
to introduce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes I do. I have with me, Mr. Kirk 
McGregor is still here, the assistant deputy minister of taxation 
and intergovernmental affairs. And behind him is Mr. Kelly 
Laurans, who is the director of corporate taxes and incentives. 
And behind me is Mr. Len Rog who was here before who is the 
assistant deputy minister of the revenue division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, there are a 
number of questions that we have to pose on the corporate 
capital tax, so I’ll begin with the first one, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the corporate capital tax is something that you’ve 
indicated that the province is hoping to address and move much 
faster towards a situation where we’ll be more compatible. 
More compatible with other provinces so that indeed we don’t 
. . . so that it is not looked upon negatively when corporations 
look at Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this one of the reasons why you’ve started to 
look at the corporate capital tax by not changing its rates, but at 
least moving in the direction of changing the limit from 10 
million to 15 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, certainly we have made the 
change to the corporate capital tax threshold this year because 
we are concerned about having a competitive tax regime, and I 
think that the change to the threshold helps us maintain a more 
competitive corporate tax regime. And that will continue to be a 
concern of government which we will monitor as we move 
forward. 
 
The Chair: — Order. It now being near 5 p.m. the committee 
will stand recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


