















































Hansard: April 05, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 451 
 April 5, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
in my hand a petition asking that a halt be brought to crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers in the Fox 
Valley, Golden Prairie areas of the southwest. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of the province 
of Saskatchewan who are concerned that SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) deductible policy is unfair and the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to work with SGI to develop more fair 
guidelines for deductibles on vehicles that are damaged as a 
result of an attempted car theft. 

 
And the signatures of this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Allan and the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
on behalf of citizens concerned about the shortcomings of the 
tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not greater 
than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Springside, Tisdale, Arborfield and 
Ridgedale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations’ representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy and Saltcoats. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I arise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens with grave 
concerns regarding the new, enhanced crop insurance. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plans to take the money out of the 
crop insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by producers in the constituency of Estevan, 
specifically Bromhead and Estevan. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the condition of our highways in 
the province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people that had 
to try and navigate that highway. Those people are from the 
communities of Tyvan, Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle, Francis, and 
Sedley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from southwest Saskatchewan concerned about the 
inadequacies of the current tobacco control legislation. And the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Consul, Gravelbourg, and the city of Swift Current. 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
of citizens concerned about tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more than 
$100. 

 
Petitioners are from Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and 
Chamberlain. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the unsafe highway conditions from Junction No. 2 to 
Highway No. 15. The prayers reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Semans, Unity, Watrous, and 
Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise in the Assembly to bring forth a petition regarding 
the tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Rabbit Lake, Spiritwood, Medstead, Mildred, and Chitek Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: how much did 
the provincial government spend on the feasibility studies 
to the proposed Meridian dam project? 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

give notice that I shall on day no. 20 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: did any Crown corporation pension 
plans have investments in the Enron corporation in 2001; if 
so, which ones and how much was lost on these 
investments? 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
shall give notice that I shall on day no. 20 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: how many firefighters 
were trained in the province during the 2001 calendar year, 
and who provided the training for these firefighters? 

 
The Speaker: — A little order please, members. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in the 2001-2002 fiscal year, 
how much did health districts in Saskatchewan pay for 
high-speed Internet usage under the government’s 
CommunityNet program? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar 
question to the Minister of Health for the current fiscal 
year. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have one more question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: in the current fiscal year, how 
much shall the school boards in Saskatchewan pay for 
high-speed Internet usage under the CommunityNet 
program? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: what 
firm provided travel agent services to SaskTel in 2001; in 
respect to this, how much was paid for these services; and 
what tendering process was used to procure the services of 
that firm? 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in the fiscal year of 1998-1999 
how much money did the Department of Health spend on 
dental and optical benefits and ambulance costs for Social 
Services recipients? 

 
I have a similar question for the year 2000-2001 and the 
following. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to introduce 10 very promising grade 11 students from 
across Saskatchewan seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

 

These students will soon travel to Yellowknife to represent 
Saskatchewan at the annual Interchange on Canadian Studies or 
ICS. This is the 30th ICS conference bringing together high 
school students from all the provinces and territories to learn 
about and discuss issues focusing on the economic, political, 
social, and cultural life of Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan Learning is pleased to be co-hosting this year’s 
conference along with the Department of Culture and 
Employment, Yellowknife School District No. 1, Yellowknife 
Public Catholic School District, and the Dogrib Division 
Educational Council, and the Nunavut Education. 
 
Each participating student is twinned with a student from the 
host community. And our Saskatchewan students, in turn, will 
host their counterparts for one week this summer. 
 
They will learn about topics such as the development of 
resources in the North and its impact on the land and people. 
And they will have an opportunity to explore the relationships 
between Aboriginal peoples and development industries as well 
as the resulting changes to lifestyle, culture, and language. They 
will also gain an understanding of Aboriginal governance 
including land claims and the creation of the Northwest 
Territories and Nunavut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here with us today — and I’d ask them to stand as 
I read their names — Kristine Montgomery of Morse; Meghan 
Dolan of Martensville; Joel Russell of Preeceville; Crystal 
Thomas of Regina; Ross Phillips of Lumsden; Brenden Freeden 
of Dundurn; Angela McKague of Ogema; Bronwyn Stoddard of 
Pierceland; Lynette Ross of Pinehouse; and Sophie Ferré of 
Saskatoon. 
 
I also want to acknowledge the provincial coordinator for ICS, 
Doug Panko of Moose Jaw and chaperone, Glenda Gosselin of 
Lampman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
them to the Assembly today and wishing them well in 
Yellowknife over the next week. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the Minister of Learning in welcoming the grade 11 
students here on the Interchange on Canadian Studies. I’m sure 
that where you’ll be going is an excellent learning opportunity. 
And I’m sure that you will be very busy by the sounds of it. 
And I also am confident you’re going to be a fine representative 
for our province. So I do wish you lots of fun and lots of 
learning while you’re there. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce 
my intern, Jessica Waiser, and some of her family. First of all, I 
want to acknowledge Jessica and tell her how much we’re 
going to miss her. In a week from now she’s going to be going 
to the other side of the House. And it’s going to be very . . . 
we’re going to miss her dreadfully. 
 
Along with Jessica, she has with her today her uncle, Tom 
Waiser, and aunt Irene Legatt; cousin, Chris; and a girlfriend, 
Sam. They’re in Regina from Saskatoon for a couple of days 

and they’re going to be visiting the Saskatchewan Science 
Centre and the museum. 
 
In Saskatoon, Tom manages the Western Development 
Museum and Irene works for Government of Canada with 
Canada Heritage. Chris attends Walter Murray Collegiate and 
Sam is a student at Martensville High School. 
 
So welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly my very good friend, Bob Richards, who’s sitting in 
the west gallery, along with his son, Tom, and his daughter, 
Kate. 
 
And Bob and I actually attended law school together in 
Saskatoon. And we were debating partners there. And Bob went 
on — he’s just a farm boy — but he went on and, Mr. Speaker 
. . . I should say he’s not just a farm boy. He went on, Mr. 
Speaker, and he articled, he articled at the . . . he clerked at the 
Supreme Court and then he got a master’s degree at Harvard 
University in constitutional law. And then he served as 
constitutional law director for the provincial government but 
now he works for the law firm MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman. 
 
And his son, Tom, is a city boy — but not just a city boy. And 
he also is a military historian, even at an early age. And his 
daughter Kate is a city girl — but not just a city girl. She also is 
an artist. And in fact I have some of her art on display where I 
stay in Regina. 
 
And I’d like all members to join me in welcoming the Richards 
family here today. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to stand and 
certainly recognize an individual in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’ve often told people of the North to travel to the South 
and learn and listen to what happens in southern Saskatchewan 
because it certainly has an impact on the North as a whole. 
 
And I want to also stand in this House to recognize Miss Ross 
of Pinehouse. It’s always very, very important to have young 
Aboriginal people come from the North and study how the 
Assembly works. And I wanted to make a special notice of 
welcoming her here as the rest of her students as well, and to 
point out that, Mr. Speaker, that it is a long haul. So anytime we 
have people from the North it’s always very important to pay 
tribute to their work and to their expertise and certainly to their 
travel. 
 
Thank you again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Credit Union Wins Community Economic 
Development Award 

 
Mr. Addley: — . . . Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Credit Union 
has been chosen by Credit Union Central of Canada as this 
year’s winner of the national Community Economic 
Development Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, credit unions are a dominant financial institution 
in this province with over 500,000 members in Saskatchewan. 
And why is that? Because credit unions have a social 
conscience — focused as much on the benefit to the community 
as the bottom line. 
 
In Saskatchewan, credit unions are growing in popularity and 
assets because people have learned that they can trust and count 
on credit unions to sincerely take interest in their communities. 
 
Over the course of this year the Saskatoon Credit Union has 
committed $2 million in mortgages over five years to affordable 
housing initiatives; invested $675,000 in a micro loan program 
for small businesses; worked with environmental groups and 
organizations in supporting disadvantaged youth; been actively 
involved in Cirus Arts, a program for inner-city kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Karen Heise, the Credit Union’s VP 
(vice-president) of human resources and community 
development, said: 
 

We do not look at it as straight, dole out the money, we 
have people directly involved. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members will join me in 
congratulating Saskatoon Credit Union board, management, 
staff, and members for winning the Credit Union Central of 
Canada national Community Economic Development Award. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Butalas Win Stewardship Recognition Award 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just last 
week we congratulated author Sharon Butala for being named 
an Officer of the Order of Canada. 
 
Well today the Butalas have won another award that I want to 
make everyone aware of. On February 28 the award was 
granted by the federal Agriculture minister, Lyle Vanclief. It 
was presented to Pete and Sharon Butala of the Eastend area 
and it was the Countryside Canada Stewardship Recognition 
award. 
 
The Butalas were among 16 individuals and groups from across 
Canada honoured at a special ceremony in Halifax. 
 
Now the Countryside Canada Recognition Program is in its 
second year. It’s a fairly new award program, and it’s designed 
to strengthen conservation practices by recognizing significant 
stewardship efforts of farmers and ranchers across the country. 
 

This award honours the Butalas’ efforts in helping to establish 
the Old Man On His Back Prairie and Heritage Conservation 
Area. I want to say that slowly so people understand the 
significance of it — the Old Man On his Back Prairie Heritage 
Conservation Area. 
 
Now the Butalas are helping to preserve 4,450 acres of native 
prairie grassland in southwest Saskatchewan — that’s through a 
partnership, incidentally, with the Nature Conservancy of 
Canada. 
 
I’m sure that all members here today would wish to join me in 
extending our congratulations to both Peter and Sharon Butala, 
recipients of this very impressive award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Health Day 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World Health 
Day, the day selected by the World Health Organization to 
provide a forum for discussion regarding various health 
challenges worldwide. Each year a new focus is selected for 
World Health Day to highlight a public health issue of global 
concern. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, great minds think alike. This year’s theme, 
Physical Activity for Health, underscores the growing 
recognition that physical activity can improve and maintain the 
health of our province, and parallels the government’s own 
strategy, a physically active Saskatchewan, a strategy for 
getting Saskatchewan people in motion. 
 
This strategy is about developing and implementing an action 
plan to elevate the importance of physical activity and promote 
community relevant approaches. Mr. Speaker, regardless of 
physical or mental health, gender or age, physical activity can 
greatly enhance the quality of life. 
 
Physical activity can be enjoyable, inexpensive, and easy. 
Anything involving physical movement results in positive 
benefits to health and the well-being of our province. This 
government is committed to providing leadership when it 
released its strategy and hopes to motivate and encourage 
people to get in motion and significantly increase physical 
activity in all Saskatchewan residents by the time the province 
reaches its centennial in 2005. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Badminton Provincial Championship 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to rise today to recognize three youth from Wadena: 
James Nataraj, Nicole Hrycak, and Calin Yablonski who 
participated in Saskatchewan badminton provincial 
championships in Regina. 
 
Calin, who was a member of the Saskatchewan Badminton 
Association was ranked fourth in the under 16 category going 
into the championship. He had to beat the top players, in some 
cases up to three times, to achieve gold medal status in three of 
the under 16-categories for boys singles, boys doubles and 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

 

mixed doubles. 
 
Calin is justifiably proud of his accomplishments at this 
provincial championship. He’s only played this sport for four 
years and he’s only played the SBA (Saskatchewan Badminton 
Association) circuit for one year. Calin will be representing 
Saskatchewan at the national championships in Montreal this 
month. 
 
James won a bronze medal in boys singles and fourth in boys 
and mixed doubles. Nicole took fourth place in girls singles and 
girls doubles and mixed doubles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating James, Nicole, and Calin in their 
accomplishments at provincials. And I also ask that we join 
with Calin’s family and community in wishing him the very 
best at the national competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Native on Championship Water Polo Team 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
bring the Assembly some more good news from the sports 
capital of North America. And in case you forgot, Mr. Speaker, 
that would be Moose Jaw. This time the sport is one entirely 
appropriate to the prairies — water polo. 
 
I would like to report on the grandson of constituents of mine 
who has achieved international distinction in this little-heralded, 
but very demanding sport. Robin Randall of Drinkwater is a 
member of the Canadian National Water Polo Team which just 
won the first Commonwealth Water Polo Championship in 
Manchester, England. 
 
Robin is one of two goalies for the Canadian team. They shared 
the duties during the tournament, and the team won all of its 
games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not a sport expert, but I understand that the 
true value of enjoyment in any sport comes from the 
development on one’s skills. The relative popularity of the 
given sport is completely irrelevant to the athlete. The 
performance is what matters. 
 
Robin has been playing water polo at a highly competitive level 
since 1989, beginning in Western Canada before moving on to 
the national team, a team that has achieved the ultimate in 
athletic excellence. 
 
I’m sure Robin’s parents in Drinkwater, Ray and Paula, are 
proud of their son and I know grandparents, Kaspar and Sophia 
in Moose Jaw certainly are. I’d like to join with them in 
congratulating Robin and his teammates. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Hockey League Playoffs 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Tuesday night fans from across southwest Saskatchewan 

absolutely packed the Swift Current Civic Centre to watch an 
amazing game seven in the first round of the WHL (Western 
Hockey League) playoffs between the Broncos and the Calgary 
Hitmen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Broncos finished second overall in the entire 
WHL this season so they were favoured in the first round of the 
playoffs. And we know how dangerous it is for a favoured team 
to run up against a hot goalie. That’s exactly what happened to 
the Broncos when they faced . . . when they had a hard time 
solving Calgary netminder Sebastian LaPlante. 
 
Thanks however to the Broncos’ tenacity, their tradition of hard 
work, their skill, and great coaching from Brad McEwen and 
Randy Smith, and more specifically to a great assist from Ben 
Ondrus that set up the game winning goal from sniper Tim 
Smith, the Broncos prevailed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of the Assembly 
are happy that the Broncos won. I know that the members from 
Moose Jaw are happy that the Warriors won their first round. 
And as the second round begins tonight, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s appropriate if I were to be able to call upon all members of 
the Assembly to wish luck to both remaining Saskatchewan 
teams in the WHL playoffs, to wish luck to both the Warriors 
and the Broncos, but I can’t do it, Mr. Speaker — go Broncos. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hudson Bay Co-operative Annual Meeting 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s that time of the year again when credit unions and co-ops 
are holding their annual meetings and are reporting to their 
members on the news of the previous year. 
 
Translation — many good news stories about community 
entrepreneurship and solid investment which is probably why 
we never hear anything about it from the members opposite. 
 
One great example, Mr. Speaker, last month approximately 150 
people attended the supper and annual meeting of the Hudson 
Bay Co-operative — 146 more than attended a recent meeting 
of the opposition in Meadow Lake. 
 
The co-operative awarded scholarships to Fallon Rokovetsky 
and Karissa Lupuliak at the Hudson Bay Composite High 
School, and has recently renewed its contract with the brothers 
and sisters of the IWA (International Woodworkers of America) 
local, thought to be a job killer by some in this place, Mr. 
Speaker, but not on this side. 
 
A quote from the co-op: “We returned approximately $196,000 
to you the members,” said Greg Maynard who presented the 
manager’s report. Continuing on in the quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Hudson Bay Co-op has returned well over $1 million 
to its members in the last eight years. 

 
The co-operative was incorporated in 1977 and has a total of 
1,600 members including 100 new ones, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Congratulations and keep up the good work. Thank you. 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Loss Statistics 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s the first 
Friday . . . it’s Friday and most people look forward to Friday 
except the members opposite dread the first Friday of the 
month. Because once again we have the job numbers released 
and once again we see that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government of Saskatchewan is losing jobs when other 
provinces aren’t. 
 
Saskatchewan over the last 12 months lost another 1,100 jobs. 
That’s on top of the 11,000 jobs that were lost the year before. 
Mr. Speaker, the government has made one promise after 
another about creating jobs, yet they continue to lose jobs and 
lose them in record numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier: why does the NDP have no plan 
to create jobs in this province and simply, why doesn’t the 
Premier have a plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Leader of the Opposition is often quoted talking about having a 
plan with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try 
one more time and perhaps the members opposite will care to 
listen. The Premier, or the Leader of the Opposition is often 
quoted . . . Mr. Speaker, the Premier is often quoted, but I want 
to speak to the comments made by the Leader of the Opposition 
as it relates to the future of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall in Saskatoon this member outlined an 
economic development plan and I want to share it with the folks 
of the province. 
 
Now his plan was a tax cut of $650 million over the $420 
million that we’ve introduced. His plan was to cut the civil 
service, BC (British Columbia) style, by a third, which resulted 
in, by the way last year, 27,000 fewer jobs in British Columbia. 
His plan in the fall was to cut the Crown corporations to their 
core, which means selling assets to pay for the tax reduction. 
 
Do you want to know what, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t talk about 
it anymore. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, the strangest people have foresight at the strangest 
times. Perhaps an election is coming sooner than we thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with the Saskatchewan Party’s plan 
to grow this province by 100,000 people over the next 10 years. 
I’m not sure what the minister sees wrong with that. 
 

And I am concerned that the members opposite don’t realize 
that these numbers represent real people who are leaving 
Saskatchewan; real families from their ridings that are leaving 
the province of Saskatchewan. Every day we receive phone 
calls, e-mails, letters from people who love this province but are 
being forced to leave it by the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers speak for themselves — 11,000 jobs 
two years ago, 1,100 jobs in the past year. Mr. Speaker, where 
are the jobs coming from that the NDP has promised? 
 
They’re leaving — why are people leaving Saskatchewan under 
this NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition may want to know that this March produced the 
third highest number of jobs in the history of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, last year March was the second highest. Mr. Speaker, 
he may also want to know that there have been in the last . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, he may also want to 
know that in the last decade this province, the business people 
in this province, have created 50,000 non-agricultural jobs. 
 
Now he may want to deny the changes that are taking place in 
agriculture across this country. The fact that we’ve lost 35,000 
jobs in Canada in agriculture last year and that that is a large 
component of our economy. He may want to deny all of that. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 
are very proud of what they have achieved. They’re working 
hard to diversify and build their economy, but I tell you what 
they won’t buy. They won’t buy a bogus political 
campaign-style speech like the one that leader outlined last fall 
in Saskatoon that he’s been backtracking on ever since. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, over the last two years under 
the new Premier’s leadership, the province has lost jobs in 
record numbers. And you know what’s even worse, Mr. 
Speaker? Most of Canada, during this period, has been 
experiencing an economic boom. 
 
Across Canada, the first quarter of the year 2002 was the best 
quarter for job growth nationally since 1987. That’s for the last 
15 years. Alberta created 42,000 new jobs; Manitoba, same . . . 
similar population to Saskatchewan, created 11,000 new jobs. 
 
Meanwhile, here in Saskatchewan under the NDP and under 
this new Premier we’ve driven out 12,000 people in the last two 
years. Mr. Speaker, that’s the NDP record. That’s the facts — 
people leaving Saskatchewan under their program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP losing jobs? Why is the rest of 
Canada growing when Saskatchewan’s going the other 
direction? 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 
the Opposition, of course, is on his same trajectory that he’s 
been for a long, long time. Like the sky is falling in, Mr. 
Speaker, and that the province of Saskatchewan can be so much 
more. And I recall, Mr. Speaker, in the early ’80s . . . 
(inaudible) . . . from another . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The minister may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if they care to 
listen I’d like to respond to the member’s question. And they 
can go on their course of gloom and doom, but I tell you who 
isn’t with them, Mr. Speaker. The business community of this 
province know that there are job opportunities for people. 
We’ve consistently had the highest help-wanted index in this 
province. Our unemployment rates are low . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Come on, Mr. Speaker, it’s Friday. 
 
The Speaker: — I know. I recognize it’s Friday. The minister 
has 15 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this government and 
the people on this side of the House are working with the 
people of Saskatchewan to grow a positive attitude about this 
province. We’re working to grow this economy. And we’ve 
experienced GDP (gross domestic product) growth in the last 
decade that’s been leading this country, not following it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister is angry this morning because he was the Minister of 
Economic Development and he’s failed to develop. Mr. 
Speaker, he’s also angry because the Saskatchewan Party has a 
plan to grow this province while his plan has been gutting the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, under his leadership and under the 
Premier’s leadership, Saskatchewan has lost 12,000 jobs over 
the last two years. Meanwhile, the rest of the country is 
enjoying a boom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he talks about unemployment. Well 
unemployment levels are low in Saskatchewan because people 
are leaving and getting jobs in other provinces. It’s pretty clear. 
Why doesn’t the minister understand it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our plan will bring families back to Saskatchewan. 
Our plan will grow Saskatchewan. Why is the NDP, under the 
new Premier, driving people from Saskatchewan? Why does the 
NDP have no plan, no plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition again speaks about his plan. And I’m going to tell 
him about his plan again. You cannot promise a $650 million 
annual tax reduction without selling off assets or deficit 
budgeting. 
 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I remember when the former 
member from Kindersley sat here. Hopefully he would have 
given him some political leadership. But you want to know, Mr. 
Speaker, what I hear from this member is what I heard in 1981 
and 1982. I can remember a politician running around this 
province saying we’re going to bring our young people home. I 
remember it well. 
 
And I remember tax reduction commitments like the fuel tax 
that was going to be eliminated on midnight, which he did. 
Every nickel of that tax reduction was paid for with borrowed 
money that this administration is working hard to pay back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have seen the former premier of this 
province. They see this guy and it’s the same rhetoric, the same 
story, and the same plan that doesn’t work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budgetary Deficit 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Finance minister 
brought down a new provincial budget and, according to the 
NDP’s own budget documents, this year’s budget will run a 
deficit of at least $300 million. Who is doing the borrowing, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — That follows last year’s budget deficit of 
more than $400 million. And even worse, Mr. Speaker, the 
budget document also shows the NDP is planning to run a third 
consecutive deficit budget of at least $140 million next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last time Saskatchewan saw three consecutive 
deficit budgets, Grant Devine was the premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Finance minister . . . Will the Finance 
Minister explain why the NDP has returned Saskatchewan to 
the deficit days of the 1980s? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, and when Grant Devine 
was the premier of the province running deficit budgets, he did 
it with the full support of the members over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What the members over there fail to 
understand, Mr. Speaker, and what the people are entitled to 
know is that this government is balancing the books, as we have 
said publicly repeatedly, Mr. Speaker, by drawing upon our 
savings, Mr. Speaker, which we have set aside for a rainy day. 
Savings . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Savings, Mr. Speaker, that we never would 
have had if we had listened to the members opposite. Because 
the members opposite are on record again and again, Mr. 
Speaker, as saying that all of the money that we have saved to 
tide us through this difficult time should have been spent two 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

years ago and spent three years ago. And now they’re promising 
$600 million in tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where would we be if we had listened to the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker? We’d be back in the Devine poorhouse, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP’s budget document speaks for itself — three straight 
deficit budgets. And that has a lot of people sounding the alarm, 
Mr. Speaker. It has a lot of people comparing the current NDP 
to the Grant Devine government of the 1980s, and one of them 
is former NDP Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon. 
 
She says the NDP is using the same accounting tricks as the 
Grant Devine government of the 1980s — changing accounting 
practices in a way that buries government debt and hiding the 
truth about the government’s true budget deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP taking Saskatchewan back to the 
deficit days of the 1980s? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I agree with one thing the member 
opposite says, Mr. Speaker. He says — and we should note his 
words — the NDP budget speaks for itself. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s correct. Because unlike the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, when we present a budget, we present the true 
facts in the budget so that the members opposite can see them, 
the media can see them, and all the people can see them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We present summary financial statements that are audited by 
the Provincial Auditor. We present mid-year financial 
statements. We present quarterly financial statements now 
because we believe in accountability to the people of the 
province, Mr. Speaker — something we never had when they 
were in office. And something, if you examine what they’re 
saying to people, Mr. Speaker, that they’re going to get rid of 
all the taxes and they’re going to increase the spending, and 
they say that’s a plan that works, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have seen that kind of so-called 
plan before and they’re not buying it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Janice 
MacKinnon balanced the budget and then introduced new 
balanced budget laws to ensure the province could never go 
back to the deficit days of the 1980s. And yesterday Janice 
MacKinnon went public with her criticism about NDP 
government’s accounting practices. 
 
MacKinnon said the NDP is violating the spirit of the balanced 
budget law. And she said the problem with the balanced budget 
law is that there is no penalty for breaking it. So yesterday 
Janice MacKinnon made a citizen’s arrest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP’s current Finance minister 

violating the spirit of the provincial balanced budget law and 
returning Saskatchewan to the deficit days of Grant Devine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, the most amusing aspect of 
this, Mr. Speaker, is that when Janice MacKinnon was the 
minister of Finance and sitting on the treasury benches, what 
did the members opposite say? They criticized her every move, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the members opposite don’t have very much credibility, Mr. 
Speaker. They say one thing one day, another thing another day, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact when it comes to building the schools and the 
universities, which we’re doing, I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. 
That what the people need to know is that what the members 
opposite are saying is that they don’t agree that the government 
this year should spend $90 million building schools and 
building buildings at the university. 
 
What we are saying, Mr. Speaker, is just as a family would take 
out a mortgage to build a house, when interest rates are low, 
and when the economy needs a boost, and we need more jobs 
— as the members opposite just finished saying, Mr. Speaker 
— we’re going to build the schools, we’re going to build the 
universities, we’re going to do it over the opposition of the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. But we’re about building the 
province, not tearing it down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it isn’t 
just former Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, who thinks 
the NDP is fudging the budget. Political observers across 
Canada are also sounding the alarm. Professor Lindsay 
Meredith of Simon Fraser University in British Columbia 
compared the Saskatchewan NDP’s budget to the Glen Clark 
fudge-it budget in British Columbia. And I quote, Mr. Speaker, 
the quote is: 
 

Talk about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Professor Meredith’s quote is this, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Talk about déjà vu. For the past six or seven years we’ve 
had lots of fun with governments here who get creative 
with their accounting principles. 

 
And the Provincial Auditor in Saskatchewan says: 
 

The NDP’s accounting practices don’t tell the whole story 
either. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Finance minister fudging his budget, 
hiding debt, and breaking the spirit of his own balanced budget 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

 

(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in a democracy there 
will always be university professors that will say one thing and 
others will say another. 
 
But I want to say to the members opposite, and I want to say to 
the public, Mr. Speaker, here’s what some other people have to 
say. The Bank of Nova Scotia . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bank of 
Nova Scotia says, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan has been a leader among the provinces in 
debt reduction. 

 
The Bank of Montreal says we presented our ninth consecutive 
balanced budget and borrowing needs will drop. 
 
The Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce says — and I note 
this, Mr. Speaker — Saskatchewan currently enjoys the 
third-lowest debt burden in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the people need to know is that we have 
gone from being the worst province in the country when it 
comes to debt to being one of the best, Mr. Speaker. We are one 
of the best under the management of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
On December 6, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities made a submission to this government. They 
urged the NDP to extend the Farm land property tax rebate 
program. They told the government that the current foundation 
grant distribution formula is flawed and that rural school 
divisions are negatively affected because of it. They talked 
about the need for rural revitalization and the issues that must 
be taken more seriously by this government. 
 
But the NDP ignored SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities). And now the NDP fudge-it budget is 
going to cost rural residents 30 per cent more in education tax 
on their land. And that’s not my numbers, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
SARM’s numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the minister justify a 30 per cent 
increase to rural landowners? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows 
that in our conversations with SARM . . . And we had extensive 
conversations with SARM as it relates to the farmland 
ownership piece and the property tax piece. And the 
commitment to SARM was that we would honour it — the $50 
million commitment — over a period of two years. 

The two years have now passed, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve taken 
a chunk of that money and we’ve reinvested that money, Mr. 
Speaker, in agriculture and in rural Saskatchewan in a different 
way, Mr. Speaker — we’ve invested the money back. Unlike 
what the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, talk about. 
 
Because we have, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan a plan about 
rebuilding and revitalizing rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
which is an investment of provincial dollars, Mr. Speaker; it’s 
an investment with municipal dollars, Mr. Speaker; and it’s an 
investment with federal dollars, of which the members opposite 
don’t support, Mr. Speaker. Because they’re on record, Mr. 
Speaker, of denying and objecting against support from the 
federal government on every front, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is about supporting rural Saskatchewan and 
supporting agriculture, supporting farmers. They are not, Mr. 
Speaker. They are not. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
SARM calculates there’ll be a reduction in grants to most rural 
school divisions in the province, and because of that, property 
taxes will be taking a huge jump. Because of the downturn in 
the ag economy, many rural landowners were struggling to pay 
their property taxes before, let alone after a 30 per cent increase. 
 
The Farm land property tax rebate program had been a huge 
help to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Farm land property tax rebate program had been a huge help to 
municipalities and to rural taxpayers, but the NDP saw fit to 
abandon this program just like they’ve abandoned rural 
Saskatchewan for 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the NDP believe farm families will be 
able to cope with another 10,000 increase in crop insurance 
costs along with the other costs that they’re downloading on 
rural taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I wondered when somebody on the other 
side of the House will get around to talk again about the crop 
insurance program, Mr. Speaker. And he’s back again. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite — because his 
previous critic talked about what happened to the crop 
insurance program in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — and I want 
to say to this House one more time, because the only people 
who are on record, Mr. Speaker, about denying the amount of 
revenue that crop insurance requires from the federal 
government are those people right over here, Mr. Speaker. 
Because there are farm organizations and farm groups in 
Saskatchewan today who say that we should be getting a larger 
share of financing from the federal government. 
 
The provincial government made a larger investment, Mr. 
Speaker, today, and put 14 million brand new dollars into the 
crop insurance . . . 
 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

The Speaker: — Members it’s difficult to hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this government put brand 
new money into crop insurance — 14 million brand new dollars 
which were taken out by the federal government. And the 
audacity of that member over there today to be raising the 
provincial government’s investment in crop insurance, Mr. 
Speaker, is a sham, Mr. Speaker, because we’re investing in 
rural Saskatchewan — we’re investing in rural revitalization. 
 
They’ve torn up their Saskatchewan . . . or the Canadian 
Alliance Party card — they’ve torn it up, and it looks like now 
they’ve become members of the federal Liberal Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s 
review the downloading in this budget. NDP cut 25 million in 
education tax rebate. NDP raised crop insurance premiums. 
NDP cut coverage, like spot loss hail. NDP cut ag budget. 
 
And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, they find 20 million to 
spend in the US (United States). They find 80 million to spend 
on Australia. They even find some grocery money for Eric 
Upshall. But they can’t find one cent for farm families in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is that government going to quit 
downloading on farm families in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, you just need to take a look 
at this budget and take a look at the kind of investment that 
we’re making in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we’re making 14 million brand new 
dollars investment today in the crop insurance program. Today 
we’re spending additional money, Mr. Speaker, in the revenue 
sharing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An additional $10 million to municipalities across the province, 
of which 5 million of that dollars goes right back into rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This government, Mr. Speaker, 
cares and works for rural Saskatchewan people and Canadian 
people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, who’s abandoned rural Saskatchewan today 
are our members opposite, Mr. Speaker. These are the people 
who have abandoned rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
investing. They’ve departed. 
 
There’s a big void, Mr. Speaker, big void in rural Saskatchewan 
today. Mr. Boyd has gone. We got a big void today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Because of the details of the questions asked 
during a period when the government is going through 
reorganization and because of the fact the opposition has asked 
88 questions in the first 15 days of this session, we are unable to 
answer these questions today. 
 
However it is the government’s intention to answer these 
questions fully next week. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I order 
these questions for return. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. At the request, at the 
request of the Government Whip the questions nos. 43, 44, 45, 
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 
63, 64, 65, 66, 67, and 68 are ordered for return. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to pick up from where I left off yesterday when I was 
addressing the budget . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from Cypress Hills would like me to start over but I 
think I’ll just start from where I left off yesterday. 
 
Which was, I was speaking about the NDP’s lack of support for 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — rural Saskatchewan, which 
is the backbone of our economy. Urban Saskatchewan realizes 
that as rural Saskatchewan, so goes all of Saskatchewan. Only 
the NDP do not realize the importance of rural Saskatchewan to 
Saskatchewan’s overall economy. 
 
We just had the Minister of Agriculture state in this House, that 
they, the NDP, care about agriculture. Well I think the Minister 
of Agriculture should go and ask the farmers of the province 
what they think about that statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak about one of the issues that are of 
great concern in my constituency and have been for several 
years. And that is the lack of cell service coverage in my area. 
Mr. Speaker, this has been an ongoing issue. They’ve appealed 
time and time again to this government who has promised time 
and time again that they would extend coverage into my area. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is now become an issue where even the 
administrator of the Radville Marian Home wrote a letter to the 
. . . to SaskTel asking them when they would consider that they 
would put cell coverage in our area. And I would like to read to 
you part of the response that came from a member of SaskTel 
back to Radville. And I’ll read a small portion of this letter. 
And it states: 
 

We carefully select expansion sites based on their ability to 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

 

provide service that can be maintained over the long term 
while providing a reasonable economic rate of return. 
 
The last several studies undertaken by SaskTel Mobility 
indicated that cellular expansion in the area around 
Radville was not projected to provide an economic rate of 
return sufficient to sustain long-term profitability. 

 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel — this was the Crown that was formed to 
give equal access at an affordable price to all people in 
Saskatchewan. Now SaskTel tells us that they can only expand 
where it is profitable. What happened to the mandate of Crown 
corporations in this province? The NDP have abandoned their 
own philosophy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another one of the concerns in my area is the 
proposed closing of Pangman School. Mr. Speaker, the blame 
for the possible closing of this school can be laid right at the 
feet of the NDP government and especially the ex-Liberal 
leader, the Minister of Learning. There is absolutely no valid 
reason for this closure. I believe the decision to close the school 
was made first and then the reasons why this should happen 
came after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, huge pressure is being put on local school 
divisions to amalgamate, with new dollars being the reward. Is 
closing schools part of the plan? If this government truly 
believes in revitalizing rural Saskatchewan, then they should be 
doing everything they can to keep schools in rural 
Saskatchewan open. 
 
Pangman is a strong, thriving community. And they are 
prepared to fight to keep their school because they know if they 
lose their school they will lose businesses, and they will 
eventually lose their community. School boards are telling their 
ratepayers that with changes to the base grant they will get 
fewer dollars from the province and possibly zero. 
 
Well my argument is, Mr. Speaker, if the province is not 
providing any dollars to local school boards, then they should 
have no say in what that school does. They should not have the 
authority to close that school. If your school is closed you will 
pay the same taxes, yet your child could possibly ride a bus for 
one and a half hours both morning and afternoon. 
 
(11:00) 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, would they get in 
their vehicle and drive an hour and a half morning and night to 
attend the legislature or any other place in Saskatchewan? And 
yet they expect children in this province to do that. This is what 
this government calls rural revitalization. How is this fair? 
 
I believe it is time that rural taxpayers drew a line in the sand 
and said, no, we will not be pushed around any longer and 
dictated to by this government. The NDP are only concerned 
with what is best for them — not what is best for the children of 
this province. 
 
A year ago the budget made allowances for a new Department 
of Rural Revitalization. To date, we have seen no gains or 
accomplishments from this department. This just shows how 
much this government has lost touch with rural people and rural 

issues. 
 
A prime of this is the now famous bus tour, the bus tour. A 
letter I received from a gentleman in Bengough sums up what 
the people in rural Saskatchewan feel about the bus tour, and I 
quote: 
 

When we heard that you were going to send representatives 
to our community to mainstreet with the people and hear 
our concerns or comments, we decided it would be good to 
meet as a group. On August 16, 2001 members of our 
community met at the RM office, put the coffee on, and 
prepared to converse our concerns or comments with . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. I just ask the 
members to keep the noise level down a bit so that we can 
clearly hear the member who is speaking. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I will continue 
to quote from the letter from Bengough regarding the bus tour. 
 

We watched as these representatives went by the RM office 
towards the Co-op store. We gave them a few minutes to 
visit with the people in that area. The reeve of the RM then 
went out to direct these representatives to the office where 
we had met. 
 
He walked down the street, stopping at the various places 
along the way, trying to find your representatives. They 
were gone. We were both shocked and amused that these 
people had left town with only a trifle interest in what they 
were here for. 
 
As for your reports and concerns for our areas, we are 
worried about our schools, health care, and highways. I 
wish you had taken your bus west of Ogema on No. 13 
Highway and south or north on No. 34 Highway. We 
believe that all taxes collected should be directed towards 
the roads for which they were originally designated. 
 
We believe the health care system has become a two-tier 
system with money now being wasted for administration 
rather than directed to caregivers. Many of our elderly have 
had to go to other communities for home care services as 
that level was not offered here. 

 
I could go on, but I’ll end here, Mr. Speaker. It clearly shows 
that people in rural Saskatchewan seen through this bus tour 
and are frustrated and fed up with a government that completely 
disregards their needs. 
 
This brings up the whole issue of needs and compassion and 
respect for the seniors of our province. The people who 
pioneered this country, Mr. Speaker, fought in both world wars, 
sacrificed greatly through the Depression. Many scrimped and 
saved so that they could look after themselves when they grew 
old and when they retired. Now this is the way that this 
government, the NDP treats them, who have long told the 
people of Saskatchewan how they are the champions of health 
care and that they are the friend of seniors. 
 
This budget completely mitigates the NDP’s claim to be the 
champion of seniors. This is what the NDP thinks of the seniors 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

in this province, where they . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what the NDP thinks of the seniors in this 
province, where they would have the nerve to take up to 90 per 
cent of their income and apply it to a fee for them to stay in a 
nursing home, leaving them a meagre $166 a month for their 
personal needs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to read from what the NDP 
was sent out on the Saskatchewan Health right in their own 
document, Mr. Speaker, where . . . and I quote: 
 

We recognize that no one likes to pay more; however, 
given the rapidly rising costs of health care, government 
can no longer afford to heavily subsidize those who can 
better afford their own care. 

 
No one, Mr. Speaker, can pay for health care throughout their 
life in this province even if they choose to. But when they get 
old, the NDP can choose to have them pay. That’s the way the 
system works in this province. The NDP, with this despicable 
act, have finally shown their true face. This is two-tier health 
care in its truest form. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues have spoken at some 
length about the deficit and the NDP’s creative bookkeeping, so 
I won’t go into that today. 
 
I would like to speak about another form of revenue the NDP 
uses to so . . . balance their so-called balanced budget, that is 
the revenue from gambling. This year some $332 million from 
Liquor and Gaming is flowing into the General Revenue Fund. 
It is a sad state when our province has come to rely on the 
proceeds of gambling for economic stability — this from the 
Premier that was opposed to gambling. 
 
And I’d just like to read a couple of quotes, Mr. Speaker, from 
the Premier of the province. On February 23, 1990 . . . 1989, the 
Premier Lorne Calvert spoke: 
 

It appears the government is hard up for cash and sees this 
as a quick fix. In many ways, the government is like an 
individual who might turn to gambling in hopes it will 
solve his financial problems only to find out it leads to 
more problems. 

 
And another quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Premier. This is on 
February 23, 1989 as well: 
 

Liberalized gambling laws will mean more prostitution, 
drug trafficking, and other crimes common to cities with 
wholly relaxed regulations. 

 
End of quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. There are . . . Order, 
please. I would suggest that members get a little closer together, 
face to face, and talk about this in a whisper rather than 
hollering across the room so that I can hear the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to repeat the last 
quote so that everyone could hear it and the quote is from the 

Premier of the province on February 23, 1989 and I quote: 
 

Liberalized gambling laws will mean more prostitution, 
drug trafficking, and other crimes common to cities with 
wholly relaxed regulations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government is counting on not only the 
elderly, but also the addicted of this province to help balance 
the books. 
 
Last year, the NDP realized $180 million from VLTs (video 
lottery terminal) but that wasn’t enough. The NDP, a 
government desperate for cash, decided to add 400 more VLTs. 
This just one week, Mr. Speaker, after a study came out 
showing that VLTs are the most addictive form of gambling 
and that no further VLTs should be added until further studies 
were done. The NDP completely disregarded this. 
 
They tried to justify it by saying that they were doing it for the 
hospitality industry, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, if they 
were so concerned about the hospitality industry, why did they 
raise taxes on liquor in the budget which, the hospitality 
industry is saying, will very negatively affect their business. 
 
Let’s be very clear, Mr. Speaker, about this. The adding of 400 
VLTs had nothing to do with their concern about the hospitality 
industry and it had everything to do with a government that is 
desperate for cash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has abandoned the sick, they’ve 
abandoned the young, they’ve abandoned the addicted, the 
entrepreneurs, the nurses, the doctors, homeowners. 
 
I went out and knocked doors in the by-election in Elphinstone 
and Riversdale and people there have bars on their doors, they 
have bars on their windows, they have locks, they have security 
systems, and many of them have fences with dogs. That is what 
we’re talking about in Saskatchewan. Homeowners have to 
protect themselves against crime. 
 
This government has abandoned farmers. It has abandoned 
students. And they’ve abandoned the elderly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just the other night I had the opportunity to talk to 
a sweet little lady who is about 80 years old, and she told me 
that she supported Tommy Douglas and the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation). And she said to me, you’re a 
politician aren’t you? Well will you tell the NDP for me that 
what they are doing . . . what are they doing having Mr. 
Romanow, who destroyed health care in Saskatchewan, heading 
up the commission to fix it for Canada? It is terrible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the people who supported the CCF now 
realize this government has abandoned them, and they have had 
enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1944 this province took a turn that has put it 
decades behind of where it should be. We as a province have 
more . . . then had more than our neighbours. It is too bad it has 
been abandoned and squandered through a socialist mentality 
that has proven to fail for decades. 
 
In 1944 Saskatchewan had a greater population than our 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

 

neighbour to the West, more oil production, and a much 
brighter future. Today we have one-third of the population of 
Alberta, and much, much less strength in our economy. 
 
We hear about the negative, defeatist attitude in Saskatchewan. 
But I lay that right at the feet of the government that has given 
us 60 years of socialism. We need to go no further than to look 
at excerpts from the CCF Regina Manifesto, which states, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . government will not rest content until it has eradicated 
capitalism . . . 

 
If we read that, we understand why we have a business 
community and an economy that has given up and has its very 
own self-worth almost defeated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of our young people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, again please. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, many of our young — and many 
not so young — have left our great province for lures of a 
brighter future. I have three young sons that have started to 
make a new life for themselves in Alberta. 
 
I believe that they’d like to return to Saskatchewan, but first 
there has to be a reason for them to come back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not only my sons who want to come home, 
but many more. During one of our Grow Saskatchewan 
meetings that was in Indian Head, a young man was at it and he 
was originally from Saskatchewan. And he had moved away 
and had come back about three years ago and was working here 
and he had his family here. And he was contemplating whether 
he should stay or go back to Alberta. 
 
And so I said to him, I said, it is my belief that most of the 
people that have left Saskatchewan would like to come back. 
And I said to him, is that true? And he said, I’ll tell you what — 
if we took all the ex-Saskies and put them in McMahon 
Stadium and said to them, who wants to go home, that 90 per 
cent of the people would stand up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it is my challenge and all members of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s challenge to form government and to 
start on the wrong . . . long road to turning Saskatchewan 
around so that we can make the place where our deported 
children and many others will want to come home and will want 
to make a future here. 
 
For those who have left, but most importantly for those of . . . 
who have decided to stay behind, an election in Saskatchewan 
cannot come soon enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to take this opportunity to say a 
couple words about the member from Kindersley. The member 
from Kindersley is the reason that I got into politics in the first 
place and has been an inspiration to me. 
 
Today and yesterday have been very sad days for myself and it 
is a sad day for the people of Saskatchewan. The member from 
Kindersley is a unique kind of politician because not only does 

he have a keen mind, a great knowledge of agriculture and 
business, he also has a heart and truly cares for the people of 
this province. 
 
He not only talked about and fought for how this province 
should be run, he lived by example every day. He is a great 
politician, a great ambassador for our province, but most of all 
he is a friend extraordinaire. Mr. Speaker, I will miss him. I will 
miss the member from Kindersley, and I miss him and I wish 
him well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not support the budget and I will support the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 
what I’ll focus on today in my address in response to the budget 
address are concerns with regard to education, my . . . the new 
Department of Saskatchewan Learning, and how this budget 
impacts on Saskatchewan learning. 
 
And I would say right from the outset, Mr. Speaker, that I will 
be supporting the budget because it is very good for education 
and I will not be supporting the amendment of the members 
opposite. 
 
Now as everyone knows, preparing for this year’s budget 
presented our province and our government with some major 
challenges: a sluggish North American economy, declining oil 
and gas revenues, disappointing revenue estimates from Ottawa, 
and the need to maintain a budgetary focus on our priorities. 
 
And one of the ways we are responding to these challenges is 
by striving to make our government leaner, more efficient, and 
more effective in order to provide the maximum possible 
financial resources where the public services are actually 
delivered. 
 
More provincial money for autonomist systems and institutions 
within the broad-base learning sector. Now that is the purpose 
of the reconfiguration and restructuring of the provincial 
government that the Premier announced on March 26. 
 
One of its central elements, of course, is our new flagship 
department, the Department of Learning. Its mandate is as 
follows, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To advance the social, economic, and personal well-being 
of Saskatchewan people. This shall be accomplished 
through leadership and support programs for early 
childhood development through pre-kindergarten through 
grade 12, to technical training and post-secondary 
education, and public library services. The department shall 
provide responsive leadership to meet the learning and 
development needs of Saskatchewan children, youth, and 
adults, and to meet the employment needs of the labour 
market. 

 
In order to secure the future of Saskatchewan and the future of 
Saskatchewan people, we must continue to build a healthy, 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

prosperous, free, and democratic society and a province where 
knowledge and learning are pursued for several purposes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To acquire valuable tools, sharpen them and develop our 
practical skills. And also to expand our horizons and the 
richness of human knowledge and to enrich and ennoble the 
human heart, the human spirit, and the human condition. 
 
Our vision entails healthy and school-ready young children who 
are prepared to take full advantage of the learning opportunities 
through public school and beyond. Our Kids First program 
helps give these youngest children those most important first 
steps. 
 
And we envision young adults and adult learners who have a 
variety of opportunities for high-quality post-secondary 
education so they can participate fully in Saskatchewan’s 
economy and communities all becoming lifelong learners. 
Educated for adulthood, educated for citizenship, educated for 
careers, educated for life — lifelong learners, well prepared to 
benefit and to contribute to our culture, our society, and our 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Learner support in their own communities by a high-quality 
public library system. Not closed repositories of dusty archives, 
but instead what they are today in fact, tools for dynamic and 
transactional resource-based learning for children, youth, and 
adults. 
 
Now the Premier and our coalition government have assigned to 
this new department a broad vision, a broad mandate, and a 
broad responsibility, Mr. Speaker. Now let me unequivocally be 
clear on one central point. We have reconfigured and 
restructured the departments of the provincial government. It is 
not our purpose, our intention, or our plan to reconfigure the 
discrete constituent elements of the broadly construed learning 
sector. Their discrete systems and sectors and institutions will 
not be reconfigured; they will be supported, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We shall respect and nurture their integrity and build on their 
many strengths, identifying opportunities to enhance, 
complement, and reinforce the many significant strengths of 
their separate systems and institutions. 
 
Now as I reflect on the broad mandate and responsibilities of 
the new ministry of Learning, I note some significant common 
conceptual and policy themes. Themes that each one of them is 
already contributing to, and I shall cite just four: meeting the 
needs of our Aboriginal population; fully exploiting the 
opportunities of learning technologies; strengthening 
communities; and serving the needs of a sparse and dispersed 
population. 
 
Now I want to assure all members and the people of 
Saskatchewan my own determination as Minister of Learning 
and that of the new department to publicly reconfirming the 
government’s commitment to sustain and strengthen our many 
significant initiatives already underway and supported by this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to name just a few: our commitment to Aboriginal 
education and training; our commitment to Campus 

Saskatchewan and learning technologies; to nurturing the new 
and independent apprenticeship commission; to implement the 
vision of SchoolPLUS; to continue to redefine the post-secondary 
education sector plan and accountability framework; to continue 
to support the revitalization of our universities — value their 
critical contribution in teaching, in research, and in service; to 
support the provincial library system-wide technological 
leadership; and the restructuring of school divisions. 
 
And I’m reconfirming to the House today my previously 
communicated expectation that 18 months from now, by 
October 2003, we will have 25 per cent fewer school divisions. 
 
Now during my two and a half years in cabinet, my most 
satisfying times have been in close dialogue with stakeholder 
leaders and visiting schools, classrooms, teachers, and students. 
 
And just a few examples, Mr. Speaker. The community high 
school, Wesmor in Prince Albert — beautiful school, enjoyed 
my visit there very much. The Internet-based distance education 
classes developed and taught at Sheldon-Williams Collegiate 
and designed and implemented by classroom professionals right 
in that school. 
 
The brilliantly innovative new joint use Carpenter High School 
in Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, or the integrated service 
program at the Churchill Learning Centre in La Ronge — all 
excellent examples of progress being made in education in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now with much broader ministerial responsibility, I’m very 
much looking forward to close dialogue with a wide set of 
major stakeholders and new opportunities to visit students, 
researchers, and institutions throughout this great province. 
 
Now at the outset of my remarks this morning I cited some of 
the major challenges we faced as a province this year in 
preparing our budget, and I would just like to add a few 
contextual comments as well. 
 
Now you will know that the circumstances being presented in 
some other provinces and you’ll have seen what’s happened in 
British Columbia and Alberta, for example, and how they’ve 
responded to similar circumstances. And later this month we’ll 
also know how Manitoba responds in its budget. 
 
But in Saskatchewan, we have first reduced the size of 
government — fewer ministers, fewer deputy ministers, fewer 
departments, and fewer civil servants. And just to give you an 
example within my own department — the estimates that have 
been tabled with this budget — that our own department, 
Saskatchewan Learning, will have lost more than 40 staff 
positions. We tightened our belts before we could say and go to 
the people that they needed to tighten their belts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at the same time, however, we have been determined to 
increase the provincial operating grant support to our schools, 
universities, colleges, and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology). And this budget does do 
that, Mr. Speaker, because this government has priorities and 
we’re proud of those priorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now we have, we have heard the call 
for increased provincial government financial support for the 
critically important capital infrastructure needs of systems and 
institutions in education. We have listened, Mr. Speaker, and 
we have heeded that call. And I am very pleased that the budget 
contains a very substantial increase in this year’s provincial 
financial contribution for capital facilities in both the K to 12 
and post-secondary systems and institutions. Over 65 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker — the largest annual increase in many, many 
years. 
 
And I am particularly pleased that based on the analytical work 
and the recommendation of the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association), the trustees association, and the support 
from individual school divisions, we will indeed be proceeding 
with the new facilities restoration program for schools. It will 
be an integral component within our K to 12 facilities capital 
program. 
 
Now as the people of Saskatchewan examine this budget and 
compare our financial commitment to the broader education or 
learning sector, it is clearly apparent that learning, education, 
and training are indeed a central priority of our government. 
Under difficult economic circumstances I can say — and I am 
proud to say — that this budget and this government continues 
its commitment to the philosophy of lifelong learning, the major 
tenet of our new flagship department, Saskatchewan Learning, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now to just highlight some of the big improvements that we 
have seen in education in both the K to 12 and the 
post-secondary sector, and putting into the context of what 
we’ve seen within the parameters of this budget, we recognize 
that the priorities of health care, of education, of highways, and 
of municipal governments, have been maintained, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at what we have received in the Department of 
Learning, we’ve got an . . . over a 3 per cent increase on our 
foundation operating grant for the calendar year despite massive 
decreases in the revenue stream available to government. We’ve 
seen a substantial increase on the capital side to the tune of 7.2 
per cent overall for the new Department of Learning. 
 
We have not only that but provided our dollars on the 
foundation operating grant in an unconditional way so that the 
per student grant has increased again this year. And on top of 
the grant increases from last year, Mr. Speaker, in the last three 
years we have seen over 20 per cent increase in our foundation 
operating grant. 
 
And I like to remind the members opposite that their platform 
would have provided no increase, Mr. Speaker. No increase. It 
was frozen. But 20 per cent in just three years. And with this 
new capital infrastructure program the amount of facilities and 
the amount of infrastructure that can be redone, that can be new 
in this province, is tremendous. And of course that will also add 
to the economy of our province as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’ve listened to some of the members opposite and just 
previously now the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy was up 
and she talked about school closures. And she, I think, she was 
saying some things that are not accurate, Mr. Speaker. And I 
just wanted to clarify some of that. 

When she was referring to schools within Saskatchewan, and 
we talked about school closures, let me clearly delineate that 
school closures have nothing to do with reorganization of the 
government management structure of school divisions. In fact 
school boards that have amalgamated have indicated and have 
told us through numbers of surveys that they have absolutely 
been . . . have had the opportunity to improve services to truly 
isolated schools because of the broader mandate and the broader 
resources available to them. 
 
So in fact, Mr. Speaker, school division restructuring has 
nothing to do with school closures. In fact in most 
circumstances it actually allows for greater resources to be 
provided to schools that would be truly isolated. 
 
When we look at the record of the previous administration and 
school closures, there were more school closures in the 1980s 
than at any other time in the history of this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a program now with our isolated school factor 
that we do support. In our grant the recognition that schools that 
are a far distance away from other schools are supported and 
that it is not the right thing to do, to have people travelling on 
buses for an hour and an hour and a half each day. 
 
And I must advise the House, Mr. Speaker, that there is a 
general policy throughout all school divisions in the province of 
Saskatchewan that no child is picked up before 7:30 in the 
morning, Mr. Speaker. I know there are some exceptions, 
especially in the southwest, but that is a general philosophy. 
 
And our school divisions, our school boards, and this 
government is very concerned about the well-being of children 
in our education system and we will never waiver on that 
commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we talk about school closures and why school closures 
occur, those are difficult decisions for school boards. But we 
have a process that is legislated in this province that if there is 
an indication or a motion to close a school or even to 
downgrade classes or sizes of a school, that that has to go 
before the public; that the local board must approve of that prior 
to that, and if it approves of it, then there won’t be the public 
consultation. But if they don’t, then there is a wide-based public 
consultation and a procedure that must be followed before that 
school closure can be done. 
 
The Department of Education has really no involvement. We 
provide the funds and over 20 per cent on the foundation 
operating grant in just three years. But school closures will 
occur as rural populations decline and as services are 
amalgamated. But as I said, restructuring school divisions in 
many cases can provide additional support to those truly 
isolated schools and perhaps enhance those opportunities for 
those children in those school divisions. 
 
And just before I end my comments this morning, Mr. Speaker, 
I just wanted to comment a little bit about some of the things 
that were said in question period and from the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. And we had the member from Saltcoats 
get up and he talked about the education property rebate and our 
commitment as a government to provide that for two years. 
 
Well we met our commitment, Mr. Speaker. We provided that 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

$50 million. But what the member fails to recognize and what 
the Finance critic fails to recognize is that $50 million came out 
of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And I’ve got the member from 
Saltcoats saying could we have more of that money and the 
Finance critic saying, well that money doesn’t exist. Well, 
which is it, Mr. Speaker? Where did that 50 million come from? 
It came from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Where did the Centenary Capital dollars come to build schools? 
It came from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Real dollars for real 
infrastructure in this province. 
 
We are building the economy of this province. We are 
supporting our school systems. And the members opposite in 
their platform had tax cuts and no support for people, no 
support for services, and no support for structure in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore, I will be supporting our budget, and I will not be 
supporting the amendment of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
and a privilege to reply to the 2002-2003 provincial budget on 
behalf of the wonderful, hard-working, productive people of 
Thunder Creek. 
 
The people of Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker, believe in this 
province. They know that we’re in an awful mess, Mr. Speaker, 
but they still believe that this province is destined to be great. 
 
They know that we’re the world’s leading producer of potash, 
Mr. Speaker. They know that we are the world’s largest 
producer of uranium. They understand that we are Canada’s 
second-largest producer of oil and gas. Mr. Speaker, the people 
of Thunder Creek know that we have 46 per cent of the arable 
farmland in this country within our borders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Thunder Creek know all of these 
great advantages that are ours as a province and they ask two 
questions. First, Mr. Speaker, they ask, how can such a 
naturally rich piece of real estate possibly be so badly managed 
as to be a have-not province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Thunder Creek see great potential 
for further development of our great province and they wonder 
why investment capital isn’t flooding in to further develop our 
oil and gas sector and our mining sector and agricultural 
value-added. 
 
These hard-working, optimistic people see the opportunities in 
ethanol and uranium and cattle feeding and diamond mining 
and hog production and tourism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second question the people of Thunder Creek 
ask is why aren’t these opportunities being pursued in 
Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, the answer to their question is 
abundantly clear for those open-minded enough to see it. 
 
For the most part of the last 60 years, Mr. Speaker, this 

province has marked time with no growth in population or 
opportunities — excuse me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During that 60 years, Mr. Speaker, for the most part we have 
endured CCF and NDP governments — governments that tax 
business higher than other jurisdictions; governments that are 
uncooperative to business; governments that use taxpayers’ 
money to compete with business; and governments that throw, 
unnecessarily, roadblocks and impediments and red tape in the 
way of business — Mr. Speaker, governments with a socialist 
agenda. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, underscores those problems in red 
ink. This budget gives up on Saskatchewan people. It gives up 
on growing Saskatchewan. It gives up on balanced budgets. It 
gives up on providing the most basic level of risk protection for 
our farmers. And it gives up on a government’s duty to take 
care of our sick and our elderly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is Glen Clark style budgeting at its worst. 
Budgeting that hides borrowing, budgeting that intentionally 
underestimates expenditures, and budgeting that intentionally 
overestimates revenues all in a most deceitful and misleading 
manner, a manner that covers up an approximate $600 million 
deficit and shows that as a $45,000 surplus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bloated, inefficient, top-heavy government 
now spends $12,000 a minute. Someone said in reaction to this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, that with a $45,000 surplus we can’t 
afford this government for another four minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder how long the people of Saskatchewan 
will think that we can afford this government when they find 
out that the bottom line for this year is really a $600 million 
deficit and not the $45,000 surplus that this phony, deceitful 
document shows. 
 
Let’s get into some of the details, Mr. Speaker, and find out 
how this fraud has been . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Members may 
be enjoying themselves, but they are actually interfering with 
the right of a member to be heard in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s get into some 
of the details, Mr. Speaker, and find out how this fraud has been 
perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Finance says that he has 
transferred $225 million from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to 
help balance the budget. By the Finance minister’s own 
admission, this fund does not exist other than as a bookkeeping 
entry. There’s no money in the fund, Mr. Speaker, so any 
money that is taken from the fund to cover government 
spending has to be borrowed and, quite simply, must be added 
to the overall debt of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance announced a nearly $90 
million change in the way the government accounts for 
education capital spending. What that means, is that they’ve set 
up a Crown corporation called the Education Infrastructure 
Financing Corporation with about $90 million of borrowed 
money to fund capital projects in our education system. 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has no intentions of paying back 
that $90 million that it borrowed and no plan to do so. And of 
course, they did it through a new Crown corporation that they 
made sure is never put under the scrutiny of the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government took $300 million this year from 
Crown corporations to balance their budget. And in the process 
added $200 million of debt to those Crowns. 
 
The Minister of Finance in this budget, Mr. Speaker, projected a 
$50 million increase in the PST (provincial sales tax). It simply 
doesn’t square with the government’s own retail sales 
projections or anybody else’s retail sales projections in a time 
when our population is shrinking and jobs are being lost. Mr. 
Speaker, at a time like this, it is surely disingenuous to project 
such a substantial increase in a tax that is directly linked to 
consumer spending. 
 
In these fudged budget documents, Mr. Speaker, this 
government projects an increase in potash revenue of $40 
million and it is quite simply not supported by industry 
forecasts and one can only imagine what kind of last minute 
flight of fancy overcame the Finance minister when he needed 
another $40 million to present this illusion of a balanced budget 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s add up, let’s add up the likely shortfalls in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker. First we have $225 million of borrowed money 
transferred from the non-existent Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
Then there’s the $90 million of borrowed money from the 
newly created Crown that is supposed to fund education capital 
expenditures. Of course there’s no plan to pay any of this 
borrowed money back. 
 
Then there’s the smaller matter of the $200 million increased 
debt to the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. Let’s not forget the almost 
whimsical projection of $50 million in additional PST revenue 
in a shrinking economy. 
 
And last but not least, Mr. Speaker, oh, pardon me, $40 million 
does seem to be the smallest and therefore the least 
misrepresentation that we can find in this budget. So maybe it is 
least after all. I refer to the unsupported $40 million in 
increased potash tax revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I add those numbers up, I come to a likely 
budget shortfall of about $605 million. Of course, as everyone 
knows, Mr. Speaker, it could be worse than that if the economy 
of the province takes another downturn, or it could be 
somewhat better than that if the economy takes an unexpected 
upturn. 
 
This NDP government, Mr. Speaker, blames everything and 
everybody but themselves for this $600 million deficit. They 
blame the terrorist attacks of September 11 when we were 
clearly already heading toward a huge deficit by that time of the 
year. It’s very difficult to see how those events, tragic as they 
were, affected government revenues in the province of 
Saskatchewan to a very great extent at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they blamed lower oil prices and the 
accompanying loss of revenue to the province for the deficit. 

Oil prices are now at about what they projected and actually 
now they’re considerably above what they projected for the 
year. And although they dropped below that price projected in 
the last budget for a while, they were above that price for a 
good part of the year as well. While oil and gas revenues are 
down somewhat they certainly can’t be blamed for a deficit of 
anything like this magnitude. 
 
Of course as this government likes to do, Mr. Speaker, they 
blame a sudden and unexpected downturn in the agricultural 
economy of the province for the deficit. Mr. Speaker, there has 
been no sudden or unexpected downturn in agriculture over the 
last year. Agriculture has been operating under very similar 
circumstances for a number of years and any honest assessment 
of the situation will reveal that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what caused this huge deficit was nothing more 
than a wild spending spree by a tired old government in its 
dying days. This government spent hundreds of millions of 
dollars of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money on foolhardy, 
hare-brained adventures in such places as Ontario, Alberta, 
British Columbia, Georgia, Chile, Mexico, and Australia. They 
invested all of this taxpayers’ money in ventures outside of our 
borders that will not create one new job in this province and 
most of which will never turn a profit. 
 
In Saskatchewan they wasted well over another hundred million 
dollars in such crazy ventures as SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company) and Information 
Services Corporation, ISC, which is our new computerized land 
titles system that simply doesn’t work. Many more millions will 
be required before ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) is up and running properly province-wide, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is the last of the provinces to 
computerize our land titles system. A working system could 
surely have been purchased from one of several provinces, with 
land surveys in a manner similar to Saskatchewan, for probably 
a couple of million dollars. 
 
I suggest as well, Mr. Speaker, that for that price, staff would 
have been provided to get the system up and running and to 
train some of our people on it. But no, we had to squander $80 
million of taxpayers’ money so far and reinvent the wheel by 
building our own system from the ground up. 
 
A year ago in keeping with their tax and spend philosophy, Mr. 
Speaker, this government hired 570 new civil servants, 
apparently for no other reason than to increase the size of 
government. Now we see them in a massive deficit situation 
and in the position of having to fire some of those civil servants 
that we just couldn’t manage without a year ago. 
 
When the government undertook these hirings a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, we in the Saskatchewan Party said that the $30 million 
would have been better spent if it was given to urban and rural 
municipalities to help ease the ever increasing property tax 
burden on their ratepayers. 
 
Now thanks to NDP mismanagement, there were no property 
tax reductions, the money is spent, and many of the civil 
servants are no longer employed, although the size of 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

government has grown and that will add substantial costs to 
subsequent budgets as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few examples of the kind of gross 
NDP mismanagement that has got this government and this 
province into the kind of a fiscal jackpot that we now find 
ourselves in. And the people of Saskatchewan will sooner or 
later be given a chance to say what they think of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those members on the other side of the floor will 
try to pretend that it is just us in the Saskatchewan Party that are 
unhappy. Well let’s examine that, Mr. Speaker. Let’s see what 
some other people had to say about this budget. 
 
This is off a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Web 
site, Mr. Speaker, and it states: 
 

Finance Minister Eric Cline announced in yesterday’s 
budget that long term care fees will more than double for 
some people. Maximum fees will climb from $1,500 a 
month to $3,800 a month on October 1st. 

 
Those on a graduated scale will be required to pay up to 90 
per cent of their income on care. 

 
(11:45) 
 
Marilyn Braun-Pollon of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business says this: 
 

Really, this budget does nothing for creating an 
entrepreneurial spirit in the province. It does really show 
that the government just doesn’t get how to grow the 
economy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Richard Truscott of the Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation. It’s all about the spending. And he says: 
 

If this government would have had a disciplined, focused 
approach to overall government spending in the last three 
years, they would have had a couple of million dollars to 
reinvest back into health care and education, to cut school 
taxes by 10 or 20 or even 30 per cent, as well as paying 
down provincial debt. 
 
But the government needs to get their heads around the fact 
that we need to reduce the size, the cost of government, and 
we need to re-evaluate the role of government in our 
economy. Every time the public sector expands, as it did in 
the last budget, the private sector shrinks. It is all about the 
. . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order once again. Once again I ask members 
to come to order. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He goes on to say: 
 

It’s all about the affordability of government and the ability 
for taxpayers to pay for more civil servants, for more 
government spending. There’s a limit to that, unless we can 
find a way to expand the tax base in this province, which I 
would argue you do through lowering taxes and getting the 
fiscal house in order and cutting red tape. 

Mr. Speaker, Murray Mandryk, a columnist from The 
Leader-Post, says this: 
 

The problem being is they weren’t honest about the 
toughest decision, and that was to come out and say this is 
a deficit budget. That’s what they should have said. That’s 
what the public should be hearing from Eric Cline today, 
and that’s not what they heard from Eric Cline today. 
 

John Allan, well-known economist, Mr. Speaker, said this: 
 

By most standards, if you take your total expenditure, 
including your debt service charges, if that is larger than 
your revenues, you’re in a deficit. And that is indeed the 
situation for the province. 

 
This is what SARM had to say. Neal Hardy, president of 
SARM. He says: 
 

The Education Tax Rebate Program, which provided $50 
million over a two year period to mitigate the effects of tax 
shift to agricultural property, has been eliminated with this 
budget. Changes have also been made to the Foundation 
Grant formula for education funding which will put 
pressure on rural school divisions to raise mill rates. This 
would further increase the education tax burden on rural 
properties. 
 
I don’t know . . . 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

I don’t know how rural people are going to deal with these 
increased costs . . . Education taxes on agricultural property 
will have increased more than 30 per cent over the last 
three years. Producers are also paying more this year for a 
Crop Insurance program that provides less coverage, and 
hail insurance will also likely cost more. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Richard Truscott, provincial director of the 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation said this when he was speaking 
on the . . . when he was interviewed on the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation. And the members 
opposite should listen to this, Mr. Speaker. He says, he says 
referring to the Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation, 
he says: 
 

It’s creative accounting at best. At worst (at worst, Mr. 
Speaker) it’s accounting that would make even an Enron 
executive blush, 

 
Editorial in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, March 28, has some 
very illuminating things to say about this budget. They say: 
 

Wednesday’s effort by Finance minister Eric Cline truly 
was a masterful document, a fine piece of unfettered 
creative writing the likes of which taxpayers haven’t seen 
since the Devine era, when Bob Andrew, Gary Lane and 
Lorne Hepworth spun a few fantastic fiscal fairytales. 

 
They go on to say: 
 

You need not look any further than Cline’s capital funding 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

 

scheme for the newly named Learning sector to understand 
the problem. No amount of explanations from the finance 
minister can alter the reality that his move to gas the full 
cost of capital commitments from the government’s books 
by funnelling them through . . . (the) new Crown entity and 
amortizing them through operating grants to universities 
and . . . K-12 system is no more than accounting 
jiggery-pokery. 

 
Cline and his boss deserve a whack to their noses (he says) 
with a copy of the 1992 report by the Don Gass 
commission to remind them of their obligation to provide 
taxpayers with complete transparency on public spending 
instead (instead) of concocting odious bookkeeping 
methods that make it impossible to understand the 
government’s finances. As Gass made it so clear . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 
 

. . . the moment the province guarantees a loan for a third 
party, it becomes a liability that needs to be recorded in its 
entirety on the government’s books, not simply as an 
annual amortized payment. Without such transparent 
accounting, taxpayers have no clear idea as to their true 
level of indebtedness, hampering greatly their ability to 
evaluate government actions and spending decisions. 

 
And finally this editorial wraps up, Mr. Speaker, by saying this: 
 

This even though Cline had to go so far as to ignore rules 
that govern the Fiscal Stabilization Fund in depleting the 
rainy day fund to prop up an . . . (unstable) spending 
regime and in all likelihood is flouting balanced budget 
legislation by changing accounting rules to remove some 
capital commitments from the books to deliver a (so-called) 
“balanced” budget. 
 
Rather than make the tough choices, the government has 
opted to procrastinate. (It’s an election . . .) If it’s an 
election Premier Calvert is buying time for, he should go 
ahead and call one without delay. 

 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I apologize to the hon. member opposite, 
Mr. Speaker; with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the hon. member opposite. 
 
I’m very, very pleased that this morning — it’s just about noon 
— but to introduce to this House and welcome to this great 
province of ours and the city of Regina, the 17 players from 
Nova Scotia who are here playing in the junior levels ringette 
nationals. And we want . . . I wanted to make sure that they 
were welcomed here. I had the . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — I had the good fortune of meeting them 
just briefly last evening and when I found out where they were 
from — from Nova Scotia — I wanted to make sure we were 
able to welcome them here to this . . . to our legislature. 
 
They have three coaches with them, Mr. Speaker, and five 
parents that help in doing the driving. And again this is a 
situation where I’m very pleased to commend parents and 
coaches that continue to support our youth and particularly 
these young people who are in these national champions here in 
Saskatchewan and in Regina. Good luck to you. Enjoy this 
great province of ours. Enjoy our Legislative Building. 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Wood River on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Leave to welcome guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also on 
behalf of the official opposition would like to welcome our 
guests to our fine province. It’s a great province and I’m sure 
you’ll have some fun and I really wish you well in your ringette 
tournament this weekend. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, it is truly alarming to see a 
government run a huge deficit and still not look after those in 
our society that are least able to look after themselves. And I 
refer to increases of over 100 per cent for long-term care for 
some people that will hurt our seniors, and changes to the 
prescription drug plan that will cause problems for many in 
poor health who rely on prescription drugs so heavily. 
 
In hard-hit rural Saskatchewan, the education tax rebate which 
was put in place to mitigate the effects of tax shifts to 
agricultural property has been eliminated. Crop insurance rates 
will increase from 40 per cent to 200 per cent for our 
beleaguered farmers. And spot loss hail coverage has been 
discontinued, along with the variable rate option. 
 
These changes will place the burden of thousands of dollars of 
extra costs on the back of the average farmer at a time when 
agriculture is suffering badly and when farmers are heading into 
what looks like the second year of a drought, or even the third 
or fourth year in some areas. 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, changes to the foundation grant for education 
funding will cause many rural schools to raise their mill rate, 
imposing an increased burden on farmers who have already 
experienced property tax increases in excess of 30 per cent in 
the last three years. These are just some examples of hardships 
inflicted on people by this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in tough times people wouldn’t complain about 
some increased costs and reduced services in order to balance 
the budget. However this ill-advised budget manages to hurt the 
most vulnerable in our province while amassing a huge deficit. 
 
Thankfully, Mr. Speaker, mismanagement of this magnitude 
only occurs in the dying days of failing governments, and we on 
this side of the floor can offer the people of Saskatchewan hope 
for a much brighter future after the next election. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget 
and I will support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to reply to the 2002 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is doubtful that in the course of Saskatchewan 
legislative history that the people of this province have ever 
been presented with a more convoluted and dishonest account 
of the provinces’ finances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the way this budget was put forward, the contents 
of it, the way the NDP have done it, every cabinet minister of 
that NDP government is responsible for this scandalous 
document. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP continue to show utter disrespect for the 
people of Saskatchewan by playing accounting games in an 
aborted attempt to conceal their ineptness and their 
incompetence at governing the province. Leadership from that 
side of the House is badly lacking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past 10 years under the NDP, and 
particularly in the past two years, the frustration level of the 
citizens of this province has grown to an all-time high and that 
frustration has turned into disgust and rage. 
 
What we have seen presented in this legislature on budget day 
was not a budget, Mr. Speaker; it was not a budget document, it 
was indeed a cookbook and in its pages are recipes for disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province under the NDP is accumulating a 
great deal of debt and the most shameful thing about it is that 
they will not be open and honest about what’s happening. The 
people of the province expect more. They deserve more and 
they will get more as soon as this government is voted out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have an excerpt — in fact, I think I’ll read the 
entire editorial — from the Humboldt Journal last week, with 
its comments about the budget: 
 

In the hallowed halls of legislatures across the country, one 
subject that dogs politicians is that voters don’t seem to 
want to go to the polls, and leaders constantly wonder why. 

It is not apathy, as they usually conclude. It is for the same 
reason that the days of loyalty to political parties are 
ending. People have been told big fish stories time after 
time, exaggeration after exaggeration, and they are simply 
tired of listening to anyone who has been so economical 
with the truth so often in the past. 
 
The latest provincial budget is just another big fish story. 
When Highways Minister Mark Wartman was asked by the 
Journal specifically if it was or was not a deficit budget he 
replied, “I guess there’s a few ways to look at it.” What a 
bizarre thing to say. 

 
(12:00) 
 
And I continue to quote: 
 

If you spend more than you take in, it is a deficit. (It’s 
simple.) If Mom or Dad or Uncle Charlie loans you a few 
bucks (and we can compare this to the . . . Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund), you have not balanced your budget. 
They want it back eventually, only you’ll have to pay a bit 
extra for the privilege of using their money. You cannot 
steal or “temporarily use” money from your sister’s piggy 
bank (like the . . . Crown corporations) and say (that) you 
have balanced your budget. You cannot decide to 
“amortize” the cost of that next chocolate bar or new 
bicycle tire over several years and say you have balanced 
your budget. 
 

The editor goes on to say: 
 

You cannot create a new way of doing math by putting 
piles of money in a newly created Crown corporation that 
doesn’t have to be counted in your budget thanks to 
ludicrous accounting rules, and still say that you have a 
balanced budget. You cannot assume and (state next year 
or) state brazenly that your weekly allowance will jump 25 
per cent next year, theoretically giving you more to spend 
on chocolate bars than you have now to spend, then call it a 
balanced budget. You cannot expect to be so economical 
with the truth and at the same time expect people to believe 
what you say at any other time, even if it is true, and you 
therefore cannot be perplexed anymore as to why nobody 
bothers to vote. 
 
The most bothersome part of this budget is not that it is, as 
a matter of fact, in deficit. It is the fact that the government 
is being so blatantly economical with the truth. We have a 
deficit in this province, (Mr. Speaker) but it’s not so much 
the money that matters at this point. Sadly, there is a deficit 
of honesty. The question is what will (the) people (of this 
province) do about it? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot and will not support this budget. But I 
will be supporting the amendment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say immediately 
how grateful I am to have the opportunity to speak in the budget 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

 

debate. 
 
I think the events of yesterday in this House, as we saw Bill 
Boyd depart this legislature, should have been a reminder to all 
of us how precious is the right to speak in this Chamber and 
how important it is to occupy a seat in this Chamber. 
 
When we think of a province of a population of over a million 
people, there are but just 58 of us who have the privilege to 
stand in this House, to occupy a seat, and to speak in these 
debates. And so I would be remiss if I didn’t begin my remarks 
today without thanking the constituents of Riversdale who give 
to me the opportunity to occupy a seat in this House. So each 
time we stand in this House, I think it is important that we recall 
for ourselves how significant an honour it is. 
 
That said, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise in this budget 
debate to support the motion put forward by the Minister of 
Finance and of course to oppose the amendment that has been 
advanced by members opposite. 
 
And if I can say, Mr. Speaker, I have sat now in this House 15 
years and I have watched budget making from both the outside 
and from the inside. 
 
I watched it from the outside sitting in the opposition benches in 
those latter years of the Devine government when the ancestors 
of the current party opposite were spending on average a billion 
dollars more per year than revenues would allow, putting this 
province, as described by one of their own members who sat on 
this side of the House, Mr. Grant Hodgins, who the day he left 
this House stood up and admitted that the province was on the 
verge of bankruptcy. 
 
I watched budget making from the outside, and I have observed 
budget making from the inside, particularly in those early years 
— the 1990s — in what I would call the dark days of the early 
’90s when the government of the day was vested with the 
horrendous responsibility of turning the finances of this 
province around. 
 
Let me say this. Having observed budget making from both the 
outside and the inside over this period of time, I can say with 
absolute certainty that not since those early days of the 1990s 
and the challenges that it presented has a government caucus 
been faced with such significant challenges as this government 
caucus was faced with in this budget year in preparing this 
budget. 
 
I just want to remind the House again of the challenges that 
have beset not just government but this province, and not just 
this province but the nation over the course of the past 12 
months. Challenges that had to be met in this budget exercise. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, just come through the most significant 
period of drought in this province’s history. The driest 12 
months in Saskatchewan’s history we have just come through. 
A drought which has affected 60 per cent of our province. That 
layered on to the continuation of the international grain 
subsidies that force and keep our farm commodity prices low; 
that layered on to the loss in farm employment that we’ve all 
recognized and seen; that in addition to the continuing 
inattention of the federal Government of Canada to the needs of 

producers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this past year we have met the challenge of the 
punishing tariffs being levied onto our softwood lumber 
industry. Recall, Mr. Speaker, that more than half of our 
province is forest. An area greater than the size of Germany. 
The softwood lumber tariffs by our American neighbours have 
hurt. It’s been a challenge. 
 
It’s been a year recognized as a year of collapse in oil and gas 
revenues. And it has been a year of terrorism — the events of 
September 11. A year of international economic downturn 
resulting in Canadian economic downturn resulting in lower 
consumer confidence, all of which has dramatically affected 
corporate income tax revenues to this government and every 
government. 
 
And it has, Mr. Speaker, been a year of challenge, the 
awakening of us all, to the concerns about safe drinking water 
in our communities. And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say it’s been a 
year of challenge when voices from without and from within 
would question the sustainability of publicly funded health care 
in this province and in this nation. 
 
And so I say without, without question, since the early days of 
the ’90s, no government caucus has been faced with the set of 
challenges in budget making that have been faced by this 
government caucus in the preparation of this budget. 
 
And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, I tell you what. In good 
times it is easy to govern. In challenging times, it takes 
leadership to govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, and if I 
may say, not since, not since the days of the early 1990s have I 
witnessed a government caucus more unified in its purpose, 
more willing to change, more determined, more rock solid in its 
belief in the future of this province than I have seen in this 
government caucus today that put this budget together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And just while I’m on the theme, Mr. 
Speaker, not since the days, not since the days when Ed 
Tchorzewski served as the minister of Finance — in those early 
days of the ’90s — not since the days when Ed Tchorzewski 
served as the minister of Finance in this government has a 
Minister of Finance demonstrated the kind of leadership 
necessary to bring to this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan a budget of this quality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And here, Mr. Speaker, is where I want 
to discuss the budget, because what this budget does, what this 
budget sets out to do and what this budget accomplishes is to 
meet the challenges that have presented themselves. Not just to 
meet the challenges, but to take those challenges and build from 
them opportunities for the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan and that’s what this budget does. 
 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

I want to say that is truly in the character and nature of the 
people and province of Saskatchewan to take challenges, to 
meet the challenges, and to turn those challenges into 
opportunities. That’s the character, that’s the nature, of the 
people and the province of Saskatchewan and that is captured in 
the work that’s been presented to this House by the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to share with the House today, 
Mr. Speaker, on this theme of the nature of our people and our 
province meeting challenges and turning them into 
opportunities, I want to share with this House a lengthy quote 
from the current Governor General of Canada, Adrienne 
Clarkson. I want to share it with the House to ensure that this 
quote is in the official record of the Hansard of this legislature. 
 
Adrienne Clarkson visited this province on September 17 to 
speak to the Regina Canadian Club. She visited this province 
precisely six days after the horrific events of September 11. 
And this is what the Governor General of Canada said in 
Saskatchewan about Saskatchewan and about Saskatchewan 
people. She said, in that very, very time of uncertainty after 
September 11, she said: 
 

Nobody knows what’s going to happen. Uncertainty and 
rumour reign. So what we can do is to hang on to the values 
that have always made us what we are: values to which 
Saskatchewan has contributed so much, and which the rest 
of Canada must not forget. 

 
She went on to say: 
 

It was in Saskatchewan that you taught us to believe that 
the public good could manifest itself in helping all citizens, 
no matter what their income or background. You taught us 
that resources, like your potash, could be part of the 
common good. 

 
She said: 
 

You taught us that our health could be part of the common 
good. You taught us that we are all part of each other and 
that, collectively, we can . . . (do) more than what we are as 
one selfish individual (can do) or even as one happy family. 
 

She said, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
people: 
 

Prairie people know adversity . . . Here in the Prairies, it’s 
the hand of nature that can parch the land with drought, 
beat it with hailstones, petrify it with cold. And the history 
of family life, ranching life, farming community life in 
Saskatchewan is a story of adversity and triumph over . . . 
(adversity). 

 
But if any people (the Governor General said, if any 
people) can bring . . . something (to bear) to (a) tragic loss 
. . . it’s the Prairie people. 

 
Now note these words, Mr. Speaker, in the context of this 
budget: 

You know (as Prairie people) you can carry on, and you 
know that you can help to create something good even 
when nothing good is happening to you. 

 
Creating “something good even when nothing good is 
happening to you,” Mr. Speaker, that is the character of 
Saskatchewan people, that is the character of our province. And 
that, if I may say, is the true character of this budget and this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my time is relatively short 
today. I do, however, want to illustrate from this budget 
precisely how we have taken the challenges and turned them 
into opportunities — met them and turned them into 
opportunities. 
 
A few moments ago, the Minister of Learning spoke to this 
House about what’s happening and what will happen in 
education. We have challenges, Mr. Speaker, in education. We 
have the fastest growing young population in Canada — the 
fastest growing youth population in Canada. We have a very 
quickly changing and growing economy in this province, in this 
nation, and this world. 
 
We have need of skilled tradespeople. We have need of 
professional people to teach, to nurse, to counsel. We have need 
to prepare our young people for the future. This is our 
challenge, and shortly put, we need the tools to do the job. This 
budget, Mr. Speaker, this budget opens the way for 
Saskatchewan people to build schools, to build university 
colleges, to equip our young people with the tools they need for 
the future of this great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We have a challenge, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a challenge and we are turning this challenge into an 
opportunity, And I tell you what, I tell you what, Mr. Speaker. 
They can criticize us from across the way for doing it; they can 
criticize us, others can criticize us. Mr. Speaker, they say don’t 
build the schools, they say don’t build the colleges. Well I say I 
don’t care about their criticisms. We are going to build the 
schools. We are going to build the colleges for the sake of the 
young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We are not about to close the doors to 
the future for Saskatchewan young people. We are going to 
open the doors of the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across Canada today we are well aware of the 
challenges facing health care, the challenges in funding facing 
health care. There are those who say — if I may say, who have 
the courage to say their convictions — there are those who say 
that publicly funded hospital and doctor care is no longer 
sustainable in Canada. There are those who would say publicly 
funded, universally accessible hospital care and doctor care is 
no longer sustainable in Saskatchewan. There are those who 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

 

would say, Mr. Speaker, this budget says just the opposite, just 
the opposite. 
 
This budget introduces another $129 million into the funding 
for publicly funded health care in this province, providing the 
largest commitment of public funding to health care in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This budget, taking the challenge into 
opportunity, begins to implement the action plan for health in 
our province. I haven’t got time to detail. This budget 
recognizes the need for the training of health care providers. 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, does not introduce user fees, does not 
introduce medical savings accounts, does not introduce 
private-for-profit hospitals, does not layer onto the families of 
Saskatchewan a burden of a health care premium of $1,100 or 
$1,200 as they’ve done in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the challenges that we’ve had to face, even in 
these difficult times, this government has supported and will 
continue to support sustainable, publicly funded health care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had challenges in 
infrastructure in this province, particularly in our road network. 
With the abandonment of the rail, the increase in trucking, 
we’ve had challenges in our road network. We’ve met the 
challenges, we’re meeting the challenges, with a three-year 
$900 million infrastructure program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The largest infrastructure project in the 
history of Saskatchewan. And we are not being deferred by the 
challenge of today. From that program $300 million to 
highways, fixing the roads in Saskatchewan, in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, turning 
challenge into opportunity, just stay tuned. For in a matter of 
days or weeks, the Minister of Highways will be making an 
announcement about how in this challenge of rebuilding the 
highways of Saskatchewan, we will be seizing new 
opportunities in new technologies that will again lead the 
continent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in information, in 
information technology and the movement of information in 
this province, we have a challenge. We’ve got a widely 
dispersed population in Saskatchewan — many small 
communities that want to participate in the economy, that want 
to have the possibilities of education for their people. What are 
we doing? We’re accepting the challenge. We’re putting in the 
infrastructure of high-speed Internet across the province. 
Through CommunityNet, we’re going to lead the continent, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’re all facing the 
challenge of global warming in every corner of the globe. This 
province is showing leadership in the challenge. We’ve 
identified a greenprint. We’ve identified and will fund an office 
of energy conservation. We’ve begun the process of building 
wind power generation in this province. And I am proud that 
my own Legislative Secretary, the hon. member from 
Greystone, will be leading this initiative. 
 
We have a challenge . . . we are finding opportunities. Some of 
the biggest challenges we face, there’s no doubt about it, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province is in rural Saskatchewan, particularly 
in our agricultural community. 
 
Now as I travel across rural Saskatchewan, I find economic 
development happening everywhere in small communities, and 
large. I fundamentally disagree with the editorial policies of the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix when they say, when they say that 
economic activity in this province is going to be centred in large 
urban areas. 
 
Yes, there’ll be economic activity in large urban centres. But as 
I travel this province, I find economic activity and enthusiasm 
everywhere I go. But there is no doubt about it — our farm 
families are facing great challenges. 
 
In light of this, in light of this, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, even 
in these difficult times, we have maintained all of our funding 
— all of our share of funding for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Program. 
 
Not only have we maintained the funding in these difficult 
times, we’ve added to the funding another $14.9 million. We’ve 
maintained the cash . . . the crop cover program. We’ve 
maintained the transition program. We’ve maintained the 
benefits of fuel tax relief to our farm families. We’re injecting 
new money into municipal government through our 
revenue-sharing plan. We’re injecting new money into policing 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, which level of government is not maintaining their 
support for rural Saskatchewan? The one level of government 
that seems to be defended by members opposite, that’s 
defended by the new Leader of the Liberal Party — the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have initiated, not just on behalf of rural 
Saskatchewan, on behalf of all of Saskatchewan and all of 
Saskatchewan people, a plan to build the ethanol industry in this 
province. The most solid, progressive plan for ethanol 
development, again, anywhere on the continent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We will be, Mr. Speaker, the first 
jurisdiction in North America to mandate the use of ethanol in 
our vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re challenged in our families. We’re 
challenged with too many people living in poverty. This budget 
doesn’t turn its back on the poor of Saskatchewan, on struggling 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

families, as we’ve seen happen in other jurisdictions very close 
to us. No, this budget injects even further support to families. 
This budget leads to the building of . . . the further building of 
the building independence program in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re building for the future. We’re seizing 
opportunities in research and development. Want to talk about a 
plan? We’ve got plans in research and development. We’re 
working with the film production industry in opening the sound 
stage in this capital city. We are working to build the 
Synchrotron Institute to seize the opportunities of research 
around the synchrotron. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in these difficult times, we’re able to do this 
and not raise the provincial sales tax. We’re doing this and not 
foregoing our plan to continue to make our income tax system 
competitive across Canada and for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re able to do this — why? We’re asking more, 
we’re asking more from some of our citizens in tobacco taxes, 
we’re asking more in liquor consumption taxes, but we’re doing 
this fundamentally on good planning that puts some money 
aside. Money aside in a savings account for the rainy day. And 
when the rainy day came, we’ve used it. We’ve used it, Mr. 
Speaker, against all the advice from members opposite who for 
the last two years on an almost daily basis were telling us, 
spend the money — spend the money. Cut the taxes; spend the 
money. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will lay the concepts of this budget beside 
any plan that they care to identify. Any plan they . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you I’ll go to 
any community in Saskatchewan and I’ll talk about our plan 
and our budget for this province and I’ll stand on any platform 
with them and we’ll compare plans. 
 
I just want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, last night, last night I had 
opportunity to travel out to the community of Raymore — 
Raymore, Saskatchewan. I went out to the community of 
Raymore to talk about this plan and this budget. You know 
what, Mr. Speaker. I had more people in the high school 
gymnasium in Raymore last night than they had in their 40 
meetings across the province combined. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You see, Mr. Speaker, these folks over 
here have got it all backwards. They’ve got it all backwards. 
The way good public policy is made and implemented is as 
follows: you meet people; you travel to their communities; you 
talk to people; you take from the community of people you seek 
to represent, their ideas, their thoughts, their concerns; and you 
bring that in; then you form your public policy; then you 
implement your public policy; and then you go back to those 
same people and say, what next? What’s working? What’s not? 
What’s next? That’s what we did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We travelled the province — 6,000 — 6,000 people we talked 
to across this province. We’ve met with people in chambers of 
commerce, we’ve met with people at the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour, we’ve met with people on our university 
campuses. Out of that we build a plan, a sustainable plan, a plan 
that meets the challenges. And then we implement. And then 
when we go to Raymore, when we go out to rural 
Saskatchewan, when we go to urban Saskatchewan, people are 
anxious to talk to us. 
 
Now they have it all backwards. What did they do? Typically, 
typically somewhere in the dead of night, they hatched up a 
one-page plan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — One-line plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well a one-line plan — cut the taxes and 
we’re into nirvana. And then what did they do? They go out and 
they say, well here’s the plan. Everybody should come and 
appreciate the plan. 
 
Well we saw how the people came to appreciate the plan. I 
don’t know. Where was it there were 20 people — I think that 
was the biggest crowd, 20 — I’m not sure where that was. But I 
know this — I know this. There were seven people — seven 
people — showed up at Morse, five people showed up at Fort 
Qu’Appelle — one of them was one of ours I think. No, four in 
Meadow Lake wasn’t it? I think there was 12 out in Moose Jaw, 
two in Assiniboia. Mr. Speaker, it’s all backwards. You don’t 
build and hatch a plan somewhere here and then take it out. 
 
Well now the member from — where is he from? — Indian 
Head, the member from Indian Head says I should call an 
election. He ought to be careful what he asks for, Mr. Speaker, 
because I’ve been out to Indian Head. I’ve been out to Indian 
Head and they’re telling me they’re looking forward to a new 
member after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, oh there’s so much more I 
could say, so much more I want to say, Mr. Speaker. But let me 
just say this. This, Mr. Speaker, is a budget that meets the 
challenges and the challenges have been many and onerous. 
This is a budget that meets the challenges, that takes those 
challenges and takes from them opportunities. Why, Mr. 
Speaker, because this is the province of opportunity. 
 
It is the character of Saskatchewan people when nothing good is 
happening to take that circumstance and make something good 
of it. We’ve done it before, we’re doing it today, and we’ll do it 
in future with a government that shows the leadership and the 
capacity of leadership demonstrated by this Minister of Finance 
in taking us forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan someday soon or perhaps later will have an 
opportunity to voice their opinion at the ballot box. Mr. 
Speaker, I predict today — I predict today — just as they have 
rejected their plan they will reject that party. They will re-elect 
a strong New Democratic Party government to take this 
province into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

 

(12:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Members of the Assembly . . . 
Order please. Members of the Assembly it now being 12:30 on 
the fifth day of the budget debate it is incumbent on me to 
request, or offer, the Minister of Finance 20 minutes to close the 
budget debate. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’d like to begin this morning . . . or this afternoon by 
personally acknowledging and thanking the people of 
Saskatoon Mount Royal, my neighbours, who send me to this 
place. And I feel very privileged to speak in the legislature. And 
I feel it’s an honour and a privilege to present a budget to the 
people of the province as I’ve had the great privilege to do now 
under two different and equally distinguished premiers. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, also that I’d like to thank my 
colleagues on both sides of the House for their contributions to 
the budget debate. I found their comments to be sometimes 
helpful, sometimes informative, sometimes entertaining if 
nothing else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to thank the members on this side of the House for 
their continuous support and encouragement of what I think is 
overall a very positive budget for reasons I’ll get into later. 
 
I also want to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to thank the very 
dedicated women and men who work in the Saskatchewan 
Public Service who do a very good job throughout the year. 
And they strive to provide the government and the cabinet and 
the public with the very best information and analysis that they 
can. 
 
And I especially want to thank the women and men in the 
Department of Finance for the very good work they do on a 
day-to-day basis. I’m very proud to work with them and 
especially at budget time, because the development of a budget, 
Mr. Speaker, is actually very difficult. 
 
It’s very easy to poke holes at decisions. It’s very easy to be all 
things to all people and say we’ll cut all the taxes, we’ll 
increase spending and so on. But when you’re actually in the 
position of having to come up with a budget, you have to make 
the tough choices and then you have to be prepared to defend 
them. And that is done with the support of people at the 
Department of Finance who work very hard, do a good job, and 
sometimes work very late at night at this time of year leading 
up to a budget, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate the good work 
that they do. 
 
Well those difficult decisions have to be made in any year and, 
as the Premier has said and it’s true, Mr. Speaker, this has been 
a particularly difficult year because of the drought, the 
softwood lumber dispute, the American recession, the Canadian 
economic slowdown, and much lower oil and gas prices. We’ve 
come through a difficult year. 
 
But I think the key is, Mr. Speaker, we’ve come through that 
difficult year. We’ve come with a budget that is going to be a 
budget of building, Mr. Speaker. And the Premier has said 

we’re going to build the highways by fixing the roads. We’re 
going to build the schools and the universities. And we’re going 
to work with the municipalities by increasing municipal 
revenue sharing. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that, you know, the opposition 
is very, very negative about everything that happens in the 
budget, everything that happens in the House — I think 
everything that happens in the province. And you could get 
depressed, I suppose, if we didn’t go all over the province 
talking to the people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say in the nine days since the budget was tabled, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the pleasure of speaking to hundreds of 
Saskatchewan people — in Saskatoon, in North Battleford, in 
Moose Jaw, in Regina — in person, on the telephone, people 
from all over the province, at meetings and on open-line shows 
as well. 
 
And my colleagues also have been around the province. And I 
want to report to you on what they have heard. And what we 
have heard from the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, is this 
— Saskatchewan people like the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Now why do they like it, Mr. Speaker? 
They like it because we didn’t raise the sales tax. We didn’t 
raise the sales tax as the Leader of the Opposition’s cousin in 
British Columbia did. The Leader of the Opposition is on record 
as saying we should do everything they are doing in British 
Columbia. What did they do there? They raised the sales tax as 
well as the medicare premiums. Well we didn’t do that. 
 
They liked the budget, Mr. Speaker, because it did not introduce 
a medicare premium. Again, listen to what the opposition says. 
They always say do what they do in Alberta, do what they do in 
British Columbia. What do they do? $1,400 tax per family per 
year for medicare premiums in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Same in 
British Columbia. That’s what they want to do. But 
Saskatchewan people are pleased that this budget did not do 
that. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, they like the budget because it continues 
with our income tax reform and it continues cutting the income 
taxes in the province. Saskatchewan people support that. 
 
Business people like the increase in the corporate capital tax 
threshold, which makes us the province with the highest 
threshold in the country for the corporate capital tax which will 
save business money and create jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
They like the plan that we have on this side of the House to 
increase health care spending by 5.8 per cent. We’ve heard from 
the opposition that they would freeze health care spending, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not the policy of our government. This budget 
puts more money into health care and I think the people 
approve of that. 
 
I think the people approve of the fact that this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, increases health care research by 80 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. I think they like that fact. 
 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, they approve of increased funding for 
education, contrary to what the members opposite say, because 
they would say they would . . . they’d say they would freeze 
education. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people like the 
ethanol plan that we have in this budget. Because this 
government is saying that we’re going to develop the ethanol 
industry in this province, as the Premier has said. And I think, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the province support that. 
 
And I’ve even had people say to me, Mr. Speaker, that they 
approve of the increase in the tobacco taxes and the liquor tax. 
They understand that. They say, if you have to get more 
revenue — and in difficult times maybe you do — don’t raise 
the PST as the opposition might; don’t raise the income taxes as 
the opposition probably would do; but cut the . . . or raise the 
tobacco and liquor taxes if you have to. And that’s what we’ve 
done. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, they’re pleased with the 18 per cent 
increase to municipal revenue sharing that is a result of this 
budget. I think they support the increase to police funding that 
is in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of the province support 
this budget. And I think they recognize that it’s a budget that 
has been put together in challenging times. 
 
And the question is, Mr. Speaker, I think we should consider 
this question very carefully: why are the members opposite 
upset with the budget? I think it’s quite simple. They know that 
we’ve had difficult times, Mr. Speaker, and what they wanted 
this government to have to do was to increase the sales tax. 
That’s what they wanted. What they wanted was, they wanted 
the government to have to increase the income taxes. That’s 
what they wanted. They wanted a budget that would increase 
health care premiums. That’s what they wanted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we didn’t do that. We said, we’re going to live within our 
means; we’re going to do some new things, but we’re going to 
live within our means; but we’re not increasing the PST; we’re 
not increasing income taxes; we’re not bringing in medicare 
premiums. We didn’t do those things, Mr. Speaker. And the fact 
of the matter is, that makes those members very unhappy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because that is really what they wanted so 
that they would have something to complain about. That’s what 
they wanted. 
 
Now since they don’t have that, what they have to do — and 
we’ve seen it day after day, Mr. Speaker — they have to grasp 
at straws in order to come up with some way to criticize the 
budget. So what do they say? They come into the Legislative 
Assembly and they go out into the media and they say, well it’s 
not the real picture. They’re hiding something. It’s not a 
balanced budget because there’s no money in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund — they say. 
 
But what we have to remember, Mr. Speaker, is what they were 
saying a year ago — and this is on the public record, Mr. 

Speaker, this is on the public record — what they said a year 
ago was the Minister of Finance is sitting on $700 million. 
Sitting on the money. That’s what they said. 
 
And they said that money should immediately be sent out to the 
people in the form of energy rebates and tax cuts and to the 
nurses and fix the roads and all that. The point is, Mr. Speaker, 
they said that we were sitting on a slush fund, they called it; we 
were saving it for the next election. And they went so far — and 
it’s a matter of public record — as calling for a special 
legislative session to be called. To do what? To come in, to 
bring the money in, and to spend it. That’s what they said a year 
ago. 
 
Now fast forward to this year, Mr. Speaker. Now they come 
into the House and they go out to the media, and what do they 
say to the people this year? They say, oh, there is no money. 
 
So one minute, there’s all this money that we’re supposed to . . . 
that I’m sitting on apparently. I haven’t found it yet. One year, 
there’s all this money; the next year, all of a sudden there’s no 
money. Well which way is it? I mean it can be one way or it can 
be the other, but it can’t be both ways, Mr. Speaker. And the 
reality is when you talk out of both sides of your mouth at the 
same time, eventually you get caught out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I think, I think that’s what’s 
happening here. 
 
But now fast forward to last . . . the other day, Mr. Speaker, and 
then what we had was, we had first of all, the opposition saying 
well, there’s no money there. Now that’s their position. Then I 
said to the media, well, I thought we should change the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund to allow us to draw down the $300 million 
reserve and spend that on highways and fixing the schools and 
fixing the university buildings and giving some of it to the 
municipalities. 
 
And then the opposition critic came in — he had been saying 
there’s no money there — and all of a sudden he said, well why 
are you changing the legislation to allow you to access that 
money? Well that’s kind of strange, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How does that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — How does that work, one of the members 
asks. And it’s a good question because one minute, there’s no 
money there and then we’re back to, well, the money’s there 
after all. 
 
Well, the reality is, Mr. Speaker, as . . . Well, I’ll put it this 
way. There isn’t a person in this province, Mr. Speaker, that 
doesn’t know that when those people were in office they ran up 
a debt of a billion dollars a year which we have been trying to 
pay down. There’s nobody in the province that doesn’t know 
that, Mr. Speaker. And there’s nobody in this province that 
takes that opposition seriously when they come in and talk 
about fiscal responsibility, Mr. Speaker. Nobody takes that 
seriously at all. 
 
Now, I want to, I want — and to demonstrate this point, Mr. 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

 

Speaker — I just want to say that just as there should be 
accountability on the part of the government, there should be 
accountability on the part of the opposition. 
 
Now last year when we presented the budget, I estimated in the 
budget that the price of natural gas would be $5.35 for the year. 
What did the members opposite do? They came in — and 
they’re all running around like chickens with their heads cut off 
— and they said, oh my God, he’s underestimating the price of 
natural gas, and it’s because he wants to build up a big slush 
fund because we know that the price of natural gas isn’t going 
to go down. They said it’s going to stay high. They said we’re 
trying to build up this slush fund. 
 
Now of course what happened, Mr. Speaker — and I’m not 
taking any personal credit for this — but what happened was 
the price of natural gas did fall and it was more or less what we 
said it would be in the budget. 
 
Now did the opposition ever come forward and say, well, 
whoops we were wrong. No. No, what they did instead is they 
go on to the next item. 
 
So then they say — and I even heard a member say it this 
morning — they say you know what the government is doing? 
They say they’re overestimating potash revenues by tens of 
millions of dollars. They said it last week; one of them said it 
again this morning. 
 
Even though, Mr. Speaker, the industry has come forward, the 
analysts from the potash industry have come forward and 
they’ve said the government projections are probably correct. 
That’s what they’ve said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But undaunted, the experts in the opposition go on and they say, 
oh well, but the government then is fudging the numbers by 
overestimating the sales tax revenue. That’s what they said last 
week. I think somebody said it again today. And they keep 
saying it, Mr. Speaker, even though the analysts have come 
forward and said, well, no, it looks like the government’s 
projections are fairly reasonable. That’s what the analysts say, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what does it mean, Mr. Speaker? It means that what we 
have over there — and the public need to recognize this and I 
think they do — is a group of men and women that will say 
anything in order to do one thing, Mr. Speaker, in order to do 
one thing. And that is to obtain power. Because that is their one 
goal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(12:45) 
 
And the problem with people that have very little in the way of 
principle, nothing in the way of consistency is this, Mr. 
Speaker. The problem is that if you ever give power to them, 
then what you will have in Saskatchewan is the same thing that 
we presently have in the Province of British Columbia. You 
will be buying a pig in a poke, a bunch of people that come 
along, do one thing before an election, and do something after 
an election. 
 
And I would predict, Mr. Speaker, that if it ever came to pass 
that this group of individuals came to the treasury benches and 

to this side of the House — and it’s not going to happen — but 
if it did what you would see, Mr. Speaker, would be massive tax 
increases, because that’s what they would have to do to fund 
their promises. You would see massive firings of public 
servants at the same time, because that’s what you’d have to do. 
You would see a freeze to education. You would see a freeze to 
health care. And ultimately, Mr. Speaker, what you would see is 
the destruction of the public health care system and the 
two-tiered, American-style health care system, Mr. Speaker. 
Because that is what those people are all about when you really 
get down to the basics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And they would sell the Crown 
corporations to do it, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what they 
would do. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that you know it’s very strange 
to listen to the members opposite say that they’re going to vote 
against the budget, because what are they going to vote against? 
They’re going to vote against $90 million of capital 
construction for schools and universities. That’s what they’re 
going to vote against. 
 
They’re going to vote against this government’s plan to fix the 
roads, because that’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
going to vote against it. They’re going to vote against the 
building independence plan that is taking families off of 
welfare, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to vote against it. 
 
They’re going to vote against — I can hardly believe this one, 
Mr. Speaker — they’re going to vote against increased funding 
for the municipalities. They’re going to vote against that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I want to say a word about this, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Wood River was up this morning talking about the record 
of this government in the last 10 years. Well I’ll tell the member 
what the record of this government in the last 10 years is. 
 
The record of this government, Mr. Speaker, is taking this 
province from being one of the worst provinces in Canada when 
it comes to debt, to being one of the best, Mr. Speaker. The 
record of this government in the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, is a 
government that saw the economy of the province grow by 28 
per cent in the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the best 
records in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The record of this government on taxation, Mr. Speaker . . . 
What is the record? It is this: personal income taxes down 
one-third since 1993, Mr. Speaker; sales taxes down from 9 per 
cent to 6 per cent, Mr. Speaker; and the small-business tax, Mr. 
Speaker, down 40 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at this record. 
They talk about taxes, Mr. Speaker. Personal income tax down 
one-third, small-business taxes down by 40 per cent, sales taxes 
down by one-third. Now, Mr. Speaker, does anyone in the 
province seriously believe that these people could take office 
and have a better record than that? I don’t think so. 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem with the opposition and what they 
have to say is this: what they have to say just doesn’t add up, 
Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t add up. 
 
And when it comes to a budget, Mr. Speaker, we can listen to 
the negativity in the opposition, we can listen to the negativity 
in some aspects of the media, Mr. Speaker. But you know, I’m 
not going to listen to the opposition, I’m not going to listen to 
the negative parts of the media. I and my colleagues, Mr. 
Speaker, are going to listen to the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the people, Mr. Speaker, believe that 
we should build the schools and believe that we should fix the 
roads and believe that we should build the universities. That’s 
what we’re going to do — without their support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you hon. members. Many may wonder why my decorum 
suddenly improved in the House a few minutes ago. That’s 
because the four most important people in my life just entered. 
And that’s my wife Karen, and my three sons, David, Eric, and 
Connor. And they are down here for spring break which is why 
I haven’t been to a lot of meetings this week. I’ve been able to 
spend some quality time here. 
 
And my wife Karen, as we know, is a very powerful person and 
is also a very good student who learned from one of the better 
teachers in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what we’re doing now is just voting on a Bill to go into . . . 
sorry, a motion to go into the Committee of Finance so we’ll be 
ringing the bells and going. 
 
All hon. members please welcome my family. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it is now 
incumbent upon us to vote the motions with respect to the 
budget debate. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:53 until 12:54. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 23 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Toth Wakefield 
Stewart Bjornerud Eagles 
McMorris D’Autremont Bakken 
Wall Brkich Wiberg 
Weekes Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 

Nays — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
 
The division bells rang from 12:56 until 12:57. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 

Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Toth  
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Members this is a very 
important part of the business of the members and it must be 
heard and it should not be interrupted. And I ask everybody to 
observe that decorum. I will proceed with the vote. 
 
Wakefield Stewart Bjornerud 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Brkich 



April 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

 

Wiberg Weekes Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: —I wish everyone a good weekend and a safe 
drive home. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:02. 
 


