















































Hansard: April 23, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 April 23, 2002 
 

 

935

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — Building Independence Program 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 
to speak on this resolution. This is one that’s very important and 
very timely for all people of Saskatchewan, I think of all people 
of Canada. 
 
When we talk about poverty this is a huge issue. Last 
Wednesday when I was back in my constituency on some 
business, the evening, this was one that people talked about — 
the face of poverty in Idylwyld. And I think it’s one that we can 
all relate to right across this province. 
 
To me, I strongly endorse the idea, the initiative of building 
independence. I think this is one that speaks to people who are 
facing tough challenges and it speaks of the community where 
we support each other. And I do get worried about some of the 
things that were said today in the House. To me this issue really 
talks about dignity, respect, and about community, and how 
people become full members of their community and how we 
act as a community relating to other people. 
 
Before I get too much into that though, I do want to say that I 
am alarmed, I am really alarmed about the Sask Party’s 
discussion today, the opposition’s points that they’ve raised 
regarding this. The first thing I’d like to say is the simplistic 
point of view, as if it’s just about welfare. And this is much 
more than just welfare. 
 
We’re talking about different people who are trying to connect 
to their community in a meaningful way, but because of the 
situation they find themselves in they can’t do that. We’re 
talking about young people. Last Wednesday night I was 
talking to a young man who was facing challenges, a brilliant 
young man facing challenges of what it’s like to connect to our 
community but for various reasons he couldn’t do that. 
 
We’re talking about disabled people and how do they connect 
to our community and contribute in a meaningful way. But 
we’re also talking about families, families with two members at 
the head or just a single, single mom. Those are really important 
issues. 
 
So I get alarmed when I see the simplistic approach here about 
building independence. I’m also alarmed about the barriers, and 
it seemed this afternoon the only barrier that the opposition 
could identify was about taxation and more tax cuts would 
answer the question. 
 
And this is much more complicated about that. It’s about child 
care, it’s about supports, it’s about education, all of those 
things. And I want to talk a little bit more about that later, but I 
think those are important issues, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not just 
about a simple tax cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, too, I think this is an important issue and it’s one 
that we shouldn’t play too much politics with. And I am really 
proud and I think it’s quite an accomplishment that for 88 

months this province has had a reduction in the social assistance 
numbers. 
 
And yet we heard this afternoon that people were questioning 
how accurate those were; and if they have different numbers I 
would sure like to hear them. But I think we need to be fair and 
say that we are making progress in this area. This is very, very 
important. 
 
What I really found alarming was the discussion today about 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Three-alarm? Well here’s the 
fourth alarm — D-day. Mr. Speaker, what is this D-day? What 
is the D-day that the Leader of the Opposition speaks about? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if D-day is denial day — denial 
that there’s poverty in this world and that we really have a 
challenge and we have a responsibility. And I get worried when 
I think of what the other . . . the opposition will do on denial 
day — denial day. Is that when they will deny that there’s 
poverty in this world and then cut the Department of Social 
Services by $50 million? 
 
This is their plan — to cut it by $50 million and they will do it 
because they’re denying the existence of poverty. And that 
really worries me. It worries me because this sets up the 
scenario of cutting $50 million. They cut the taxes. This is what 
they say will bring in the jobs. 
 
But how do we pay for the other services? Is this the first step 
to selling off the Crowns, selling off SaskTel? Is this their 
answer for building independence? This is a worry to me and 
this is what people in Idylwyld and right across this province 
are worrying about. What does it mean about building 
independence for these people? So I am really worried about 
this. 
 
But before I go too far this afternoon, I was reading a book 
about what is poverty and I would like to quote from this book. 
It’s a book by the National Welfare Council. Now: 
 

Poverty is usually measured in terms of income, but people 
can also be impoverished by the lack of access to other 
resources, by social exclusion and . . . the stress of 
insecurity. 

 
And that, Mr. Speaker, too many people face every night and 
every day in this province. And this is what I’m worried about 
— our province becoming a province of haves and have-nots. 
And this is why the building independence initiatives is so 
important and that we endorse it, that we realize this is a 
complex issue and we need to make sure that we put our best 
resources towards supporting families, young people, and 
disabled people in this area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — 
 

Lack of access to other resources is often closely associated 
with poverty. Safe, adequate, and affordable housing is 
critical. It’s not just a matter of physical shelter (it says) 
because housing is also a site of economic activity where 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

food is produced, children are raised, self-employment can 
be generated and community ties are built. 

 
Once again the politics of the exclusion is not, is not acceptable. 
We need to be able to connect to the community. It’s very, very 
important. 
 

For adults and children, poverty can also mean loneliness 
and exclusion from sports, recreation, culture and other 
activities around which individual confidence, friendships 
and other positive social relationships are built. For 
children (Mr. Speaker), especially, this can have 
long-lasting effects. 

 
And again this is why we need to endorse the building 
initiatives . . . building independence initiatives. It’s very, very 
important. 
 
Now this, this book was actually a national publication and it 
was released just in this winter. So it talks about how does 
poverty cost Canadians. Well we know it costs in terms of 
money, but it also costs in terms of human misery and it doesn’t 
make good economic sense. 
 
Now they go on to talk about four or five main issues that 
where we can feel the cost in our communities, and the first 
one, Mr. Speaker, is in health. Health is a big issue for people 
facing poverty every day. Again and again population health 
researchers I quote have shown the importance of income in 
social status. Even when people have all the basics, such as 
adequate food and shelter, the higher their income and status, 
the better people’s health is. 
 
It goes on, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

At birth, children from the poorest neighbourhoods in 
Canada have a life expectancy between 2 and 5½ years 
shorter than that of children from the wealthiest 
neighbourhoods. Children from the poorest neighbourhoods 
can also expect to spend more of their lives with disabilities 
and other health problems. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this really shows how important it is that we 
take the building initiatives program seriously. This is a critical 
issue. It goes on to say, not only for children is it a problem, it’s 
also for the parents. 
 

And parents at the lower end of the scale showed the 
effects of living in poverty. They suffered increased stress 
and poorer functioning with their children and higher levels 
of depression, both of which are bound to have serious 
effects on the capacity of parents to take the best care of 
their children. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a critical issue and we need to support this 
initiative. 
 
Again, and this is one that we all face and we talk a lot about, is 
the high cost of justice in terms of the role poverty plays in it. 
 

Spending on justice and crime is another area where we are 
putting a great deal of money . . . 

 

Now this pushes young people, and particularly young people, 
into crime instead of helping them stay out of it. And it’s 
largely related to poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a well-known fact in Saskatchewan we’re 
really wrestling with this problem, and it’s one that we have to 
take seriously. We know we have one of the highest rates of 
young people put into jail or incarceration, and a lot of that is 
caused because of the issue around poverty. And in those who 
are arrested, detained without bail, and given the harshest 
sentences are people with low incomes. And they don’t have 
family connections, education, steady employment and other 
labels of respectability that will help them out in these times. 
And it’s really important that we give them support. 
 
Again, another issue, another area of high cost in terms of 
poverty is human rights and human development. Now in terms 
of . . . this is an interesting quote in terms of social exclusion. 
The report on the Royal Commission of Aboriginal Peoples: 
 

The costs associated with the economic marginalization of 
Aboriginal people (in Canada) were estimated to be at $7.5 
billion in 1996. Of this, $5.8 billion was estimated as the 
cost of foregone production because Aboriginal people are 
not fully able to participate to their potential in the 
economy and $1.7 billion for extra expenditures on 
remedial programs to cope with social problems. 

 
Again, a huge cost. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the one that I think is truly tragic is focused 
around child development. And this is because children are our 
future, and this is where we need to intervene so that the cycle 
of poverty can be broken, so they can be given the resources to 
make their lives as full as they can. And that revolves around 
health, revolves around education, and it revolves around the 
social skills so they can feel like they can contribute. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what do we need to break out of this 
poverty? And this to me really parallels how this province is 
tackling poverty through building independence. It talks about 
leadership and political will, and we see that leadership and 
political will, especially in the Department of Social Services 
and how they’ve worked over the past three years fine-tuning 
this program so today we can feel pretty proud of an excellent 
program that enables people to connect to their communities by 
being full members of their community. 
 
It talks about a comprehensive and holistic planning process. 
Well this is a really good example of how we work together 
with communities, planning ways to beat poverty, and also 
building on success. 
 
Here’s a three-year story of how we built continually, refining 
and refining a program that truly meets the needs of people who 
are facing some of the harshest challenges in our society. 
 
And the last point these people make is that you must start with 
families with young children. Again this is the best place to 
start. It’s the one where if you put resources you can see the 
best results — maybe not tomorrow or the next day but in the 
long run. And we see that through education, opportunities for 
the future. And that’s really the key. 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say it seems that today when 
we were talking, the opposition seemed to focus on the fact this 
seemed to be an urban issue. And I was surprised that they 
didn’t talk about how people in rural Saskatchewan were facing 
serious issues as well in terms of the working poor, declining 
. . . declining income, that type of thing. 
 
And so I was surprised at that because this is a program that’s 
designed to meet all needs, or to meet the needs of all people in 
Saskatchewan if they’re part of the working poor facing issues. 
 
So what are the three parts? We have the Saskatchewan Child 
Benefit program, that’s critical; the family health benefits 
program ; and the training allowance program. That’s really, 
really important. So this is a well-thought-out, well-thought-out 
program. 
 
Now I’m particularly delighted to see that Social Services is 
taking the lead and refining this program one step further by 
announcing four specific initiatives to help with people on 
social assistance. The call centre, job first, first steps group 
sessions, and then transition planning services. These things 
together help people connect with their community through 
meaningful employment. It’s a first step in the right direction. 
 
And these four things are designed to work as additional job 
supports. It supports their families, youth at risk, and people 
with disabilities. 
 
First of all the call centre, Mr. Speaker, is the first point of 
contact for people for information and services, so that they can 
find out what kind of services there are so they don’t have to 
take the next step and go on social assistance. Here the job first 
sessions, which provide low-income people with access to job 
opportunities — it’s a first choice before becoming involved in 
the welfare system. 
 
(19:15) 
 
As well they’re providing the first steps group sessions, which 
provides new clients with information about other programs and 
how they might serve as an alternative to welfare. Clients also 
receive information about social assistance and their rights and 
responsibilities under the social assistance program. And as 
well, the transition planning services which are very important. 
They allow workers more time to assist clients with planning 
for independence. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I talked earlier about the opposition’s 
simplistic views about barriers. There are many barriers for 
people getting their first job or getting jobs in a meaningful 
way. What are some of these barriers? Well it’s child care and 
including the whole area around early childhood development, 
improving . . . improved standard and affordability of housing, 
and I was particularly delighted to hear the initiatives around 
low-income housing mentioned in the budget. 
 
Expanded employment and training supports, that’s very 
important; opportunities and supports available for people with 
disabilities, recognizing that there are specific ways we can help 
people with disabilities; and support for youth to ensure they 
have the education and skills to join the workforce. This is 
important that we recognize young people. We need their 

support . . . we need support so they can enter the work market 
in a meaningful way. And the northern initiatives — very 
important. Okay. 
 
So these are some of the barriers. How are we going to meet 
these barriers? Well through job coaching, mentorship, 
post-employment supports, training on the job, and working 
with communities to develop connections and linkages so that 
there . . . so people have those supports so they can connect. 
 
Now my colleagues on the government side have talked 
specifically around budget initiatives and I just want to review 
those. So here’s, in this budget, we’ve allotted about $1.3 
million for employment support projects. 
 
Job services for families — $400,000 to assist families on social 
assistance to secure and maintain employment. 
 
Jobs services for youth — $380,000. And this is to assist 
high-risk youth under 18 years of age with transition to adult 
and for independence. And this program will offer a package of 
enhanced employment supports including financial support to 
obtain adequate housing arrangements, job coaching, on-the-job 
training, and job readiness and life skills. 
 
As well, a half a million dollars — $500,000 — in new funding 
to assist persons with disabilities currently receiving social 
assistance so that they can feel part of the labour market. And 
this is really, really critical. So we are meeting those needs and 
I think it really is important. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know earlier on in the day we’ve alluded 
to a couple of articles where the opposition, the Leader of the 
Opposition, has talked about some of these . . . what his view is 
on building independence and around his way of dealing with 
people and poverty. And again he would say that he would: 
 

. . . get employable people living on social assistance back 
in the workplace by imposing a “D-day” on their assistance 
cheques. 

 
And so again, this D-day. What is this D-day? 
 
Now in this article in The Leader-Post, on October 2, 2001, 
Sask Party lists out its platform and here it talks about: 
 

. . . on the chopping block is the $25 million to $50 million 
he wants to trim off spending by changing the welfare 
system. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this alarms me and concerns me and I 
know it concerns many people in this province. What does this 
mean . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Discontinue. Discontinue 
day. There you go. All right. 
 
In the same article just right above it he was talking about how 
we should not be ideologically bound to maintain the Crowns as 
they are now. So here we keep seeing this Crowns and cutting 
the social services and I wonder what are the connections here. 
 
Further on in this article when he’s talking about 25 million, 
$50 million off of the welfare system, Ken Rasmussen, assistant 
dean from the University of Regina Faculty of Administration is 



938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

quoted as saying: 
 

“The talk of spending increases and tax reductions are 
really all smoke and mirrors,” Rasmussen said. 
 
Whatever the promises, the Saskatchewan Party’s platform 
is little more than a high school popularity contest when the 
next election is called, he said. 

 
Again promises and promises, and how does it all add up? It 
really worries me. It concerns me. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what are the accomplishments of this 
government? Well we really are tackling poverty head-on and 
we’re looking at this challenge. It’s a real challenge and we’re 
not denying it. It’s there. But because of this head-on approach 
we can say that we’ve had 88 months, consecutive months of 
decreasing numbers of families on social assistance and that’s a 
key, key thing. 
 
Our philosophy is more integrated. It’s a holistic approach to 
building the capacity of individuals and families for 
independence and self-reliance and it’s one that emphasizes the 
principles of inclusion and citizenship, not of exclusion and 
haves and have-nots. It’s really important that we include all 
members of our community. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that another key part is 
behind every number for our government is the face of someone 
who has returned to the workforce and has gotten back their 
dignity as a productive human being. And we celebrate each 
and every one. This is critical. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I just want to read this quote 
from . . . 
 

Poverty is costing all of us dearly. Some costs, those of 
personal human suffering, are simply incalculable but they 
are . . . (nevertheless) preventable. Other costs, the more 
economic ones, may still be very difficult to calculate 
precisely. What really matters, . . . (though) is not that we 
put an exact number on the cost of poverty. What we as a 
society need is to set clear goals, compare the benefits to 
the costs over the short and the long term, evaluate our 
progress and understand that we get what we pay for. The 
foundation for a sustainable high quality of life does not 
come cheaply. But let us invest wisely now, for the public 
good and the positive results that will benefit all Canadians. 

 
And I think that applies for people here in Saskatchewan. We 
realize this is an important issue and I appreciate the fact that 
this government has struggled hard for three years to build such 
a fine and well meaning . . . a program that hits right on target, 
building independence. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would stand in favour of the main motion but 
not in favour of the amendment. So thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to enter debate today. It’s been very interesting as 
the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld has mentioned. The 

observations he made with the Saskatchewan Party members 
have contributed towards this debate, and I’ve certainly noticed 
some very interesting comments coming from the government 
side of the House also that I’d like to mention as my address 
goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion put forward speaks of 10,000 fewer 
children growing up on social assistance in the province. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I remember when building independence was 
initiated by the government of the day and it was applauded by 
a great number of people. And it was applauded because in fact 
most people believed that people in an independent state are 
much better than being dependent on the state. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I applauded this but it does stand to reason 
that if the building independence program with the employment 
supplement part of it is going to in fact be feasible and 
workable, that employment supplement area or strategy has got 
to work. 
 
That’s very logical. However I’ve been hearing from a good 
number of people throughout the province that are bringing in 
complaints about employment supplement, about them not 
being able to in fact draw from employment supplement when 
they feel that they are entitled to it. 
 
So what good does it do, Mr. Speaker? What good does it do to 
bring in a program when in fact the people out there in the 
province that are expecting that they are qualifying for this 
program are indeed not doing so a good portion of the time? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from a letter from one of my 
constituents regarding the employment supplement programs. 
Part of her letter sums up by saying this: 
 

If these programs such as employment supplement are out 
there to help and assist low income families such as 
ourselves until we can get back on our feet, and we are 
under the understanding that this is what these 
Saskatchewan programs are here for, yet we have been 
turned away from all of the programs. We are very 
discouraged and also becoming awfully stressed out, 
wondering where the next dollar is going to come from just 
to live, let alone fill the order that is outstanding for our 
children’s needs. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, here we have a program replacing the original 
program with children being entitled to social assistance. Here 
we have a program that is not necessarily and always working 
for the people of the province. So, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the 
government to make sure that when they put forward a program 
to the people of Saskatchewan, to the families of this province, 
that they in fact are fair with these people and they do divvy out 
to the people the kind of funding that is put in place for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, child poverty is a very serious issue. No one is 
going to dispute that, and no one will dispute the fact that the 
best poverty fighter is a job, and a good paying job. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that this government does not 
have a good record when it comes to creating jobs in this 
province. The NDP’s (New Democratic Party) ’99 election 
platform promised more jobs. In fact the members opposite 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

 

know that the NDP promised to create 30,000 new jobs. But 
reality is, Mr. Speaker — and this reality is based on fact — the 
NDP have lost 24,700 jobs for this province, almost as many as 
they promised to create. 
 
And so I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, exactly where these 
people who are making a transition from social assistance to the 
job market, where are they going? We’ve lost that number of 
jobs. Where are they going to find the jobs? And I’m wondering 
what tracking mechanism the government has in place to 
determine whether these people are gaining permanent, 
full-time employment in this province or whether they’re 
actually leaving the province. 
 
When people work, Mr. Speaker, they gain valuable experience 
and skills that can lead to better jobs, hopefully allowing them 
to eventually break the welfare cycle and build independence. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party agrees with that philosophy, and so we 
do agree fundamentally that the general concept of the building 
independence program is a good idea. And we realize that the 
barriers to employment must be addressed if people are truly to 
find financial independence. So we are applauding efforts to 
improve education and training for social service recipients 
when they happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier in this session, the member from 
Cannington referred some questions to the Minister of Social 
Services, and these questions were about rate increases to the 
general public or to businesses for services rendered by the 
department in this 2002-2003 fiscal year. 
 
And so in response to that question by the minister from 
Cannington, he received from the department this answer. The 
first one was on the graduated rent scale that will be introduced 
for calculating social housing rents. And I ask the minister, or 
the member rather, from Saskatoon Idylwyld to pay attention 
because he just mentioned that social housing was important in 
order to help people that were struggling in this province, 
people that were low-income. 
 
What did the minister, his very own minister in his government, 
replied to the member from Cannington was that there may be 
or there will be a rent increase for social housing beginning 
September 1, 2002. 
 
So here we’re talking about the issue of affordable housing. 
People in low income brackets have been for some time, for 10 
years, addressing this, talking to this government about this 
very important factor, and what do we have? An NDP socialist 
government that is now going to increase the rent on some 
social housing. Now I hope that the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld has paid attention to that because this is an answer that 
was given by your very own Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other question that was relayed to the Minister 
of Social Services is: 
 

What is the projected increase or decrease in projected 
revenue taken in by your department through these fees and 
charges in 2002-2003 fiscal year? 

 
So through the graduated rent scale, according to the Minister 

of Social Services’ answer, there would be an estimated 
increase of $1.7 million. That seems to be $1.7 million now that 
people in low income brackets are not going to be having to 
their advantage. 
 
(19:30) 
 
One other question that was very interesting to me, that our 
member from Cannington put forward, was, what service 
reductions or program cuts will occur in 2002-2003 in this 
department? The work placement program will be eliminated, 
so skills training benefit reduced $2.2 million. I mean, how is 
this supposed to be better for placing people in jobs, for job 
placement? This government, Mr. Speaker, contradicts 
themselves. Their programs and their announcements of 
programs contradict in fact what they’re really doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so what we agree fundamentally that the building 
programs . . . independence program, rather, is a good idea, we 
do have to take issue with the government on just in fact how 
they are putting this program forward and how they are 
behaving as they are making people of the province believe that 
they are going to be benefiting and that they will be able to stay 
off social assistance, when in fact the opposite is turning out to 
be true. 
 
The loss of jobs in this province . . . With the loss of jobs in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, I wonder just how sustainable this 
decline in welfare rolls is going to be in the future. And I’ve 
noticed that since the inception of the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement the government’s budget for this plan 
has steadily increased — another contradictory happening here 
— which means there are more low-income people in the 
province who need help. 
 
If it wasn’t for this plan there is a good chance that the number 
of welfare cases in this province would be increasing. So on the 
one hand, the employment supplement is a good thing if it 
keeps people off the welfare rolls or if it allows them to make 
the transition to the workforce. But on the other hand, as I’ve 
said, Mr. Speaker, these people still need government 
assistance, and the only way to make them independent is to 
have a healthy economy with good paying jobs so they can 
support their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to highlight a case of a 
woman again that had . . . her situation was brought to my 
attention. She wrote to us saying that she was a single mom 
with three children, she was on welfare but upgraded her 
education, and she was fortunate enough to find a job. However 
her gross monthly income, which is used to determine whether 
or not she qualifies for the employment supplement, is just over 
the limit of $2,000 per month, so she does not qualify for the 
program. Her children need glasses, dental work, and 
medication and she gets no help with any of these things 
because she is just over the gross income cap. So she does not 
qualify for family health benefits. 
 
And she writes to us and she indicates that she was better off on 
welfare because by the time she pays her rent and 
transportation, food for her children, her utility bills, and other 
costs of living, she believes that she’s worse off. Worse off 
because if she earned a few dollars less on her gross income she 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

would receive the employment supplement, which no income 
tax is paid on, and she would receive benefits for her children 
from the family health benefits program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that programs need capitations 
and the government doesn’t have unlimited resources. 
However, the reason I bring this case up is because this 
government must also consider how other policies, things such 
as power and energy rates, affect people who are on low 
incomes and affect people’s abilities to be independent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just today I had a phone call from my constituency 
of a low-income family that spoke to me, almost in desperation, 
of the 43 per cent increase in SaskEnergy rates, wondering how 
they were possibly going to make it go in this province with all 
the increased rates. Now these rates don’t only apply, Mr. 
Speaker, to medium- or high-income families; they apply to 
low-income families also, and low-income families are having 
to contend with them. 
 
Let’s look at some of the other things, Mr. Speaker, that 
possibly the NDP government should be looking at when 
they’re considering assisting people on low income or people 
that are trying to get into the job market. Presently, Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government, along with the provincial 
government, are negotiating talking about a commonwealth 
migrant workers program. 
 
Now we all know that in this province First Nations people, 
Aboriginal people are having a more difficult time getting into 
the workplace. The commonwealth migrant workers program, 
Mr. Speaker, will in fact assist people into training — mostly 
immigrants the way it sounds — into training in order to work 
at the intensified livestock operations. But First Nations people, 
Mr. Speaker, according to the information I have, seem to be 
sidelined with eligibility to get into this program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has talked to 
some First Nations people about this and he made some 
remarks that were not very hopeful for First Nations people to 
be able to receive entitlement to getting into this program. And 
I just ask him today as he sits across from me to make sure that 
he considers First Nations people’s eligibility for this program 
because it would help them a great deal. 
 
We’re talking about helping people into the job market and off 
of social assistance and this would be one very, very beneficial 
way to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I close I just want to refer to some remarks 
from members opposite about the fact that rural families also 
are eligible for the employment supplement program. And I 
want to remind those members — I think it was the member 
from Saskatoon Greystone, as well as the member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld — that mentioned that the Saskatchewan 
Party, or members opposite in opposition, did not consider 
speaking of farm families that need to have some supplement, 
that need to have assistance. 
 
Well I would remind those members — and I don’t believe the 
member from Saskatoon Idylwyld was here when this building 
independence program was announced — before it was 
finalized, there was no provision for farm families to receive the 

employment supplement. And it was only, Mr. Speaker, 
because members of the opposition, and I was one of them, 
brought up to the now Premier, who was then the minister of 
Social . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — It was the then minister of Social Services that 
hadn’t even considered farm families. And had it not been for 
the opposition bringing up the need to look at farm families 
who were in need of employment supplement because of low 
prices for farm commodities, because of the many factors that 
can cause net profits or even gross profits for farmers to go 
down, that government of the day, that NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker, would not have even considered farm families. 
 
And if they don’t want to listen to this, they can go back in 
Hansard and they can look at the Hansard debate and find out 
that this is in fact very true. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I cannot and will not agree with the motion 
put forward by the member from Saskatoon Greystone, but I 
will certainly condone and agree with the amendment that was 
made by the opposition. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be making some comments of 
course on the success that we had in the building independence 
program as well as dealing with the . . . and in that sense 
dealing with the issue of poverty in this province. 
 
I’ll be making some comments in relation to what others have 
said about this province, you know, some information in 
relation to the policy as well as the program, and also the record 
of the impact of this program. 
 
But I’ll also make some comments because I heard some 
statements by the Sask Party member from Humboldt and also 
from Saskatchewan Rivers, and I would say that the 
information that she gave just recently was not true, not 
accurate. And when I look at the record this hits . . . this poverty 
not only is an improvement in northern Saskatchewan, it’s not 
only an improvement in the cities, it’s an improvement in the 
rural areas. For that member to come out and say that it didn’t 
talk about the farm families is completely inaccurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — For the record I would like to state this for what 
other people have said from the province of Alberta. Of course 
the member from Saskatchewan Rivers was getting a little bit 
worried about being called the Alberta envy party and made that 
point, you know, during his speech this afternoon. But of course 
they’re always saying that everything is great in Alberta and 
nothing happens here in Saskatchewan. It’s a point the 
Saskatchewan Party makes which is that they’re not very, very 
proud of this province; they’re always talking about Alberta. 
 
Now this is what they say. Not everything in Alberta, of course, 
not everything about Alberta is definitely wrong, and of course 
I see this editorial that was written in Edmonton. Now this 
editorial was written in Edmonton on June 18, 2001. You know 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

 

a few years after our . . . (inaudible) . . . strategy on our building 
independence program, and this is what they said. It’s called 
“The Saskatchewan Advantage.” It says, quote: 
 

The soul of a nation, or any other group of people can be 
seen in how it treats the most disadvantaged. 

 
It also says, quote, and of course this is a report from the 
Canadian Council on Social Development: 
 

(Saskatchewan) Between 1993 and 1998, Saskatchewan cut 
the incidence of poverty among single-parent families from 
51 to 20 per cent. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And he also says that from a values viewpoint 
. . . this is what the writer had to say: 
 

Eliminating child poverty is crucial for any society that 
respects the dignity of all people. 

 
Now when I looked at that, I wanted to of course cut into the 
aspect of the record. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t yell at us. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Now the person says, don’t yell at us. To me, 
I’m very proud of this province. I can yell on what we succeed 
in regards to this province while the Saskatchewan Party 
remains quiet about achievements that we do have. 
 
Now this is what . . . this is what I’d have to say in regards to 
the caseload. Now on the caseload, a lot of people don’t realize 
that the welfare rates have dropped. The numbers have dropped 
substantially, not only in regards to the urban areas and the rural 
areas but also in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The member mentioned something about Aboriginal people, 
and of course in northern Saskatchewan over 70 per cent of the 
people are Aboriginal. And in that sense, a lot of the record in 
regards to the success of our program shows very clearly that it 
impacts Aboriginal people, contrary to the statement the 
member from Humboldt stated. 
 
Now when I look at it, we have approximately . . . in 1994 there 
was 41,000 cases in this province. This year in March there was 
30,815 cases, a decline of 25 per cent. But in terms of each case 
there’s of course beneficiaries. There are children in the 
families, and when you count the adults and the beneficiaries 
and the children, the number rises. 
 
In 1994 we had 83,120 beneficiaries and that dropped to 56,074 
by March of 2001. This is 27,000 less people on the welfare roll 
than we had in 1994. So it is good news not only for the people 
of the cities but the rural and northern areas as well. 
 
(19:45) 
 
On a more detailed level on stats, the member was talking about 
the Athabasca region so I’ll pick one community on the 
Athabasca region. And what we do have . . . in just the year 
from March 2001 to March 2002, last year in Buffalo Narrows 

the caseload was 602. It dropped by over seven and a half per 
cent to 556. Good news in Buffalo Narrows. 
 
Now in my constituency, we have La Ronge. In a year, we had 
. . . last year, 414 people on caseloads, this year we had in 
March 358, a drop of thirteen and a half per cent. Now that to 
me is what you call a successful program in the war against 
poverty. 
 
Now I notice that the members from across, and I notice this 
idea, the war on poverty idea came from the United States, you 
know, during the post-’60s period. And I notice that when the 
Grant Devine government came into play, they of course had 
not a war on poverty. They had a war on the poor. I mean they 
hired special police to go chasing the poor with Grant Schmidt. 
So all they did was go after the poor, assuming that 13 billion, 
the 15 billion that they spent going in the hole was going to the 
poor which was completely wrong because in many cases, it 
was tremendous amount of mis-expenditures on the GigaTexts 
in the business side to many other areas of special . . . to some 
of their friends in their own regions. 
 
Now when I look at this . . . I’d like to quote directly from the 
Saskatchewan Party policy when I talk about the Saskatchewan 
Party because some people say, well it’s good to talk about the 
fact that the Sask Party changed its name so that . . . They didn’t 
like to be called the old Tories, not that they were really 
ashamed of what they did but it wouldn’t be a good vote-getter 
if they were still called the PCs (Progressive Conservative). 
 
Now what I see here is a Saskatchewan Party policy, and it 
says, and I quote. This is what Hermanson told The 
Leader-Post, and it’s a quote from October 1 of last year, of 
2001. It says: 
 

Also on the chopping block is the 25 million to 50 million 
he wants to trim off spending by chasing the welfare 
system. 

 
So he was going to take 50 million people away from the 
poorest of the poor in this province. Now I’m listening to the 
speeches this week about seniors and the poor, and you could 
. . . it sounds like all of a sudden they’re compassionate. But 
who believes them when you know that this is what their 
Saskatchewan Party policy was in October 2 of 2001? 
 
Of course somebody that’s listening in will say well, that’s last 
year. We must have a new policy; the Saskatchewan Party must 
have a new policy. Well here’s the one that was done on 
Thursday, March 21, 2002. I’ll say that again, March 21. It 
seems to be that it’s only less than a month ago that he made 
this comment. 
 
Now talk about the war on poverty, and the war on welfare 
recipients, this is what . . . and I quote from the Humboldt 
Journal, from the member for Humboldt. This is what 
Hermanson said: 
 

. . . get employable people living on social assistance back 
in the workplace by imposing a “D-day” on their assistance 
cheques. 

 
Now listen to the words on this: 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

. . . by imposing a “D-day” on their assistance cheques. 
 
Now, that to me is a war on the poor. And this is the type of a 
strategy that the Saskatchewan Party has followed in the 
footsteps of their old friends, the Devine PCs, and Grant 
Schmidt who used to send the welfare cops out there to chase 
around in the . . . and I don’t know, but from all over the place 
in regards to the province. From north rural areas and the urban 
areas, and making, you know, special . . . hiring special people 
in the bureaucracy to go and chase people down. 
 
So that’s the record in regards to the Sask Party. Now I know 
that people would like to get at those . . . at the number that I 
gave in regards to the drop on the number of welfare 
beneficiaries in this province, so I’ll say them again. 
 
In 1994 we had 83,120 beneficiaries in regards to the welfare 
system. And in March of this year we had 56,074 —a drop of 
27,056 — 88 months of welfare numbers dropping in this 
province. 
 
Now when you look at the facts, Mr. Speaker, there’s many 
other programs that we have done. We’ve had the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement, and it helps 
lower-income people to do . . . from their wages, their hard 
earned wages, they have money from self-employment. And in 
many cases, you know, the costs are there for them to deal with, 
and there’s related costs of going to work and so on. So we 
have a top-up amount of money that we provide so that their 
subsistence basis is a lot better. 
 
We also have provincial training allowance because everybody 
knows that a lot of people prefer to have a training paycheque 
than a welfare cheque over the long run. And in many cases it 
provides that independence of getting out of welfare, getting the 
training, and moving forward. And in that sense we have this 
provincial training allowance. 
 
We also have the child benefit program which assists the lower 
income families on raising their children. We have basic food, 
health, clothing, and personal needs. 
 
On top of it all we have, of course, the special program in 
relation to health, and we have the health benefits going out to a 
lot of the working poor. And in that sense, our program is one 
of the best in Canada. And as our member says that we are 
indeed the best. And in many cases from where we were at with 
the police approach of the Devine PCs — later changing their 
name to the Saskatchewan Party — and now the Saskatchewan 
Party is saying much the same thing on adding a D-day on 
assistance payments. 
 
It shows why in many cases a lot of people, whether it is seniors 
or the poor, they don’t trust what the Saskatchewan Party has to 
say, because they know what the whole strategy is, because all 
they ever talk about is cut taxes, cut taxes. As they talk to the 
business community, that’s what they say. When they talk to 
people out in public, they say, oh we’ll spend money on that. 
Spend money, and that’s exactly what the Devine strategy was. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess in regards to a commentary on the 
North, there was some comments made by the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. I’d like to say this. In the past 10 years, 

when the welfare rates went up during the Devine period . . . the 
welfare rates have gone down during our time. And we’ve also 
improved our employment records. 
 
In the mines, we used to have approximately 500 people 
working in the mines, and we topped it up a couple of years ago 
and went as high as about 1,000 people working in the mines, 
of which over 80 per cent were Aboriginal people. And again 
that was a top level strategy. 
 
On the business development side, we included the $20 million 
worth of contracts that they used to have during the Devine 
Tory years, to over $200 million worth of contracts to help out 
not only in regards to the employment side but the business 
entrepreneurial strategy as well. 
 
And I must say that the training side was very important on our 
North. When we come into government there was 
approximately 1,000 people that were on post-secondary 
education. And now last year we had over 2,500 people in 
post-secondary education in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So again, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to make some 
comments in regards to supporting of course our motion and 
also against their amendment. And I think that in many cases I 
would like to close off by saying this. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I made a quick summary in Cree and 
of course members from the NDP and the coalition government 
said, egosi, egosi. And of course for the members, for the public 
at large it means hear, hear, or it’s good, you know, what it is 
that you are saying. 
 
So again, I support our motion and go against their amendment, 
and now with that I’d like to move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Motion No. 6 — Loss of Confidence 
in Premier and Cabinet 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think this is really 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I’m always . . . (inaudible) . . . that as MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) we need to speak on 
from time to time. The one we have tonight I think has become 
more critical as time goes on, and I’d like to explain why it’s 
become so critical. 
 
But before I do that, I do need to read the motion, and the 
motion is as follows: 
 

That this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan have 
lost confidence in the current Premier and cabinet. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago when we went 
around the province and we visited various people, they would 
say: why are these NDP doing this? Why do these socialists 
have these ideas? And then the questions changed after a year 
or so, and they said to the Saskatchewan Party, what kind of 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

 

plans do you have? And we told them and they liked it. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, we just finished off some 40-some 
meetings across the province. And not as a Premier’s little bus 
tour went where they went and got a quick picture taken and 
tried very hard to get a picture in the paper — which usually 
wasn’t very successful — and then they’d run down the street a 
little bit. They were so hard pressed, so hard pressed, Mr. 
Speaker, to find people to talk to that when I was in the office in 
Prince Albert from the minister of . . . or the MLA from Sask 
Rivers, who walks in there but one of the NDP MLAs on the 
Premier’s bus tour. Couldn’t find anyone to talk to. He thought 
surely the Sask Party MLAs would at least be civil enough to 
him, he could come walking in and talk to us. And we did; we 
did. And then we showed him the door and he climbed back on 
the bus and left. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, in those 40-some meetings — 
in those 40-some meetings — people asked us what our plans 
were. We told them. And there’s been a real change in what 
people are saying now. They start off saying, why are these 
socialists doing these crazy things? Then they said, what are the 
ideas the Saskatchewan Party have? Now they’re asking, 
when’s the next election? We get that everywhere we go. 
When’s the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I was at a fundraiser for Sask Rivers in 
Prince Albert a couple of weeks ago. And we had one or two 
people who spoke to the group and as soon as the word election 
was mentioned, there was a round of applause because people 
are waiting, they’re begging for the next election to get rid of 
these people. Because for years —for years — they’ve asked, 
why are these socialists doing these crazy things? 
 
Now they know there’s another option. They know what our 
plans are; they like those plans; they want the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence. 
 
I need to bring something to the attention of the members of the 
House. The recession sinks Saskatchewan economy. This is the 
root and centre of why the people of Saskatchewan want an 
election, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan economy is sunk. We 
had a recession. 
 
What happened in the rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker? Did they 
have a recession? No, they didn’t; no, they didn’t. 
 
The Saskatoon paper did a very good job when they outlined 
this. They put up a set of graphs, Mr. Speaker. And on those 
graphs they showed what was happening in other provinces. 
And you have the line that’s there which means the economy at 
that particular point didn’t grow and didn’t shrink. Every single 
province, including the one, the Maritimers that we make so 
much fun of, their economies grew this last year. Only one 
province had a negative growth —Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m proud of this province, Mr. Speaker. Every member on this 
side is proud of this province. But we are ashamed of the job 

this group across is doing, where they’ve led this province. The 
only province in Canada to have negative growth — the only 
province. 
 
And it wasn’t as if there wasn’t a drought in Manitoba, as if 
there wasn’t a drought in Alberta. Oil prices affected both the 
same way. Even British Columbia, where these people are now 
talking about British Columbia that had that NDP government 
that ran the whole province into the dirt. In fact is, if I’m right, I 
think the past premier there is in a few problems of his own 
with how he ran government. After that whole long session, do 
you even recall when Mrs. Barrett’s fat boy was in charge? All 
of these individuals, they ran that province into the ground. And 
yet, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the reports, British Columbia 
did better than Saskatchewan in spite of all the things that are 
happening there. 
 
This NDP government, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t have a clue what 
to do. They have no hope. They have no plan. This morning in 
question period, Mr. Speaker, we got up and we asked questions 
to the Minster of Health with what he’s doing with the seniors, 
and his only answer was sort of, well what’s your plan? 
 
Surely when you’re in government, you’re in government to 
govern. But not this NDP group over there. They’re not here to 
govern. They’re here to take their cheques home and hope that 
no one catches them at it. The people of this province have 
caught them at it, and they want another election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — They have absolutely no idea where to go. I 
recall the speeches we’ve had over the last numbers of weeks 
and years that I’ve heard from the member from Cumberland. 
Has he ever presented a plan for this province? Not one single 
time has he presented a plan. 
 
Over all the years that I’ve heard his speeches, it’s been a 
diatribe against this, that, and the other thing. But does he set 
forth a plan and say, this is what we’re going to do? He has 
never done that, not one time. After he’s been on his feet with 
that kind of diatribe for about 30 minutes, 45 minutes, then he’s 
at a loss for what to say, and he slips back into the ’80s. 
 
Those are the only two worlds that he has, Mr. Speaker, the 
only two worlds that he has. And his seatmate over there from 
Regina behaves much the same way — from Regina Victoria 
— exactly the same thing: has no ideas, has no plans, has no 
hope. But he can go back to the ’80s. It’s the only life that he 
has, the only life that he has. We are in a different century and 
in a different millennium than where these NDP are at. 
 
They need to wake up. They need to realize what this province 
needs. They need to give some hope to the people of this 
province. We’ve had this recession, Mr. Speaker. What has that 
caused? What has that caused? We have had thousands of 
people, thousands of people leaving this province. Our 
population is lower than it’s been since the 1930s. 
 
This building that we’re in tonight, one of the most beautiful 
legislative buildings in this country, a large legislative building, 
built because Canada at that time said this is going to be one of 
the biggest provinces in Canada; this is going to be the place 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

where growth will take place; this is the place where the poor 
and the hungry of the world will be able to come and find work 
and find jobs — that’s what everyone thought. And then a short 
decade after that, a couple years later, we ended up with an 
NDP-CCF (New Democratic Party-Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) government, and ever since then 
people have been leaving this province. And I have the member 
from Cumberland again trying to move back into the ’80s. But 
we’ve had people leaving, and they leave and they leave. That’s 
thanks to this particular government. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have no hope in this 
government. They have no hope whatsoever. 
 
GDP (gross domestic product) declines 1.9 per cent in 2001. 
Not only did people leave this particular province — they’re 
looking for work — we’re short on taxpayers. We just finished 
debating another motion, Mr. Speaker, a motion dealing with 
those individuals who have become disenfranchised, who feel 
they’re not part of our society, and as a government, we need to 
take care of them. 
 
But what has happened, Mr. Speaker? Those individuals have 
no hope because that NDP government has not created any jobs 
for them. They have no plan to create any work for them. We 
ask them what their plans are, and the cabinet ministers get up 
time and time again. What’s your plan, they ask us. 
 
We’ve put our plan out, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we keep 
getting the same response from people all over Saskatchewan. 
Call an election. When is the election going to come? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had an election some years ago. We had an 
election some years ago. You recall what happened in that 
election, the one that brought all of us here. They had less votes 
than the Saskatchewan Party, and very few people at that point 
thought that was going to happen. With the change in attitude 
that’s happened the last couple of years, we can expect a 
landslide. We can expect the back two rows to be gone, to be 
gone, Mr. Speaker. Back two rows to be gone. 
 
What are they doing for Saskatchewan? What are they doing for 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Let me turn to another thing from Tuesday, 2002, April 23. 
That’s today, Mr. Speaker. It’s from Saskatoon, and the heading 
is “Catholic school taxes set to jump.” Let me read the first 
paragraph, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Saskatoon Catholic school division has produced a 
draft budget that will add $27 to an average homeowner’s 
tab, yet the division will still end up spending less than it 
did last year. 
 

Now how is this possible, Mr. Speaker? They’re going to raise 
more money in taxes and they’re going to have less to spend. 
They’re going to raise more in taxes; they’re going to have less 
to spend. 
 
We’ve had the minister of Education, Mr. Speaker, over the 
past week or two, get up in his seat and say, guess what, we’re 
giving all this extra money. Well they’ve moved a little bit of 
money in one place and taken away a whole lot in another 

place. 
 
That’s why, in Saskatoon, what’s happening. They’re adding 
$27 to an average homeowner’s tab, and the division will have 
less to spend than it had last year. 
 
You’ve seen the headlines in the paper, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatoon: dozens of teachers are going to have to be fired. 
And surely the members from the opposite side should be 
paying attention because they do have a lot of ex-teachers on 
that side. They should know what that’s like to think that their 
jobs might be gone. And why is that happening? The school 
board there very definitely said it’s because of underfunding of 
this NDP government. That’s why those teachers are being laid 
off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we’ve had one of the union people from the Saskatoon 
city teachers’ association say, let’s have a big rally in front of 
the doors of the school board. In fact . . . is maybe, we can 
attend a meeting and impress them how upset they ought to be. 
They should be in these galleries over here because it’s the 
minister sitting over there, Mr. Speaker, that’s responsible for 
cutting back on those amounts of money going to Saskatoon. 
 
It’s that particular minister that’s responsible for dozens of 
teachers that are going to be fired in Saskatoon. It’s that 
minister sitting over there, Mr. Speaker, that’s responsible for 
having those students in larger classrooms than they’ve ever 
been in before. That’s where the responsibility lies. 
 
That’s why this motion is so important. The people of 
Saskatchewan have lost confidence in the current Premier and 
in his cabinet. And there’s an example of what the minister 
responsible for Education has done: cut funding all over. 
 
Now we know what’s going to happen with the RMs (rural 
municipality), Mr. Speaker. The rate of taxes that the people in 
rural Saskatchewan are going to have to pay are going to go up 
many times more than even the ones in the cities. They’ve cut 
that back. They’ve played with the mill rates. They play with all 
sorts of things. At the end of the day the taxpayers have to pay 
more, and we’re going to have teachers laid off across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d look at something else that’s critical in this 
particular province. We need to look at health care. We’ve had 
the Minister of Health up numerous times, most recently, Mr. 
Speaker, question period today and yesterday, involving 
long-term care fee increases. 
 
Now we did have one of the members from Saskatoon get up 
and say, oh but that’s not one of the five pillars. So we can take 
old people who just have no opportunity to take care of 
themselves, we can take their last dollar away from them 
because it’s not part of the five pillars. I thought that was 
supposed to be a party of sympathy, a party of a social 
conscience. 
 
There is no social conscience there, Mr. Speaker, or else they 
wouldn’t be taking the last dollars out of the pockets of senior 
citizens that have no way of protecting themselves; that have no 
way of coming and sitting in these galleries and asking these 
people to show some sympathy and to have a social conscience. 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

 

Let me take a little few items from this particular chart, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s see what happens. If we have . . . let’s start off 
with a monthly income of $1,000. A monthly income of $1,000. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is not very much. That’s not very much. 
That’s an annual income of $12,000. 
 
Now they used to have to pay . . . what did our seniors used to 
have to pay before long-term care fee increases? They used to 
have to pay $831. That’s gone up, Mr. Speaker. That’s gone up 
under this government. That’s hard to believe. Someone who’s 
taking home $1,000 a month. But, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
says these are wealthy people, and the Premier is an honourable 
man. 
 
Now let’s just add a little bit to that. Let’s say that their income 
just jumps a whole lot to $1,800 a month — $1,800 a month. 
That’s what most of the teachers that I talked to, on the other 
side, what they will get in a pension and probably more when 
they retire. Now their increases — this is $1,800 a month now, 
Mr. Speaker, $21,000; that’s awful close to the poverty line — 
their increases go up 26 per cent; 26 per cent. But the Premier 
says, they’re wealthy; they’re rich. And the Premier, we know, 
is an honourable man. 
 
Let’s just raise this a little more, Mr. Speaker. Let’s say in the 
eyes of the NDP these people are really rich, they’re taking 
home $3,000 a month — $3,000 a month; probably about a 
third or a quarter what the cabinet takes home. Now their 
increase in fees is 68 per cent — 68 per cent. But the Premier 
still says these are wealthy people — these are wealthy people. 
And the Premier as we know, Mr. Speaker, is an honourable 
man. 
 
They keep going on up till you get to the maximum. And those 
increases are 148 per cent — 148 per cent. Now we have a 
pretty good idea what a 100 per cent increase is. What is it? It’s 
a double. 
 
(20:15) 
 
So if you take the amount that these people had to pay — our 
senior citizens in long-term care — we double it, take half of 
the original amount, slap it on top of there again, and say you 
can pay it because you’re wealthy, is what the Premier says — 
and he’s an honourable man. This is disgusting, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely disgusting that we would take our seniors and do that 
with them. 
 
That’s the same place, the same place that these NDP tend to go 
during election time. And they pull their cars up on election day 
and they try and drag them all out so they can vote for them. 
Well it’ll be interesting to see how many they’ll be able to drag 
out this time after they’ve taken their fees and put them up 
almost 150 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Their social conscience is not 
there. They have no social conscience. They have no social 
conscience. 
 
And there’s the member from Athabasca starting to chirp from 
his seat. He should be quiet over there and be ashamed of what 
his government’s done. He’s one that halfway through that 
chose to come across from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, where 
he could have protected the seniors, where he could have 
protected the old people of this province. But instead he went 

across over there to get a cabinet salary and now he goes ahead 
and says it doesn’t count, it doesn’t matter. It’s shameful, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s absolutely shameful. In fact it’s a whole lot worse 
than that. 
 
We know very well what happens, Mr. Speaker. In this 
particular province, along with the work ethic that’s there — 
and this province probably has the best work ethic of any 
province in Canada — along with the work ethic comes the 
knowledge that you need to save for tough times, particularly 
all of those individuals that sort of came through the ’30s, 
remembered some of that, and that mentality hasn’t been lost 
for a generation. So that when you make some money, you save 
some because times could get tough and they could get difficult. 
 
So many of our seniors have something saved up. All of them 
tried; many of them managed to do that. 
 
So what’s this government doing now? Well we found out this 
morning, Mr. Speaker. What’s happening is that when they get 
that income, this government not only takes 50 per cent, which 
is what they used to say they were going to take — they 
actually took a little more, Mr. Speaker; it was close to 60 
because of the way the income tax situation works — now they 
say they’re going to take 90 per cent. 
 
But the 90 per cent is not off of 100 per cent. The 90 per cent is 
off about 125 per cent which means that when these seniors get 
a cheque from their RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings 
Plan) or some of their other dividends that they’re getting back, 
from money they’ve set aside over a lifetime of working, this 
NDP government with no social conscience whatsoever is 
going to take more from them than they get on a monthly basis 
— more from them. 
 
We already know they’re only left with 100 or $200 per month 
to take care of clothes, some travel they might want, they might 
want to buy some gifts for their grandkids, and for medication, 
Mr. Speaker — 100 or $200 is all they were left. 
 
Now these people are going to take more from them than what 
they get from their dividends. And they say they have a social 
conscience. 
 
The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, are sick and tired of 
this NDP government. They have no confidence in the Premier; 
they have no confidence in any of the cabinet. 
 
When we asked those questions on health the other day, finally 
after probably a dozen questions the Premier got up and agreed 
that he was going to underline, this is the path they had taken, 
this is where they were going to keep on going, and yes, if 
you’re taking home $1,000 a month you are a wealthy person. 
 
Well the province just can’t wait to vote him off as the weakest 
link, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It was probably one of the NDP’s only 
chances to get out of this mess they were in. We know they’re 
embarrassed. We get copies of the same letters they get from 
the seniors, from their children, saying that this is outrageous 



946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

what this government’s doing. We get copies of those letters. 
They stand there and they act as if they’ve never heard of this; 
oh, it’s only one or two. But we do get copies of them. 
 
Now the Premier had the opportunity to sit there as he did day 
after day and avoid getting up and answering question, to say, 
well I guess if we realized we actually did something wrong, I 
can get up and as the leader take some responsibility — take 
some responsibility and say to the people of this province, yes 
this was our plan; we realize it’s hurting the seniors of this 
province a whole lot more than we thought it would, so let’s 
reverse it. We’ll just roll it back;, we’ll roll it back. 
 
And it really, Mr. Speaker, matters not how they were going to 
try and balance the budget, which actually wasn’t balanced but 
that’s another issue why the people of this province want to get 
rid of them. It really matters not how they were going to fiddle 
with their figures at the end of that time. 
 
The people of this province would have said that is a good thing 
to do. And the Premier could have gained a lot of credit for the 
next election. Not enough, Mr. Speaker, to win an election but 
he could have gained some. He might have been able to win 
Riversdale one more time. 
 
But instead he stood there in his spot and he said, no, we’ve 
made up our mind, we’re moving on ahead; we’re going to take 
over 100 per cent of the senior people’s income that they have, 
and we have no problem doing that because we are socialists. It 
matters not how it hurts people as long as it’s philosophically 
on their side. 
 
And I think they must have gone back to the Regina Manifesto 
that talks about having a control of everything in the province. 
And so the Premier said, hey there’s something we don’t have 
control of — we can’t get our little hands on all the RRSPs and 
all the dividends in the province. This is how we’ll do it; we can 
get our hands on some more money that belongs to someone 
else. And sure enough, the Premier unfortunately took his own 
advice and the bad advice that he gets from other people. 
 
Friday, April 19, end of last week, Mr. Speaker, “Care home fee 
increase said cowardly” — cowardly. I couldn’t have worded it 
better myself, Mr. Speaker; it is cowardly. Because who do they 
pick on? As I said earlier, not people that can fill up the gallery 
over here and let them know how they feel about it; not people 
that can stand out on the lawn, come kick down the doors of 
this particular building and say, we want to be heard, we 
demand to be heard. No, that’s not who they pick on. They pick 
on the seniors, the individuals who can’t do that, who are in 
senior care homes, who are hurting. 
 
Let me read a paragraph or two from that particular article, The 
Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, Friday, April 19, 2002: 
 

Member after member on the opposition side rose to berate 
the government’s decision in the spring budget to raise the 
maximum charge to special care home residents. The 
maximum charge went from $1,561 a month to $3,875 . . . 
 

And we read that off and they said we’re fearmongering. Well I 
should hope there’s fear to be mongered because there’s no 
telling what these people will dream up. Who would have ever 

thought that a socialist government would try to balance its 
budget on the backs of the elderly and the sick — who would 
have ever thought it? There is no fearmongering there. That’s 
exactly what they’re doing, that’s exactly what they’re doing. 
The member from Cumberland sits there and grins, Mr. 
Speaker. What a shame, what a shame. 
 
Let me read another paragraph: “When this budget was 
announced . . .” And it’s dealing with one of the individuals, 
“(her mother) was devastated.” This is a lady who’s in a senior 
care situation. “This budget leaves $166 a month . . .” There are 
teenagers who get a bigger spending allowance than that. But 
this isn’t just spending allowance; part of it is personal 
expenditures. But it also includes the amount of money for 
drugs and we know very definitely that seniors are heavy users 
of medication, and that has to come out of the 166. And this 
lady goes on to say, “My mom pays over 320 for these expenses 
alone.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe some of the schoolteachers on that 
side, or the Premier who used to count the tithing, maybe he 
should just do a little bit of math over here. Subtract 166 from 
320 and he hasn’t got enough to live on. That’s the situation, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Premier has put the seniors of this 
province into. “This will take all of the money my dad saved in 
RRSPs and retirement funds.” That’s the money this 
government is clawing back at over 100 per cent for every 
dollar they get, Mr. Speaker. It’s a shame. 
 
“Health Minister John Nilson responded by saying the 
Saskatchewan Party was fear-mongering.” That’s what I was 
talking about, Mr. Speaker. And he says, “What I would say to 
these people who are listening on the televisions . . .” And it 
seems like the only ones they want to talk to are the people on 
television. They should be talking to the people in seniors 
homes. Where we get this information is that we have a phone 
number, Mr. Speaker. All the mockery in the world. 
 
So you have these people in intensive care situations and our 
senior homes and they’re supposed to use a phone number to 
phone the Premier and do what, Mr. Speaker? Do what? Just 
say, please, Mr. Premier, could you send some more money? I 
don’t think the chances are there. We had the Health minister 
this morning get up and say, well if these things don’t work out 
there’s some ways we can review this possibly. Now there’s no 
assurance on that. 
 
When this socialist government reviews someone asking for a 
different point of view on the help they’re getting, they get 
turned down more often than not. Are they going to go ahead 
and be afraid of some senior in a home? I doubt it. And so that 
is cold comfort, Mr. Speaker, cold comfort to the seniors of this 
particular province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a made-in-Saskatchewan recession — a 
made-in-Saskatchewan recession. And fact is I think the 
seniors, if they were back in their younger days, would be 
filling this legislature saying, this is not how we want to live 
when we retire. But they’ve put that into that. 
 
This actually, Mr. Speaker, is two-tier care at its absolute worst 
— two-tier care at its worst because they’re going to take the 
money from those people who’ve saved something and they’re 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

 

going to take over a dollar away from them for every dollar 
they get in dividends. Two-tier at its very worst. 
 
This is the group that always said, no they don’t want two-tier 
government, they don’t want two-tier health care, they don’t 
want two-tier anything. They’ve created it — they’ve created it. 
Look at all the things in health care that people have to pay for. 
Look at all the things they have to pay for: eye care, dental care. 
 
They want to get an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). Where 
do they have to go? Out of province. They can wait a year over 
here. Mr. Speaker, you could be dead in a year. And yet they 
say, no, over here in Saskatchewan it’s a year to wait for that 
and you should be thankful when you get it in a year, Mr. 
Speaker. You should probably write the Minister of Health a 
letter and say thank you that I only had to wait a year, that it 
wasn’t a year and a half. 
 
And then they send them off to Alberta and these people pay for 
it on their own. Well it’s fortunate probably, Mr. Speaker, that 
there are some people left in Saskatchewan with enough money 
to do that. It’s unfortunate that they have to do it. The fortunate 
part is it makes the list, the lineup shorter for those who can’t 
go and get it done there. 
 
But not only do they send some people off to Alberta to get it 
done, make other people wait for a year. The MRI sits without 
any people being checked out for most of the day — a 24-hour 
day — during which time they put pets and farm animals into it. 
Can you imagine that? The thing is sitting there not being used 
by the people. We have a year-long lineup, and they’ve got time 
for pets but they haven’t got time for people. Where’s the 
priority of this government? Where’s the priority? 
 
There is no social conscience there. This is a group of 
hard-hearted NDP politicians who are power hungry and all 
they want is to maintain power as long as they can. And the 
people of Saskatchewan are saying, enough already; let’s give 
us an election; let’s get them out of here. 
 
That’s why this motion is in front of us this evening. The worst 
job creation record in the country — 24,000 fewer people 
working in Saskatchewan than in the 1999 election, 24,000 
fewer people working. Those are people who are not paying 
taxes. That means we don’t have a surplus of jobs. So the 
people we were just talking about earlier on today who would 
like a job know they have no hope because the number of jobs 
go down. 
 
And what did this NDP government that’s supposed to have a 
social conscience, Mr. Speaker, promise in 1999? They 
promised 30,000 new jobs. Now had they kept their promise, 
those 24,000 people that are now out of work — probably left 
the province for Texas, or Manitoba, or British Columbia, or 
any other place but Saskatchewan — would be here paying 
taxes, and we would have 6,000 more people working and 
paying taxes to take care of the health care, the education, the 
roads, the highways, the farm economy, all of those things. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Speaking of farm economy. Mr. Speaker, most people in this 
province have a rural background. Even though there are more 

people living in the cities now than in rural Saskatchewan, most 
of them have a rural background. Now what has this NDP 
government done for them? Well they’ve been in charge for a 
decade. The very first thing they did, they took and tore up the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contract. Then they 
went ahead and took and sent that money back to Ottawa. There 
were millions of dollars there, Mr. Speaker, millions of dollars, 
a quarter of a billion in fact. Let’s round it off to what it is — a 
quarter of a billion dollars sitting here, federal money waiting to 
get matched with provincial money to turn the rural economy. 
That group tore up the contract, sent a quarter of a billion 
dollars back to Ottawa and said to the farmers, we are 
responsible, and we care, and we have a social conscience. 
 
Not true, Mr. Speaker. There is no social conscience on that 
side. They do not care for rural Saskatchewan. They do not care 
for the men and women and children who live on those farms. 
It’s a cold-hearted brood over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then along came another plan. So they put in place their own 
crop insurance plan, and they fiddled with it one way or 
another, and it kept getting worse. People didn’t want to sign up 
for it. Then a year or two ago, Mr. Speaker, they had a pretty 
good idea. They did have a good idea. They said, let’s put spot 
loss into the whole crop insurance thing because farmers will 
like that. So if they get hailed out in a particular area, they can 
go ahead and get some help for that particular area. So they 
went ahead and did that, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of rural people, 
farmers, signed up. Farm families said, this is a good idea. 
 
Now having said that, what did they do this year? They pulled it 
right out. They pulled it right out. They took one of the better 
ideas they’ve had . . . And we’ve got one of the members from 
Saskatoon who’s saying it’s about this size. Well the idea was a 
whole lot smaller than that, but it was still not a bad idea. But 
they pulled out the spot loss hail concept. They pulled it out. So 
now what are they doing? Now what are they doing with the 
whole concept? That means a whole lot of people, a whole lot 
of people, now will not have the coverage they need, will not 
have the coverage they need. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it gets worse. It gets much worse. Then they 
came up, and they dreamt up the idea that what we’re going to 
do is we’re going to let people gamble — not that we don’t 
have enough gambling already — but we’re going to let people 
gamble on where they want to have their hail insurance based 
on rainfall. So they said we’ve got 80-some weather stations 
across the country, not just in Saskatchewan. You can actually, 
Mr. Speaker — think how bizarre this is — be a Saskatchewan 
farmer and bet on a weather station in Manitoba or in Alberta. 
 
They missed Alice Springs, cause we’re quite sure it wouldn’t 
have rained over there. It would have been a good bet, Mr. 
Speaker. Why didn’t they put in Alice Springs? Where’s the 
Minister of Agriculture? He should have done that. 
 
Anyways, they put that plan into being and said you can go 
ahead and pick whichever rain station you want, buy your 
insurance on the rainfall in that particular weather station, and 
then you will or won’t get any insurance depending on how 
much rainfall there is over there. 
 
Now what do they do next? They said oh, but we’ve got to keep 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

this betting even. So now what happens is they only allow a 
certain number of farmers to bet on a particular rain station. 
 
So if you have a rain station on your quarter section — 
remember there’s about 80 of them around the country — if you 
have one on your quarter section, and by the time you’re going 
to buy your insurance the quota’s full on that one, you couldn’t 
buy insurance based on the rainfall on your own quarter, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
How utterly stupid. You have to bet on some . . . on a rain 
station on your neighbour’s land and hope that he has a crop 
failure so that you can collect something. 
 
What a bizarre way to run a province — what a bizarre way. As 
it was called, very well by one of our members, it’s a loopy 
little lottery, Mr. Speaker. It’s a lottery — it’s a lottery. It’s not 
very big, it’s little, and it sure is loopy. 
 
That is part of this whole thing, Mr. Speaker. Recession sinks 
Saskatchewan economy — recession sinks Saskatchewan 
economy. They’re actually creating a recession. 
 
Farmers should have the right to be able to buy an insurance 
policy that covers the land they have, the crops they have, the 
rainfall they’re going to get on their land, and the land they 
farm. But not from this particular government — not from this 
particular government; has absolutely no idea what they’re 
doing. 
 
Our population, Mr. Speaker, is the lowest population in 20 
years — in 20 years. Now how could that happen? How could 
that happen? It could only happen when you have an NDP 
government in charge. 
 
They had an NDP government in Ontario. You recall that 
government. Bob Rae ran the biggest debt that this country has 
ever seen — Ontario, Bob Rae. We’ve got the same kind of 
government over here. 
 
They had the same sort of thing in British Columbia with Mr. 
Clark and his predecessors. We know exactly what happened 
there. They ran up the debt. They did all kinds of funny things 
with their finances. They bought aluminum ferries that gobbled 
up a log and the whole thing just left people adrift out on the 
ocean. The most bizarre things that can be dreamt up, this 
government will think up. 
 
BC (British Columbia) had its aluminum ferries that couldn’t go 
through a log or two. We have our GRIP plans that are torn up. 
We have our rain stations in other provinces, we buy our crop 
insurance on. Just absolutely no idea how to run a province — 
no idea. 
 
That’s why the people of Saskatchewan, when we come to a 
meeting and we mention the word election, they applaud and 
they say, we want it now; we want to get rid of the NDP; give 
us an election. They want an election; they’re pleading for an 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at that budget. Let’s look at that budget. 
There was a time the previous premier came into this particular 
position and he made a lot of commitments about how he was 

going to deal with the province’s finances. And he got a lot of 
support from that. And grudgingly, Mr. Speaker, some of us 
gave him some support on some of his initiatives as well. 
 
He was going to make sure they didn’t run into any debt. He 
was going to pay off some debt. It was going to be a balanced 
approach. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it may seem hard to believe — 
it is to myself at times — I did actually vote for one of his 
budgets once, Mr. Speaker. I did vote for one of his budgets. I 
told the people in my constituency and they said, that’s fine. In 
the next election they sent me back with a bigger majority. So 
they realized you can have common sense; you can vote in 
favour of a budget that even the NDP creates. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, was under a different premier. We didn’t 
have this kind of a budget from that premier. Roy Romanow 
budgets — you knew they were going to be balanced. You 
might not be happy with the amount of money spent on 
education or the amount of money spent on health or the 
amount of money spent on roads or the amount of money spent 
on social services or on prisons or on policing. But you knew, at 
the end of the day, there was no fiddling with the budget as far 
as it being balanced. It was balanced. 
 
Now under our present Premier, what have we got? Every 
single budget is a deficit budget and our debt is going up. And 
he fiddles with figures, Mr. Speaker. He juggles them around. 
Look at the plan that he has for his growth in education. Oh yes, 
he and the minister of Education get up and say, we have this 
plan to build schools. Is anyone opposed to it? Well, 
motherhood and apple pie — we’re not opposed to the building 
of a school. But let’s check how he’s going to finance it. So 
he’ll tell us one day, absolutely no, I’m not going to go ahead 
and create any more deficit budgeting; I’m on the same line as 
Roy Romanow was. No, he’s not. 
 
He’s going to tell the school boards that you can . . . Excuse me, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s absolutely no way that this government 
has the money for it. So here’s what they do. Follow this, Mr. 
Speaker, follow this because this is important to see how they 
play with the numbers. He says we’re going to create another 
Crown corporation. 
 
We have some 70-some Crowns, Mr. Speaker. Is there anyone 
in this House that can list all 70-some Crowns, or is it 80 by 
now, 80 Crowns — 84 Crowns, I’m told. And that’s from the 
people who know, Mr. Speaker — 84 Crowns. There’s not a 
person on that side that could probably list half of them. 
 
So they create another one and they say okay, this is what’ll 
happen. This Crown will go out and will make a loan. They’ll 
get some money from someplace, and then the school boards 
can go ahead and get the money from this Crown, and then the 
school boards can build schools because that’s good. Mr. 
Speaker, no one disagrees. 
 
Now let’s take a look at what happens with the money. Let’s 
look at what happens with the money. It was funnelled through 
. . . maybe laundered is the best term — I think I’ll use the word 
laundered, Mr. Speaker. It was laundered through — it was 
laundered through a Crown. It was washed, Mr. Speaker, it was 
washed. It came from the banks and then was washed through 
the . . . 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I ask the member from Moose Jaw North to 
state his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there have been numerous 
rulings including some recent ones that have come from the 
Chair, Mr. Speaker, regarding the use of excessive language 
which suggests ill motives and excessive language. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when the hon. member 
opposite refers to laundering money and makes . . . and then 
pauses to make a special emphasis of that reference to what is 
clearly understood in this country, Mr. Speaker, to be an illegal 
act, I suggest that he has become excessive in his language and 
that it is, well some would say offensive, and certainly violates 
the decorum for what is acceptable behaviour in terms of 
conduct of debate in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member truly believes that, he does 
have vehicles that are available to him and that language of that 
nature is clearly not acceptable. And I would ask you, Mr. Chair 
. . . Mr. Speaker, to rule it out of order and require the hon. 
member to withdraw the remark and apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I’ve taken, during 
the . . . I thank, first of all, the member for Moose Jaw North for 
raising the issue. A quick perusal of Beauchesne during the time 
that the member was making his statement shows that there — 
order, please — shows that there are no precedents using these 
particular words. 
 
Nevertheless I do believe that the idea that the member from 
Moose Jaw North has brought to the attention of the Speaker 
indicates that this could be interpreted in a way where it could 
be legal. So I would simply advise the member at this stage to 
desist from using that type of language so that the debate can 
proceed in an orderly manner. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So they take this 
money as coming from the banks and they work it through the 
Crowns. And we’ve called it a fudge and that’s been acceptable 
all the way through so we’ll continue using that. So they fudge 
this thing through there. And it reminds me a whole lot of 
making fudge where the stuff is warm and sticky and gooey, 
and we don’t know what happens as it comes through the 
system. 
 
Then the school boards get it. They will have to pay it back to 
the Crowns. Now that all sounds nice and neat and simple. 
However it’s this NDP government that is going to want to take 
credit, is going to want to take credit for the building of those 
schools. However when we look at their budget, it’s not going 
to show up in their budget anywhere. 
 
The minister of Education is going to say, look how frugal I am, 
look how frugal I am. You know, I’ve managed to spend some 
more money on a few things, but you know we’ve kept it all 
nice and the budget is balanced, and all those kinds of things. 
However that Crown, which will probably be Crown number 
85, Crown number 85 if they create a new one, Crown number 
85 now has debt. 
 

But the way this government deals with their finances, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not going to show up on their sheet. It’s a bit like 
borrowing money from dad, you see. Who’s going to pay it 
back and when do you pay it back? We know how that works, 
but dad’s caught with the debt. Well this Crown’s going to get 
caught with the debt — the Crown’s going to get caught with 
the debt. And this government’s trying to avoid looking as bad 
as they really are with the way they run their budget. 
 
Every single school, every single hospital, every single thing 
that’s being built in this province with money that’s coming 
through that Crown system is debt, has to be paid back by the 
people of this province. And it is essentially a deficit budget, 
something the Romanow government never did, they didn’t 
even try to do it in devious ways. They might have done other 
devious things but when it came to their budget, Mr. Speaker, it 
was a solid document; it was a solid document. Not any more. 
Under the reign that we’re under now, Mr. Speaker, under the 
reign that we’re under now, this is not the way it’s happening 
and it’s not going to be happening. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s scary to know that this government is taking 
us down the worst road that any government in Canada has 
been in and there’s been many a bad ones. It’s the same road 
that Bob Rae took Ontario down — the same road that Bob Rae 
took Ontario down and increased the debt in Ontario to 
unbelievable limits, and they’re still suffering underneath that. 
 
It’s exactly the same road that BC NDP . . . Clark took their 
government down and created massive debts in British 
Columbia. And now we have our present NDP government 
going down exactly the same road. Surely they could have 
learned, surely they could have learned from what happened, 
what their brethren did in Ontario and in British Columbia. 
They love the word brethren. This is one time they ought to call 
those people their brethren, they ought to call those people their 
brethren, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is probably the most disconcerting thing to 
people in this province. When this budget came down and this 
Premier presented his budget, people of the province said, well 
let’s just see. There’s been some hanky-panky before; let’s see 
if this one’s fudged or what’s happening with it. 
 
They’ve now come to realize after all the numbers and the 
statistics and the directions and the fiddling that we’ve 
presented to them, Mr. Speaker, they realize . . . everybody in 
this province realized this is a deficit budget and our debt is 
growing. In one form or another our debt is growing. 
 
And that’s another reason when we go to all those 40-some 
communities, and we go to our fundraisers in Prince Albert, and 
we mention the word election, they say, we want it now. We 
have to have it now before this government gets another chance 
to put up another budget that’s going to be a deficit budget and 
the people who can stand it least are the ones who suffer. 
 
We had a speech earlier on today from the member from 
Cumberland who should have been one of the people most 
concerned about this, because he mentioned, Mr. Speaker — 
and he’s right, he’s right — that unemployment in his 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

constituency was unusually high, higher than it should be. You 
shouldn’t have 40 and 50 and 60 and 70 per cent of your people 
unemployed. And I agree with him on that. 
 
But why can we not create opportunity down there? Because 
this province has no money. We have no money because 
they’ve chased the taxpayers out of this province. They’ve 
chased them out of here. All those people — 24,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker — those are taxpayers that are gone. Their children 
who would have held jobs, who would have gone to university 
here, created more opportunity, they’re gone. 
 
And so when the member from Cumberland is concerned about 
unemployment in his constituency, he should be concerned 
because the situation is not good at all. But he should get up in 
his place and tell his brethren, Mr. Speaker, that it’s time they 
change a few things, that it’s time they grow some industry to 
give business an opportunity to create jobs because as we have 
jobs, Mr. Speaker, we will have taxpayers. And as we have 
taxpayers, this government and this province will have money 
for the programs that we need so badly. 
 
And the member from Cumberland has got up in his place year 
after year and blamed everyone else but himself and his 
brethren for their short-sightedness. It’s time they look at their 
plans and say, what’s happening? How effective is it? 
 
Twenty-four thousand jobs, interesting . . . Now we have the 
member from Regina Elphinstone doesn’t want to be a brother 
with the member from Cumberland. We knew there was 
dissension in the ranks over there. We hear that. We see it when 
they come in and they sit in their little groups and they chat. 
Now he tells the member from Cumberland he doesn’t want to 
be his brother. Well how bad can you guys be split over there? 
How badly can you be split? Surely your socialist . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would remind the member 
from Rosthern to continue to make his remarks through the 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
has managed to try to get close to balancing its budget. In the 
Romanow days, they did. Now they’re not. They’ve done that 
by downloading. They’ve done that by downloading. They need 
to go back to their towns, their cities, their municipalities, and 
say exactly what has the effect been of the last 10 years of NDP 
socialist government. 
 
And every single one of those, unless they probably hold a 
party card and used to be an MLA over here, every single one 
of them, Mr. Speaker, are going to tell them downloading is 
what is killing the towns, the RMs, and the cities. We have a 
situation in all of those organizations that was never this bad 
before. That’s why the taxes are going up. 
 
We have these people, and we just had a bad situation last year 
with a water scare in North Battleford. We remember 
Walkerton. We sat back as people in Saskatchewan. We said 
that could just happen in dirty, factory-ridden Ontario. This 
would never happen in Saskatchewan because look at our maps, 
particularly if you get a map that has a lot of northern 
Saskatchewan on it, and you see all the fresh water up there — 
just would never happen here. Then it happens in North 

Battleford. 
 
It happens, Mr. Speaker. It happens because there wasn’t 
enough money given to communities for infrastructure. Every 
single town, RM, and city is going to tell us that. 
 
There is a city, the city of North Battleford, a beautiful city, that 
the MLA representing it will tell you, Mr. Speaker, should have 
been the capital of Saskatchewan. I would debate that; Rosthern 
would have been suitable. But having said that, it’s still a 
beautiful city and had that water scare. Thousands of people 
sick, 7,000 people, Mr. Speaker, 7,000 people sick in a small 
city in Saskatchewan because of this government’s 
downloading and its negligence. Their testing wasn’t done as it 
should have been done. 
 
That’s why when the report came back as to who was to blame 
. . . yes, there were some goofy things like when you have a 
discharge station on the wrong end of your intake pipes. But 
that was built probably during a socialist era as well. They 
probably can’t tell good water from bad water. 
 
But having said that, had that funding remained as it should 
have been, North Battleford would have had the opportunity to 
go ahead and improve their infrastructures as it should. They 
wouldn’t have had that bad water. The testing would have taken 
place as it should have been. 
 
And again, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the motion that I’m speaking 
to talks about lost confidence in the current Premier and the 
cabinet. It’s the cabinet responsible for water that should have 
made sure that testing happened, and it didn’t happen — 7,000 
people in that particular city waiting for an election to turf out 
this government, waiting for an election. They knew it was 
going to happen. We asked questions all along. 
 
Downloading on one level of government after another. We 
drive down the streets of our cities, and the roads are poor. 
Most cities have some sort of a pothole contest in spring to see 
who has the deepest pothole. Well yes, our weather is one that 
sort of makes having good streets a little more difficult. Cold 
weather and ground heaving creates a few things. But there isn’t 
enough money to make the upkeep and the maintenance so that 
the potholes and the cracks and the ruts aren’t there as they are 
today. That’s because of the downloading of this government. 
 
They try to balance their budgets on the backs, as I said earlier 
on, the sick and the infirm, on top of the RMs and the towns 
and the cities. That’s how they try to balance their budget, and 
they’ve done a disastrous job of it, and every area of this 
province is suffering because of this NDP government. It’s 
mismanagement of the purest sort. It couldn’t have been done 
better or worse, which ever term you want to use, Mr. Speaker, 
unless you had Bob Rae or Glen Clark in charge, the only other 
two individuals that were in the running besides our Premier for 
mismanaging an economic system as badly as they’ve done it 
. . . right here. 
 
Looking again, Mr. Speaker, looking from an article in the, in 
the Saskatoon StarPhoenix — and I’ve been talking from time 
to time about the election call — by Les MacPherson: 
 

Calvert’s election call can’t come soon enough . . . (can’t 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

 

come soon enough). Not that it probably is needed or it’ll 
be interesting or it’ll be a watershed. Things are so difficult 
in this province that the election call can’t come soon 
enough. 

 
Well it says reliable sources tell Mr. MacPherson that the 
Premier is alerting his troops to be ready for a fall election. 
Well we don’t know whether or not that’s going to be the case. 
What this article does say, it’s needed. It’s needed. He talks 
about the same little jaunt around the province I spoke of 
earlier, this so-called bus tour. And I like what he calls it here, 
he says: 
 

A polka band can manage a bus tour. A third tier minor 
hockey team can manage a bus tour. We should expect a bit 
more from our Premier than the bus tour that he tried to run 
and mismanaged so badly. 

 
Okay let’s look at a few or for a few other ones. It says that 
campaign pamphlets are being distributed across the province 
by the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. You remember 
those; they came to a number of our households. We saw them 
around — pure election rhetoric, pure election rhetoric, a 
fundraising agency for the NDP. 
 
I’m glad he said it, Mr. Speaker, so I didn’t have to, but he 
couldn’t have said it better. The pamphlets condemn the 
opposition’s Saskatchewan Party for not being friendly to 
workers. And he says that’s a good one: under the NDP, 
workers are packing up their families and leaving Saskatchewan 
in unprecedented numbers — 24,000 of them, Mr. Speaker, 
24,000 left this province, unprecedented numbers. That’s what 
they call a worker-friendly group. They’re supposed to be 
friendly to the workers. They’re supposed to be their brethren. 
They’re supposed to be their union buddies, brothers and 
sisters. What do they do with them? They make sure they run 
the province in such a negative sort of a way that 24,000 of 
them have to leave this province to find some other way to stay 
alive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s particularly disheartening about this is that 
this province, that this province at one time, was the place in the 
world where people came that didn’t have jobs. Most of our 
forefathers were given an opportunity here and were thankful 
for that. Were given an opportunity — there were pictures. And, 
Mr. Speaker, you may be aware of these having been a 
schoolteacher in your days, the pictures that were sprinkled out 
. . . throughout central Europe. 
 
And on those pictures it said come to Canada — to the prairies. 
And it was a nice little picture of a little white house with a 
green roof, a little hip-roof barn, and a windmill. And people 
thought this is the opportunity; this is what we’ll get when we 
come to Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they did get a bit of a surprise, because 
many of them were just loaded off from one side or the other of 
the railway track to keep the Americans in or out of Canada. 
 
And so they found out it was a rather cruel environment to go 
ahead and start your first year, your first winter. But they 
survived. They persevered. And they came and they came 
because this was the land of opportunity. Hard work would pay 

off, Mr. Speaker, — hard work would pay off. Diligence would 
pay off. Saving would pay off. And they came here, and they 
were diligent, and they worked hard, and they saved. 
 
And now this NDP government took 24,000 of them and 
shipped them someplace around the world. And then said, now 
we’ve lost the income from 24,000 taxpayers. And they said 
we’ll take it off the backs of our sick and our elderly — 
thousands of them. Sick and elderly, who had saved money by 
working hard, by being diligent, by being thrifty, by being 
frugal. And these people took the money right out of their 
pockets when they no longer could fight against it. 
 
It’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. It’s an absolute shame that we would 
treat our seniors that way. An absolute shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Les MacPherson goes on, and he makes this 
statement: 
 

You have to wonder how much more unfriendly to workers 
a province could get. 

 
How much more unfriendly they could get. 
 
Well, I’m sure those 24,000 workers are, wherever they are 
today, say rah for the NDP-CCF, they raised the minimum 
wage in Saskatchewan. Well they probably couldn’t give a 
sweet tweet, Mr. Speaker, because they’re gone. They’ve been 
chased out. 
 
So the NDP thought they did a good thing but they’ve chased 
the people out of the province. That’s the way they work. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard some boos on the other side when I 
referred to Les MacPherson. Let me relate to someone else. 
This gentleman is known for really cutting down to the core of 
the message, Mr. Speaker — Randy Burton “Straight Talk,” 
“Bright future optical illusion — call an election.” Call an 
election. 
 
And then there’s a photo of our premier, Mr. Speaker. It 
reminds me much of my little chat I had earlier on about the 
Crowns and I’ll read a few of the lines from Randy Burton 
“Straight Talk.” “Bright future optical illusion — call an 
election.” 
 

A survey conducted last year by Canada West Foundation 
showed that fully 70 per cent of this province’s university 
graduates intend to seek careers outside the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s 70 per cent, 70 per cent — 70 per cent. 
That’s where they intend to go. Now I have a cohort of some 
people over here from Prince Albert saying how many stayed? 
We know how many left. We know how many left — 70 per 
cent. This is frightening, Mr. Speaker, it’s frightening for a 
number of cases. It’s frightening because we have spent 12 
years putting these young people through elementary and high 
school — 12 years. 
 
The Minister of Education, when he gets a chance to speak 
some year, can tell us what it costs to give 12 years of education 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

to one of our students in Saskatchewan. It’s tens of thousands of 
dollars. We spent that on those kids and we don’t regret it, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re proud of the children of this province, we’re 
proud of them. 
 
Then we sent them to university and we subsidized them, and 
there’s always the debate about how much we should or 
shouldn’t subsidize them. But we subsidized them and we’re 
still proud of those kids because we know they’re the best. 
They’re the best because they’ve helped make many other 
provinces great in this country. 
 
They’re probably responsible for making Alberta as good as it 
is, Manitoba as good as it is, Ontario as good as it is. They’ve 
gone all over the world. Mr. Speaker. Seventy per cent of those 
young people were going to look out of the province for work. 
 
Now that’s not the end of the problem, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
the end of the problem. Those 70 per cent didn’t just necessarily 
leave, because once they have left, once they have left there’s a 
tendency to bring along their brothers and their sisters because 
they’ll phone home and say, guess what? I got a good job in 
Texas, I got a good job in Brandon. I got a good job someplace 
else. And you know there’s a job here for what you can do. And 
before you know it, Mr. Speaker, mom and dad want to come 
along. 
 
You go on the western side of the province, Mr. Speaker. And 
you and I are fortunate, Mr. Speaker. We live about in the 
middle of the province. It doesn’t affect us quite to the same 
extent as it does when you draw a line let’s say from Swift 
Current, North Battleford and the people that are moving out of 
province from those areas. It’s very, very easy for them to do 
because they know as many people on the other side of the 
border as on this side, so they have friends all over. You and I, 
Mr. Speaker, may not have the same number of friends . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member for Rosthern to 
please not involve the Speaker directly in the argument of his 
debate. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So, Mr. Speaker, the bizarre thing is we’re 
used to — the last 10 or so years of this NDP government — 
people leaving. They promised 30,000 new jobs; they chased 
24,000 out. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, follow this. The students leave, their parents 
leave, and their grandparents really want to stay. And then 
along comes this NDP government and increases their fees up 
to 150 per cent. Remember, Mr. Speaker, that’s doubling the 
fees that they had the month before, taking half of the original 
fee and stacking it on top. In fact, you remember one of the 
examples I gave, Mr. Speaker, where they actually have less 
money than what they need. They’ve got about $160 left. 
They’ve got $266 of expenses. They are in debt, so they may 
have to leave. 
 
Furthermore, they find out that when they get money back from 
their dividends, as I said, Mr. Speaker, and from their RRSPs, 
this NDP government is going to take over 100 per cent of that 
money away from them. And so we do have some of those 
people saying, we may have to move. We don’t want to move. I 
have my spouse in a seniors’ care situation. I don’t need to be 

there, but I can see what’s happening, so we may have to move. 
 
The government, Mr. Speaker, has letters. The Health minister 
has letters on file with exactly those stories. He knows that’s 
happening. The Premier, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has those 
same letters. He’s aware of them. What have they done? 
Nothing. We’ve brought this up day after day, we read letter 
after letter, showing how the people, the seniors, are suffering. 
And this government has done nothing. They’ve been given 
opportunity after opportunity; they’ve turned it down. 
 
Randy Burton, “Straight Talk”: “Bright future optical illusion 
— call an election”. And there’s the gentleman that should call 
the election. 
 
Okay 70 per cent were looking for work elsewhere. Nearly half 
of that 18- to 24-old age group the province is so proud of 
enrolling in university intends to leave Saskatchewan the first 
chance it gets. The first chance it gets. 
 
There’s an attitude problem here, Mr. Speaker. There’s an 
attitude problem. This NDP government has created such a 
negative attitude in this province, it’s unbelievable. 
 
All you have to do is look at their favourite newspaper, The 
Western Producer. Go to the back, find the index under the ad 
section, the classifieds, look under auctions and you will find 
tens and dozens and dozens of farm auctions. Those farmers are 
not moving off the land and having some young person come 
on to it. Those farms are becoming abandoned because of the 
attitude this NDP government has created. 
 
They have created an attitude of negativity that it’s impossible 
to think that anyone could create that kind of a negative 
attitude, that people would actually leave this province that is so 
beautiful, that people would stop farming the land that is so 
fertile. 
 
There are few things that farmers enjoy more, Mr. Speaker, than 
walking out in their field and bending over, and you see this 
when you talk to them. They won’t stand in a field with their 
hands in their pockets for very long before they’ll bend over. 
They’ll pick up some of the soil, they’ll rub it in their hands, 
they’ll let the wind blow some of it away to see how much of it 
is chaff, how much of it is ground and soil. They love the soil. 
Farmers have loved in the soil in this province for a century — 
a century. 
 
And now this NDP government is chasing those people off the 
land. They see no hope there. 
 
I talked earlier on, Mr. Speaker, about the people who came to 
Canada, people who came to Saskatchewan with hope in their 
eyes, with young families that they hoped would be able to go 
ahead and start farming as they did. And it happened for one or 
two generations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And many farmers turned over their land to other young men 
and women and children, and they helped in many kinds of 
ways. They would sell it to them with no down payment. They 
would sell it to them with no interest and basically just, when 
you have some good years you pay something; if you don’t 
that’s fine. There were many, many farms sold to young people 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

 

on that basis. 
 
Not anymore, Mr. Speaker. The seniors moving off the farms 
know they’re going to need every single cent they can so 
they’re not dying out in the streets with this NDP government. 
They know the way this health care is, the way they take care of 
their seniors, the way they raise their utilities, the way 
everything is going up under this NDP government. 
 
They’re going to need every cent they can possibly muster to 
stay alive themselves. And even if they could help, and even if 
they would help, how many young people are actually going to 
say, I want to start farming in a province where this government 
says we have a lottery for rain and you bet on a rain station 
Alberta or Manitoba? 
 
How many are going to say, we’re going to go ahead and start 
farming in a situation where they’ve taken out spot loss — it 
doesn’t exist any more — where, when a government makes a 
deal with farmers, they tear it up. That was probably the worst 
sin of them all, Mr. Speaker, to break that trust with our 
farmers, the people who produce the food for us, that produce 
food for the world; a thing that we all take pride in, Mr. 
Speaker, that we consider ourselves the breadbasket of the 
world, that the hungry people of the world can look to 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan farmers to produce food for 
them. 
 
What did they do? They downloaded on them. They raised their 
taxes. Mr. Speaker, all you need to do is go to some of our farm 
families and say, what has happened with your taxes in the last 
few years. There was a time, Mr. Speaker — there was a time, 
Mr. Speaker — when you asked what the taxes were on a 
quarter of land and the number would be 100, 2, $300, $400 
maybe. That’s now gone over a 1,000 and we’re looking at the 
next 1,000. 
 
That’s only in the last decade or decade and a half, Mr. Speaker. 
For a 100 years there was very little change. This NDP 
government, in 10 years, has caused the taxes to go up for rural 
people in rural Saskatchewan more in the last 10 years than in 
the previous 100 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — That’s the kind of negative attitude they’ve 
created. And we wonder why there aren’t young people who 
want to get into farming when someone tells them our taxes 
have gone up more in the last 10 years because of the socialists 
than the previous 100 years. And I’ve talked about negative 
attitude. That’s what this NDP government has done. They’ve 
created a negative attitude all over this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I well recall, and many of the members of this 
House do as well, when PST (provincial sales tax) was just a 
few percentage points, very few percentage points. Then along 
came an NDP government and you know what? A year had 
barely passed, ballots were barely cold, and we were at 9 per 
cent — 9 per cent. And we wonder why we have a negative 
attitude when people say we can go across all kinds of borders, 
any direction — north, east, west, south — and we’re going to 
have lower PST rates than in Saskatchewan. And then a few 
years later along comes this NDP government and they say 

well, we’re going to have to reduce this a little bit because 
we’re going to bring down taxes to create a better attitude. So 
how do they reduce it? They brought it down a bit; then they 
widened it a whole lot, expanded it a whole lot into many other 
areas. 
 
And fact is, Mr. Speaker, there was a budget not long ago. It 
was two or three years ago. The NDP brought down and they 
said: guess what? We’re going to save the people of 
Saskatchewan taxes. And by the time the Saskatchewan Party 
finished going through that budget to see what it actually said, 
there was an increase in taxes, an actual gouging, an actual 
gouging. 
 
And you know what? I have another member from Regina back 
there saying that doesn’t matter. He says it doesn’t matter that 
you’ve increased a lot of things in taxes, that you took a lot of 
things that hadn’t been under taxes and now you’re taxing it. It 
created a lot of costly red tape, red tape, Mr. Speaker. The 
money of this . . . And we need to talk a bit about red tape. And 
we have one of the schoolteachers from Saskatoon on the red 
side over there saying oh, there’s black tape and red tape and all 
sorts of tape. Well, Mr. Speaker, the one tape I’m . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Order please. We did 
come to what I would call convention in the House that there 
are certain words we would not use in the House, and I would 
remind the member that one of those words was the word red, 
and I would ask him to simply not to use that, to withdraw that 
statement . . . Alongside with other words that we should not be 
using in this House. So I would ask the member just to 
withdraw that particular statement. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, I withdraw that, and I must admit it’s 
sometimes hard not discuss this, but I won’t. So we’re going to 
go on maroon tape. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have this situation. We’re in 
Saskatchewan, and we do have people coming in from out of 
province. It does happen. There are people who look at 
Saskatchewan and realize what all of us who live there 
understand. This is a land of opportunity. There should be 
opportunity here. How can you have so much arable land and 
not have opportunity? How can you have more potash than 
most any other place in the world and not have opportunity? 
How can you have uranium and not have opportunity? How can 
you have all this forestry and not have opportunity? There’s 
opportunity all over the place in Saskatchewan. 
 
(20:15) 
 
So people do come here looking for that opportunity. Then they 
find out, Mr. Speaker, that there is red tape around this province 
like you wouldn’t believe. This government could very easily 
take care of that. And here’s a good idea. They’ll probably pick 
it up right away, and that’s fair enough. The people of this 
province know what the plan of the Saskatchewan Party is, and 
so if they steal one of our plans, Mr. Speaker, if they take one of 
our ideas, as they did with ethanol — everyone in the province 
knows that — we really don’t feel bad about that anymore 
because our plan is out there, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan is out there. People know what it is. They know 
what it is in detail. 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

And so when we lay out the plan and the NDP out there decide 
to cherry-pick one or two of them, that’s okay, Mr. Speaker, 
because those plans are good for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when these individuals come to 
Saskatchewan . . . Let me just pick the dairy industry. There are 
a lot of people who come here and say there’s a good place for a 
dairy. We’ve got water, there’s lots of land. And land is a big 
thing, that’s important. And I’m thinking of an example of an 
individual that came to my constituency, Mr. Speaker, and . . . 
Look who’s all chirping on the other side. All of the people who 
don’t know one end of a cow apart from the other one, Mr. 
Speaker. And they want to get involved in the debate about 
dairy farms. Well, Mr. Speaker, they will have an opportunity 
and they can convince us they can tell one end of a cow apart 
from the other. The two key numbers you need to understand 
are four and two. That’ll help you tell one end apart from the 
other. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when they came from British Columbia to 
Saskatchewan, and they came here because of the opportunity 
of buying a good-sized plot of land, which they said that’s what 
we’re going to need because we want a large operation and 
we’re going to need that to take care of our waste. And that’s 
good; we can do that in Saskatchewan. They can’t do that in the 
Lower Mainland in British Columbia; there isn’t enough land 
there to maintain that kind of growth. 
 
Now it would have been very nice, Mr. Speaker, if at that 
particular time they could have come up to one of the ministers 
. . . Recall the motion we’re debating, Mr. Speaker, that there’s 
a lack of confidence in the current Premier and cabinet. 
 
Okay, let me continue on that. They should have been able to 
come to one minister and say, I want to come to Saskatchewan, 
I want to start a dairy, now what are the hoops? That minister 
should have said, I’ll put you in contact with one person and 
that person will cover the whole gambit of all the things you 
have to take care of. 
 
Not so, Mr. Speaker, not so. Not with this government. There 
was hoop after hoop after hoop after hoop they had to jump 
through. And when he thought he was almost finished, then 
someone else would come out of this bureaucratic woodwork 
created by this NDP regime and say, oh no, but you have to do 
something else. You have to do something else before you can 
get this dairy going. Eventually he did get it going. Very 
frustrated. 
 
I’m glad he persevered because he brought literally millions of 
dollars into this province, and expertise, and his wife, and two 
kids. He brought them all to Saskatchewan and I’m glad he’s 
here. 
 
But what is his attitude? I spoke about attitude a minute or two 
ago. His attitude is this is not an easy place to get going. You 
got to be tough and mean and miserable to get through this 
government and find out what you all have to do. It’s a bit like 
the old-timers I talked about before. You’ve got to be 
determined like you wouldn’t believe. You’ve got to be about 
as determined as a settler was a 100 years ago to get through the 
red tape this government creates. It’s a shame. 
 

He has a bad attitude about that. And when he talks to his 
friends back in British Columbia, many of whom are thinking 
of coming to Saskatchewan to start a dairy, to start a feather 
operation, any one of those sorts of things, he’s going to tell 
them but when you come here you’re going to get caught with a 
lot of red tape. It’s a bad attitude created by a bad government, 
and it’s time we need a good election, and get a good 
government back in here. It will be a Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Straight Talk. We need to call 
an election. “Bright future optical illusion”: 
 

Rather than taking advantage of short-term windfall in oil 
and gas revenues to reduce debt and cut taxes, (let me quote 
here) Calvert chose to jack up spending by some 7.5 per 
cent in last year’s provincial budget. 
 
Even at the inflated level, he missed the budget targets by 
. . . (half a billion dollars). 

 
Half a billion dollars. Mr. Speaker. Randy Burton I believe does 
not have a Saskatchewan Party card and he says, he missed it by 
half a billion dollars. That’s not just peanuts, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a lot of money. That’s half a billion dollars in a province 
that doesn’t even have a million population thanks again to this 
NDP government — half a billion dollars. 
 
Listen to this sentence, Mr. Speaker: 
 

No government in this province has miscalculated so wildly 
since the mid-’80s. 

 
That’s how they run their government along with Bob Rae, 
along with Glen Clark. That’s the company they keep. That’s 
the company they keep. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to talk a little bit about Justice. We need 
to talk a little bit about Justice. We had, Mr. Speaker, at the last 
election, promises made and I’ve brought a few of those to the 
House today. The one promise that I dealt with was the number 
of jobs they were going to create and we know how wildly 
askew that went and we have to review that. Create 30,000. 
They lost 24,000. So we have to keep that in mind. That’s the 
mindset. That’s the negativity that this NDP government is 
creating in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So when we come to justice, the Premier stood up and he said 
yes, justice is a concern for this province. Therefore we will go 
ahead and ensure that we will hire 200 more police officers. 
That election was a long time ago, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
this province think it was a very long time ago. In fact they 
think it’s prime time for another one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Commitment made, 200 police officers. Now let’s look a little 
bit about why that statement was made. Why was that statement 
made? Because under this NDP government in the last decade 
where they’ve been totally in charge, Mr. Speaker, totally in 
charge, we have become the car theft capital of Canada, the car 
theft capital of Canada. 
 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

 

Now you have to put that in perspective, Mr. Speaker, with 
what I said earlier about the people who came to this particular 
province and worked hard and worked diligently and worked 
intelligently and saved their money and were honest, 
community-minded people. Now how come three or four 
generations later does even the minister’s car get stolen, even 
the minister’s car get stolen? 
 
And maybe one of the reasons that the people of this province 
have no confidence in the ministers, they figure surely the 
Minister of Justice who knows how many cars are stolen would 
protect his own car more than that. Or possibly it was a 
government car, and it belonged to the taxpayers, and he said so 
what, who cares? 
 
But anyways these people, Mr. Speaker, who created this 
province, who worked so hard, now a hundred years later this 
province, built up by these kinds of people — honest, hard 
working, community-minded people — now we are the car 
theft capital of the world. And it happened in 10 years under an 
NDP government. There is no one else to blame for that. The 
programs were there. The plans were there. The philosophy 
were theirs. 
 
Everything that was going to happen during those 10 years, they 
have to take full responsibility for. And what have these 
socialists given us? Car theft capital of Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
that is a shame. That is a shame in the truest sense of the word. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, car theft capital of the world. Let’s just 
think about that a little bit. That means in the city of Regina 
when you park your car somewhere there’s a better chance of it 
being stolen than in Vancouver, or Toronto, or Oshawa, or 
Halifax. This is where it’s going to get stolen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some time ago, Mr. Speaker, during the summer months when I 
was in Regina for a bit of a tour of duty here, I stayed at one of 
the hotels in town and was having breakfast there. And a lady 
kept getting up at breakfast and running to the window. And 
this happened quite a number of times and the waitress, 
wondering what was the cause of this behaviour, said to the 
lady, is there something wrong? 
 
And the lady said well, I’m from out of province, I’m from 
Ontario, and I hear that cars get stolen here a whole lot, and I’m 
worried about my car. A tourist coming to visit Saskatchewan 
has found out the reputation given to us by this NDP 
government; can’t even have a breakfast in peace, Mr. Speaker, 
but has to go run to the window to see if her car’s been stolen. 
 
It’s worse than the Old West where you just sort of threw your 
reins over the hitching rail and hoped your horse stayed there 
and someone didn’t scare it. At least you know the horse would 
probably be alive and well when you found it at the end of the 
day. When these people steal the cars, they don’t usually find 
them in good condition. Car theft capital of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s not the end of it, Mr. Speaker. That’s nowheres near the 
end of it. We’re now starting to lead the country in arson. In 
arson. And we’ll see these little headlines all over the paper. 
The newscasts will say, last night the fire department report . . . 
had to report at the sight of so and so many fires. 
 

Most of those fires, Mr. Speaker, were arson. And we have 
chirping going on from the other side; they should be ashamed 
of themselves and they should feel sorry for the people whose 
cars, whose sheds, whose homes, whose churches, Mr. Speaker, 
have been set on fire. 
 
In Saskatchewan it’s a more serious situation than in any other 
province in Canada — arson. Under the 10 years of the regime 
of this NDP government, they’re the ones that have done that. 
Car thefts, arson, break and entry, Mr. Speaker, break and entry. 
 
And again we have the member from Saskatoon chirping as if it 
isn’t her fault. Who else creates the economic situation that 
makes people contributing members of society? It’s the 
government of the day. This government of the day has failed. 
They chased out 24,000 people. The rest of the people left here 
can’t find work. They’re left with a negative attitude. They’re 
left in poverty. What other choices do they have, Mr. Speaker? 
What other choices do they have? 
 
That’s the situation, that’s the attitude, that’s the mentality, 
that’s the environment this NDP government has created for 
them. And they should be ashamed of themselves. They need to 
be ashamed of themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that promise of 200 police officers. And the Justice 
minister just reminded me of that and I thank him for that. 
Some time ago, Mr. Speaker, some time ago when we checked 
the members it was 42. Well you would think when you make a 
promise on something where you’re already the car-theft capital 
of Canada, and you’ve a problem with break and entry, and 
you’ve a problem with arson, and they say we have two more 
years. So in other words what they’re telling us, Mr. Speaker, is 
we really don’t give a care how many cars are stolen, how many 
homes are broken into, how many places are set on fire. We 
have two more years; let the games begin. 
 
What a rotten, cheap attitude from the NDP. They just said it 
right over there. You heard it, Mr. Speaker, I heard it — we 
have two more years. What a shame. They’ve had two more 
years and those crimes are going up and this government isn’t 
doing anything about it. 
 
Some time ago 42 police officers were all they had created, 42. 
Now even if they kept their promise of 200 it would be way 
short, Mr. Speaker, way short. Why would it be short? 
 
On average 41 per cent of our police officers could retire today. 
We have a senior police officer. They’re getting up in years — 
41 per cent could just go ahead and sign the letter, hand it in 
tomorrow and say I’m retiring. They’re going to do that in the 
next couple of years, Mr. Speaker. In the next year or two or 
three or four or five, they will do that. And those will be 
hundreds of police officers. And 42 is by no means, is by no 
means even going to start to fill that gap, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now recently we heard they added about another dozen or so to 
that. So they’re somewheres about a quarter to their promise. 
They’re already halfway through their mandate and they had the 
gall to say, we’ve got two more years. Let the fires burn, let the 
break-ins happen, let the cars be stolen. What a negative 
attitude, Mr. Speaker. 
 



956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

Is it possible that those kinds of people were actually elected to 
this legislature who would say we have two more years and so 
who cares? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that’s being debated here — the people 
of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in the current Premier 
and the cabinet. They have lost confidence, Mr. Speaker. They 
have lost confidence. When we stop to think of how many 
people have had something burned on their block or their 
community, have had a car stolen, have had a break-in take 
place; I am sure, Mr. Speaker, there is not one of us in this 
House that doesn’t know one of those. And yes we do, because 
we know the Minister of Justice who had his car stolen. 
 
Everyone in this province, Mr. Speaker, knows someone who’s 
had one of those crimes inflicted on them. And this particular 
government has the nerve to say we have two more years so let 
it continue. That is a shame, Mr. Speaker, that is a shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then the Justice minister says, well we’re going to 
do something about this. We have between 30 to 80 hard-core 
car thieves around, so we’re going to deal with this. So he 
comes up with this really special plan. Now you have to 
understand this. This is probably 30 to 80, so let’s round it off 
to about 50, it’s in the middle there somewheres. So we’ve got 
these people who are car thieves spread around Regina and the 
Minister of Justice says in his wisdom, I’m going to hire — ah, 
what is it? — four, six social workers and these people will 
solve the problem. 
 
Now here’s how he’s going to do this. Half of them will have 
an office job. The other half are going to try and control 50 car 
thieves — 50 car thieves. Now here’s they do this, Mr. Speaker. 
Here’s how they do this. These car thieves are supposed to be at 
home at a certain hour of the night — and one of the mothers 
spoke very eloquently to the minister the day his car was stolen; 
I was there, I heard it — and here’s how they check up on the 
car thieves. This is how the Minister of Justice takes care of car 
thieves. 
 
So they’re supposed to be at home at a certain hour of the night. 
So then one of his . . . minister’s employees dials up the phone, 
in this case it was a young lady, phones up this young lass and 
says, good evening, are you home? Yes, I’m home. That’s fine, 
click. Job’s done. And the young lass — out the door. Out the 
door to go commit another crime. 
 
And the minister had a severe tongue-lashing from that mother, 
that this government wouldn’t give that mother any of the tools 
she needed to help rehabilitate her child. He got a 
tongue-lashing from that mother and he should remember that. 
 
That is one of those people who is waiting for an election, Mr. 
Speaker, to get rid of this government, to change some of the 
things they’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — They want to get rid of this government. 
 
So these very few social workers are going to make those phone 

calls and are going to change a difference in the number of car 
thieves. Now there has been a decrease in the number of car 
thieves, but not because of that plan, not because of that plan. 
 
They took a number of those young, hard-core car thieves and 
just took them off the street. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party had a plan, and I told you we had a plan. 
Our plan talked about what’s been called boot camps— boot 
camps. 
 
Now we have the minister saying we should put the cars in jail. 
Well isn’t that a typical NDP socialist plan. Don’t deal with the 
criminals, rather take the objects of crime away. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Send them to Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Send them to Moose Jaw. That was plan 
number one, but it didn’t work. 
 
So anyway, we presented the plan of a boot camp where you 
would take these young, hard-core car thieves, we would put 
them in a camp where they’re taught responsibility. They’re 
taught self-respect for themselves, which is one of the things 
that’s very important. Under an NDP government there’s none 
of that. You need to teach them respect for themselves, so they 
would have so much respect for themselves they would say, I 
wouldn’t do this sort of a thing because I’m a person of value, 
I’m a person of importance, I’m a person who has something to 
contribute to my community. Why would I go steal a car? They 
would learn that at a boot camp. 
 
They learn respect for themselves, respect for others, respect for 
other people’s property. 
 
Now what was the criticism of this Minister of Justice and the 
whole cabinet row? Mr. Speaker, what are we debating? We’re 
debating a lack of confidence in the current Premier and the 
cabinet. 
 
This particular Premier and cabinet tried to mock the boot camp 
situation. In Ontario, Mr. Speaker, they had a form of boot 
camp. Their repeat offender rate for young people, Mr. Speaker, 
was 50-some percent — 50-some percent. 
 
They instituted this boot camp. Repeat offenders dropped 20 
per cent. Fact is, it dropped more than 20 per cent depending on 
how you play with the figures. It dropped from 50 per cent, 
down to 30 per cent — almost half. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are more examples we can use. British 
Columbia used to have a boot camp. Their effective rate . . . and 
I spoke with people who worked there. This doesn’t come out 
of the Readers Digest which is where they take their policy 
from. Their repeat rate for young offenders was 25 per cent — 
25 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in British Columbia, 30 per cent in 
Ontario; 50 per cent with this minister. 
 
Half the people going through his plan are repeat offenders, and 
we’re supposed to feel secure. Our seniors are supposed to feel 
secure. Our business people feel secure. I doubt it, Mr. Speaker, 
when we know that under this person’s system, half the people 
will reoffend. 
 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

 

And what did this NDP, front-row, cabinet minister respond to 
the whole thing? Oh, they’ll have to do push-ups, and they 
might get yelled at. First of all, boot camps are not set up with a 
primary purpose of push-ups and being yelled at. But I can 
assure you when the young people in there who are car thieves 
aren’t toeing the line, just to go ahead and say, well you 
disobeyed today. You messed up your room. You didn’t help 
with the work around here. Therefore we’ll turn you loose for a 
day just to steal a car. Maybe you’ll come back and be 
rehabilitated. 
 
That’s the way these people work. They turn them loose again. 
They turn them loose again, so they steal another car. And then 
they say, well I guess that didn’t rehabilitate you; we’ll turn you 
loose again. We need a camp that teaches some discipline, 
teaches some self-respect for themselves, for other people, for 
responsibility. There’s none of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister the other day whether he’d 
informally, voluntarily, on his volition — and not because of 
any of his actions — visited some of the correctional centres 
that we have in Saskatchewan. Now he tells me he’s visited 
them all. Well, Mr. Speaker, those of us who visited them in 
those situations, we know that is not a situation that’s likely 
going to rehabilitate anyone. It’s not going to rehabilitate 
anyone. 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, what’s one of the things that I 
saw when I visited the correctional centre in Saskatoon. Walked 
out on the playground where they’ve got some recreational 
facilities. That’s the same place where that big hole was cut in 
the fence and all the people escaped and ran across Warman 
Road, and they took them a long time to catch them. You will 
recall that, Mr. Speaker; you live in Saskatoon. Now those 
particular individuals, when I looked at this recreational area, 
there were coloured flags, all the same colour tied to every 
recreational device in the correctional area. And I asked the 
person giving the tour, why is this taking place? Well we have 
gangs in here, and I guess it’s the gang who’s now . . . take in 
this case, it was a black cloth. The gang that is represented by 
black, they’ve taken ownership. They’ve won authority around 
the correctional centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to rehabilitate young people, and 
we’ve got gang situations with winners and losers in a 
correctional centre. Let’s get something going that’s going to 
work. Let’s pick up something that has worked. It worked in 
Ontario, it worked in British Columbia. 
 
And then people will get up and say well this is going to cost 
you a whole fortune. Mr. Speaker, we spend $241 a day per 
person on people in our correctional centres. Ontario in their 
boot camp situation spends 214. They run a better program with 
better success for less money. It works, it has worked, it is 
working, and it will work here when a Saskatchewan 
government takes over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And they’re waiting for an election so we can 
get rid of this government and do something positive and clean 
up some of the streets and make this a safer place to live. A 
safer place to live, Mr. Speaker, for those people who’ve 

worked hard all their lives, who are now retired, living in their 
homes and they have to read the newspaper and they see there’s 
arsons taking place, there’s break and entries taking place, cars 
have been stolen, one thing after another has happened. 
 
They want to feel safe and they ought to feel safe, Mr. Speaker, 
because they’re the ones who built this country, they’re the ones 
who built this province, they’re the ones who’ve taken care of 
us, they’re the ones who deserve a whole lot more respect than 
what this NDP government has given us over all of these 
particular years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you would think after all the time that this 
government has been around, they could’ve done their own 
research on that. The research is there. It is published. But you 
see they’re looking for some opportunity to get out of it. Why 
can’t they create something positive? They’ve had ten years — 
ten years. Surely in ten years, Mr. Speaker, someone over there 
could’ve created a system that would work. They can’t. 
 
The NDP is totally incapable of a positive idea that’s going to 
work, that’s going to build this province, that’s going to create 
opportunity, that’s going to create safety and security for the 
people of this province. They’re totally inept. They can’t do it. 
There’s not a good idea on that side — not a good idea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the whole justice scene needs to be reviewed. We 
need to look at, as I mentioned, the interaction with youth in our 
province, we need to look at policing in our province, we need 
to look at the funding for that, and that is something that has to 
be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a very good program that’s being 
developed voluntarily, not because of government, but in spite 
of government. And I think we have to mention that very often, 
Mr. Speaker, things happen in Saskatchewan in spite of this 
NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are a group of individuals working on a collaborative 
approach to marriage breakdown. Now let me explain that a 
little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That approach basically says that when a marriage is breaking 
down, instead of going through the courts, hiring your own 
lawyers, creating a lot of ill will, fighting over the spoils of the 
marriage, you sit down together and you say this isn’t working. 
How can we break this up as amiably as possible without 
hurting ourselves, our kids, our families, our neighbourhoods? 
 
There’s an idea that just exists out there on its own. Why aren’t 
they working with it? Why aren’t they supporting it? It’s a good 
idea. It’s a very good idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a bright future is an optical illusion under this 
government. 
 
There’s a possibility for a bright future but it will be under a 
Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We have a plan. Our plans are definite. 
They’ve been presented all over the province. They presented to 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

record numbers in our cities. 
 
Our leader, Mr. Speaker, our leader has spoken to larger groups 
in our cities than anyone else has in history that can be 
remembered, Mr. Speaker, presenting our plans. And it gets an 
excellent report from everyone that’s there. Why in two or three 
years have the numbers that come out to a leader’s dinner 
grown to that number? 
 
Because they want to hear the ideas. They are hungry for a 
positive approach. They are hungry for ideas that work. They 
are hungry for ideas that make sense, and they’re hungry for an 
election, Mr. Speaker — they’re hungry for an election, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our ideas are presented at those meetings. They were presented 
at the 44 meetings we held around the province, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re good ideas. 
 
We have ideas as I mentioned, on how to deal with the justice 
system. First of all, that commitment that the NDP had for 200, 
that’s an idea that ought to be kept. That’s a very minimum — 
that’s a very minimum. 
 
We will present and we have presented all around the province, 
Mr. Speaker, eight different points. Eight different points on 
how to grow this province. 
 
Now the NDP looks for eight ways to maintain power. They’re 
power hungry and nothing else. Power hungry and nothing else. 
Why else would they have taken in two Liberals who mocked 
them without end and given them, and given them a cabinet 
position with cabinet perks? Why else would they have done 
that, Mr. Speaker, except that it was the only opportunity they 
had to hang onto power? 
 
(21:45) 
 
This NDP group wants nothing but power. They care not for the 
province. It was said very definitely today — and you heard 
them, Mr. Speaker — when they said, who cares about crime, 
we have two more years to try and solve it, two more years, and 
who cares in the interim — one of the most shameful displays 
by an elected representative that I’ve ever seen here before, 
with the exception of one or two other ones that were 
mentioned the other day, but we’ll talk about those displays at a 
different time. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . okay, Mr. Speaker, let me continue. It says . . . 
and we were talking about this particular government that’s not 
going anywheres, and I see them squinting. It reads: “Bright 
future optical illusion — call an election,” and I’ll read the rest 
for you: 
 

So we see his government (this is our Premier) operating on 
two tracks simultaneously — one of them promoting 
government rule and economy, the other one tearing it 
down. 

 
So the government wants to get involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you watched the news tonight, but 
you should have. There was a good article that came on out of 

Yorkton. And we have an individual in Yorkton, as has 
happened in many other places in this province, that puts in 
security systems, and he is very upset. He has basically spent 
his life in electronics, things related to electronics. He has a 
security system installation company in the city of Yorkton. 
Now there used to be three, Mr. Speaker — there used to be 
three other ones — and along came SaskTel in all its wisdom 
and said, well if we don’t install security systems, who else 
would? 
 
There were three other companies doing it, Mr. Speaker. 
SaskTel comes in. Two of them shut their doors. This one 
individual says, I would like to keep on serving the people of 
my community. I’m a community-minded person. I get 
involved in what happens in the community. I care for the 
community. I know them. I want to stay. 
 
So what did . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and the people 
across use the word communicable. Well I think the way 
SaskTel is behaving in this case is almost a communicable 
disease because they went up to this business person and said 
. . . the term they used was partnership. We would like to form a 
partnership. Partnership is socialistic lingo for we want to take 
you over. We want to buy you out or we’ll grind you into the 
dirt. The NDP call that a partnership, but it’s not a partnership. 
It’s just, pure and simple, an unfriendly takeover. 
 
So they’d gone up to him and said, we want to take you over, 
because that’s what it was. He says no, I’ve spent my life doing 
this. I want to stay in this community, I want to help in this 
community. And now what’s he doing, Mr. Speaker? Every 
year, and it’s sometime in March or April he gets this form that 
has some blank lines on it and numbers and boxes and coloured 
paper. It’s called your tax form. And he fills out this tax form 
and he finds out that he owes some income tax because he’s a 
good business person. And he ships some off to Ottawa, and he 
ships some money off to Saskatchewan, and he finds out that 
this gets filtered back through SaskTel and he’s actually 
competing with his own money. Mr. Speaker, can you imagine 
that? Competing with your own money. 
 
It’s like a father and son saying, well son, I’ll buy you the same 
business I have and see who can run the other one out of 
business the first. We would say it’s got to be the most stupid, 
ignorant, self-deprecating thing we can do. And that’s the way 
the NDP behave. Let’s get together and see who can kill each 
other economically the first. That’s the way they behave. And 
this has happened all over the province. 
 
I believe the first one took place in Swift Current. Then they 
moved to Saskatoon and they tried the same trick over there. 
We’re competing time and time and time again with our own 
taxpayers, their own tax dollars. They have to compete with 
that. Who else but with an NDP could do that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, another heading dealing with the election. Star 
Phoenix, Saturday, March 16 — that’s not very long ago — 
2002. Probably by one of our best known sages in the province 
— best known sages in the province — Hugh Arscott. We’ve 
all heard of him. We’ve seen him because when you see him 
once you never forget him. People in Saskatchewan love him. 
He’s full of wit and wisdom and only wit and wisdom — other 
than the NDP over here who are full of a lot other things 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

 

besides wit and wisdom. 
 
Now, he’s talking about joint action. And I’ll have to read a part 
of this to you, Mr. Speaker, because this is good stuff. He’s 
talking about a coalition. He says: 
 

A coalition has kept the NDP in power and only a coalition 
will remove them from power. 

 
And he’s talking about the way these two Liberals sold their 
political souls to the NDP and now they’re sitting in cabinet. 
And they have the nerve to defend the socialist position that 
I’ve talked about for the last hour or two, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Creating the negative attitude, the anti-business attitude, 
chasing thousands of people out of the province; not creating 
opportunity; making our students want to leave the province; 
taking money from our elderly, from our sick; putting debt in 
the Crowns. No end of mismanagement and these two Liberals 
have the nerve to go over them and join them. 
 
Matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, there are three. There are three. 
You will recall very definitely that one of the other members 
from Athabasca also joined them in order to get into cabinet. 
And we know how well that worked because as soon as he got a 
hold of the department we had the North Battleford water 
situation. Those two went right together, hand in hand; 
responsibility is there. It’s a statement that was made, a 
coalition kept the NDP in power and only a coalition will 
remove them. 
 
And he says . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, I said that 
already and will say it many more times: 
 

You began by stating that, after business success, you had 
considered moving to Calgary or Arizona . . . 
 

This is talking about the present Liberal leader, the present 
Liberal leader. And the letter is entitled, “Dear David 
Karwacki:” 
 

. . . you had . . . (decided to move) to Calgary or Arizona, 
but . . . (you thought) you could be more help to 
Saskatchewan through provincial politics. You then sought 
and won the Liberal party leadership. 

 
And then he says that Mr. Karwacki explains his thinking. So 
we need to get this so we understand it: “The Liberals were 
different. The Liberals had the right answer.” 
 
And that’s not on the political spectrum, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
make sure we have that right. 
 

The Liberals had the right answer. Saskatchewan was ready 
for a change. The polls indicated it was the Liberal party 
the people wanted. Liberals had principles. 

 
You were asked why you were spending so much time 
running down the Saskatchewan Party . . . (must have 
something to do with principles, Mr. Speaker, right?) 

 
. . . running down the Saskatchewan Party when the real 
and common enemy was the NDP . . . 

But I don’t imagine he could do that because three of his 
brethren are sitting there in cabinet. So that gets close to home. 
 

. . . the real and common enemy was the NDP and why you 
were spending so much time attempting to resurrect a dead 
political horse when a live one was available (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
The people of Saskatchewan know there’s a live, political horse 
available. They want to ride it to victory in the next election and 
get these people out of there. 
 

When asked if you would consider a coalition with the 
Saskatchewan Party, the answer was a loud and definite, 
“No way.” The word coalition has been a dirty word to 
Liberals since the “defection” of Jim Melenchuk and Ron 
Osika to support the . . . (Liberal Party or the NDP Party). 

 
Unbelievable. 
 
Then Mr. Arscott . . . remember he’s full of wit and wisdom 
now, let’s follow this. And he continues in his letter and he 
says, “You, sir, do not know your history.” And if anything we 
know with Mr. Arscott, he knows a lot about history. He’s a 
history buff. When Mr. Arscott speaks on history it’s important 
for us to listen: 
 

You, sir, do not know your history. I have been where you 
are and have made the same mistakes you are making now. 

 
Consider the general provincial election of 1964. 

 
There’s a few of us remember that. And the rest of you who 
don’t remember it, now need to learn about it. 
 

The Liberals were on the ascendancy and they pleaded with 
the Progressive Conservatives to join them. Together, they 
had the opportunity to permanently unseat the NDP. 

 
Well, the PCs didn’t do it — they didn’t do it, unfortunately. 
 

These are exactly the same reasons or justifications you 
give us now, 38 years later. You are a replay of the past, 
and that has repeatedly failed us. 

 
There have been 15 provincial general elections since the 
first CCF victory in 1944 (15). 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we want to know why this negative 
attitude is there, why this negative attitude is there, we have to 
underline what Mr. Arscott says in this situation. Fifteen 
elections — more of them won by the NDP than not — almost 
all of them with only a handful. I think two or three, did they 
actually win with a majority. 
 
It’s just the way they snuck into power this time. Fewer votes 
than the Sask Party but they’re in government. Just snuck in. 
They’ve done that time and time again. They have never had the 
public support. That’s why they fight so hard to hang onto 
power, because they know they’re not going to get it from the 
public. 
 
Mr. Arscott says 15 provincial elections since the first CCF 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

victory. Now we know why Saskatchewan is in the situation we 
find ourselves in. One CCF-NDP premier after another one has 
led this province down this same path toward a lack of growth, 
toward a negative attitude, toward exporting our young people. 
Tommy Douglas was barely elected and the ballots weren’t 
even cold, as I said earlier on, and he chased oil companies out 
of this province. 
 
The record is there; we know it. Once they were out of 
province, what happened shortly after that? They did a major oil 
find in Alberta. They would have found all kinds of good stuff 
in Saskatchewan if we hadn’t had that start with the CCF. 
 
This NDP government has exactly the same mentality and it’s 
gone on election after election after election — 15 times Mr. 
Arscott tells us. Now we know why we’re in the state we are 
and it’s time we had an election and get rid of this government. 
 
In 13 of the 17 . . . here’s the number I told you about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

In 13 of the 17, the opposition exceeded the CCF/NDP 
totals, even reaching as high as 62.36 per cent of (the) total 
votes. 

 
Saskatchewan is not a socialist province. 

 
We just have a socialist government. This is a government the 
people want to get rid of because we’re not a socialist province. 
We don’t want to be a socialist province, and we want to get rid 
of this socialist government as soon as we can. That’s why we 
need an election, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we need an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Saskatchewan, and I read this over again for 
the members opposite who don’t always listen: 
 

Saskatchewan is not a socialist province. It is a 
free-enterprise province. Too many have voted with their 
feet, given up and moved away. 

 
Twenty-four thousand since the last time we had a provincial 
election; 24,000 voted with their feet and said if we can’t get rid 
of the government, I guess we’ll have to leave. Shameful, 
absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 

They’ve gone and not just the young people . . . 
 
And notice who’s repeating what I said earlier on, Mr. Hugh 
Arscott, the man of wit and wisdom: 
 

. . . but many senior citizens who have left to be closer to 
their children. We are hemorrhaging people . . . 

 
They’re not just sneaking out. We are hemorrhaging people. 
And notice what else he says, Mr. Speaker. It’s important, and 
I’m sure the socialists opposite missed it: we’re not just 
hemorrhaging people; we are hemorrhaging wealth, Mr. Hugh 
Arscott says. 
 
Because with these people goes wealth. With these people goes 
skills and opportunities and people who would contribute to our 

communities. We’ve lost all of that. We’ve lost all of that. And 
with that we didn’t just lose the individuals who are counted on 
a census. We’ve lost the wealth that they would have created. 
The wealth that would have built our roads, would have built 
our schools, would have ensured proper care of our seniors, and 
all the things that we want to do in Saskatchewan because we 
love our people. We love our young people. We love our 
seniors. It’s something that this NDP government, without a 
social conscience, doesn’t know how to do because they’re just 
concerned about hanging on to power. 
 

We can’t keep doing things the same old way. We must 
have change. It is not a question of politics; it is a question 
of survival. 

 
And he goes on to discuss with Mr. Karwacki, what he should 
do to ensure we get rid of the NDP socialist government. Well 
I’d like to read this sentence one more time: 
 

We can’t keep doing things the same old way. 
 
If we do we’ll hemorrhage another 24,000 people before the 
next election. We need an election now to save our young 
people, to save our seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the 
motion and I’d like to read it: 
 

That this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan have 
lost confidence in the current Premier and the cabinet. 

 
I so move, and it’s seconded by the member from Moosomin 
. . . from Cannington. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(22:00) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am more than pleased to rise to second this amendment. And I 
would like to compliment . . . this motion . . . I would like to 
compliment the member from Rosthern for very succinctly 
putting the thoughts of the people of Saskatchewan together. 
 
His words were very profound. His words were very much to 
the point. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, were very succinct. Mr. 
Speaker, there are a good many things that we could talk about, 
about why the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in 
this government. Led by the member from Riversdale, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a continuation of the government of the previous 
member from Riversdale with some significant changes though, 
Mr. Speaker, with some significant changes. 
 
Things that would not have taken place under the previous 
member from Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, things like the attack on 
seniors. Mr. Speaker, we have seen an unprecedented attack by 
the NDP to people who have said for the last 50 years they were 
the great defenders, Mr. Speaker, the great defenders of those 
less fortunate in society. 
 
And yet in their desperation to hang onto power, Mr. Speaker, 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

 

they have turned on the very people that have supported them 
these many years. They no longer care that those seniors in the 
nursing home are still the same ones that are sending a small 
portion, Mr. Speaker, of their old age pension to support the 
NDP party. And, Mr. Speaker, that is going to get a lot smaller 
once the NDP get their hooks into that little remaining income 
that those people have. Mr. Speaker, there will be very little left 
when the new fee structure goes in place for the seniors in our 
nursing homes. 
 
You know, we talk about various jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, 
and what their tax rates are, what their tax rates are. You know, 
the NDP like to say that you need a progressive tax system so 
that those at the bottom pay the least amount and those who 
have the greatest income pay the most amount. And so you 
have various percentage levels of income tax. You have 25 per 
cent, 33 per cent, 49 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Well this 
government, Mr. Speaker, has gone beyond the bounds of any 
other government. 
 
They were taking a fixed amount, Mr. Speaker, and then adding 
another 50 per cent tax take up to the maximum of $1,500 a 
month. But that wasn’t good enough for them because, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the seniors still had income. They still had 
enough, Mr. Speaker, to pay for their cable TV. They still had 
enough to go for coffee, Mr. Speaker. They still had enough to 
buy a gift for their spouse. They still had a little money, Mr. 
Speaker. That could not be allowed to continue. 
 
They were wealthy people, Mr. Speaker, according to the 
Premier. And so, Mr. Speaker, what can they do? What can the 
NDP government do? How about the supposed wealthy people 
who are earning greater than $12,000 a year? Well what they 
do, Mr. Speaker, they change the tax rate. They maintain the 
fixed amount at the bottom end and then change the tax rate. 
 
And it’s not a 25 per cent tax, Mr. Speaker; it’s not a 50 per 
cent tax which was in place before. It’s a 90 per cent tax. No 
one else, Mr. Speaker, charges 90 per cent taxes. It’s even 
worse, Mr. Speaker, than the rates charged by loan sharks. They 
don’t charge 90 per cent a month but this government is going 
to charge seniors 90 per cent a month, Mr. Speaker. It’s usury. 
That’s the term that’s used when loan sharks are charging those 
kinds of rates, Mr. Speaker, but when governments do it’s 
simply called taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is it 90 per cent on your gross income, it 
depends what kind of income you have. If you have dividend 
income of any amount, be it $100 a month or $1,000 a month, 
the rate there by the time the calculation is completed, Mr. 
Speaker, is 112 per cent. So you owe more money than you 
actually took in. Now that is NDP economics, Mr. Speaker; you 
owe more money than you could even earn. 
 
You know, I don’t know why they just don’t say on the form 
when you apply to go into the nursing home it’s . . . how much 
do you earn, give it to us. And just get it over with. That, I 
believe, would make the form simpler, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 
the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in this 
government. 
 
If there was one group in society, Mr. Speaker, that the people 
expected the NDP government to have even a mediocum of 

compassion for it was for our pioneers. It was for our seniors. It 
was for our mothers and fathers, Mr. Speaker. Our 
grandparents. But the NDP, the government, backbenchers, the 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker, have abandoned them all. Every single 
one of them in a nursing home, Mr. Speaker. They are taking 
virtually every cent they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite, the Minister of Health, 
said that oh no we’re not going to touch their assets, Mr. 
Speaker. But once you hit 69 years old and you have to cash in 
your RRSPs, both the principal and the income they have 
earned become income to you. And so your savings, the 
principal of your savings, now becomes income, now becomes 
taxable at the 90 per cent tax rate, and you lose most of it, Mr. 
Speaker. That is what this NDP government will do to stay in 
power, Mr. Speaker. That is what they will do. They will take 
the money away, Mr. Speaker, from seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a columnist, an editorial writer in this 
province, that I think hits the nail right on the head. And its the 
Waterfront Press from Lumsden, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Lucien 
Chouinard is the editor, and his column is called “Shoot the 
Bull . . .”. And, Mr. Speaker, the title of this particular article is 
called “Voodoo Economics”. 
 
And I would like to read some of his comments about the 
government’s budget that they brought down earlier this month, 
part of which is the gouging of senior citizens income, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so Lucien says: 
 

So what’s the problem? Now that they want to use that 
money they have to borrow it. 

 
Talking about the government’s fancy slush fund, Mr. Speaker, 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. He says: 
 

Essentially Saskatchewan is now running a deficit. 
According to the government of Saskatchewan this is an 
accepted accounting practice. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I kind of recall back in late ’91, early ’92 
when I was first elected here, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
government had a commission. It was called the Gass 
Commission, Mr. Speaker, and it talked about some of the 
practices of the previous administration, some of their funding, 
Mr. Speaker, of school construction. It talked about how it 
wasn’t proper, how it was the wrong way to budget by having a 
separate account for the construction cost of schools by 
providing mortgages over extended period of time and bringing 
them in bit by bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And lo and behold, what does the Minister of Finance do in this 
budget? What does the Premier, resident of Moose Jaw, 
representing Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, what does he 
do? 
 
They form a new Crown corporation to do the very things that 
the Gass Commission said was wrong, Mr. Speaker. The very, 
very same thing. The things that a good number of those 
members stood in their place both during the ’80s, throughout 
the early ’90s, and condemned, Mr. Speaker, are the very 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

practices they’re using today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the things, as my colleague from Swift 
Current said, the things they beheld are the things they have 
become. Mr. Speaker, they’re copying them — they’re copying 
them. And fact is, Mr. Speaker, they’re very poor copycats at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to carry on with some of Lucien’s words. 
And he says: 
 

Let’s put this in laymen’s terms. At the end of the month 
you have a couple of hundred bucks left in your account. 
You decide to take (your) money and pay down your 
mortgage. Now how do you explain this to your spouse? A) 
you have $200 left in your account and you’re saving it for 
a rainy day; or, B) you have no money left in your account 
but you’ve paid down some of the mortgage. 

 
Most of us are in . . . to carry on with Lucien’s words: 
 

Most of us would use option B. But let’s say we have used 
option A like the government did. When (your) spouse 
went to use the money and found the account empty, would 
he or she feel they had been lied too (sic)? Probably. 

 
Lucien goes on to say: 
 

Why didn’t the government just come out and tell us the 
truth? Could it be that they thought it would make them 
look bad because it meant that they were once again 
running a deficit? 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chouinard has the government figured 
out. He understands their financing methods. He understands 
their explanations, Mr. Speaker. While they may very well say 
they have a savings account, there is no money in it. So when 
they take money out of it, Mr. Speaker — such as if you have a 
line of credit — you have now accumulated a debt; a debt that 
you use to pay down another debt perhaps, Mr. Speaker, but 
you’re still left with a debt because there was no money. 
 
Mr. Chouinard goes on to say to the Premier: 
 

. . . your ship is sinking. It appears that new leaks are 
springing up much faster than you can plug the old ones. 
Maybe it’s time to abandon the old ship and start building a 
new one which reflects the modern world. The days of 
Tommy Douglas economics are no longer relevant. It’s 
time to move on. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chouinard has it figured out, and it’s 
too bad that perhaps the member from Regina Lumsden doesn’t 
read the local Lumsden paper, Mr. Speaker, and gain an 
understanding of what the real people in the world are saying 
about this government and why they have lost confidence in 
them, why they believe it’s time, Mr. Speaker, for an election. 
 
Mr. Chouinard also has another very good article. It’s called, 
“The same old show.” And again, Mr. Speaker, the title of his 
column every week is called “Shoot The Bull . . .” by Lucien 
Chouinard, editor of the Waterfront Press. And it goes on, Mr. 
Speaker, to talk about . . . it’s pretty simple. 
 

The economic environment in this province is not exactly 
stellar. I’ll lay things out for you (he says.) If you haven’t 
figured it out yet, every cash dollar starts its life in the 
hands of a private enterprise. 

 
In the past, this may not have been a big issue. Lack of 
transportation and communication meant that you started a 
business in Saskatchewan; you likely stayed here. The same 
went for working people. Most people stayed and work close to 
home. Only the truly adventurous made the trek to work in 
another province. 
 
Fast forward to today. Transportation and communications have 
made our world a lot smaller. Businesses and people are much 
adventurous and go where they get the best deal. That deal may 
be in Alberta, Ontario, the US (United States), or anywhere 
across our little blue planet. To stay in the economics game, an 
area must be competitive, both tax- and labour-wise. 
 
(22:15) 
 
So what’s happening in Saskatchewan? Our government is 
running the same old show. It’s still governing the same way it 
did back in the days of Tommy Douglas. The problem is that 
the captive audiences of businesses and entrepreneurs that 
Tommy and the boys had, have become really tired of forking 
over their hard-earned dollars and have moved on. 
 
The businesses left are paying a bigger and bigger share of the 
pot, and eventually they, too, will get tired and move on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lucien goes on to say: 
 

In Saskatchewan, if Saskatchewan is ever going to get out 
of the economic doldrums, major changes will have to take 
place. For one, we need more taxpayers. To do this, we 
need more privately owned businesses, not Crown 
corporations, not government workers, but people who are 
willing to make it on their own. 

 
And how do you get these people here? You have to create 
a business-friendly environment. This means lower taxes, 
less government interference, and the promotion of private 
enterprise. This runs contrary to the socialist ideals many 
held in this province. Many cling to these ideals like 
passengers dancing on the deck of a sinking Titanic. In the 
face of certain destruction, they are denying anything is 
wrong. 

 
Mr. Speaker, every show eventually comes to a close. The 
Tommy Douglas show is long in the tooth, no longer has a 
paying audience. It’s time for the new show that will raise the 
paying audience, the taxpayers, to its feet. If it doesn’t happen 
soon, the curtain will come down on Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not prepared to sit by and allow the 
curtain to come down on Saskatchewan. We believe in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, there’s not a member on this side of the 
House at least, who doesn’t believe in Saskatchewan and 
believe that it’s not too late to turn it around. 
 
But to do that, Mr. Speaker, is going to take a bold and 
imaginative step, something the government opposite has not 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

 

presented in 10 years because, as Mr. Chouinard says: 
 

They’re still operating on the economic plan for 1944. 
 
An economic plan, Mr. Speaker, that has failed since 1944. We 
had, Mr. Speaker, about a million people in 1944. Today we 
still have a million people but we have a whole lot less 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, and our prospects, while looking good 
in 1944, are severely diminished and are dropping out of sight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one way to turn this around, and that’s 
what people are asking for. They have lost confidence in this 
government, Mr. Speaker. They have lost confidence in the 
Premier. They have especially lost confidence in the cabinet 
ministers who continually fail us, Mr. Speaker, investing in 
things like SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potash Utility 
Development Company), Mr. Speaker; providing deficit 
budgets, Mr. Speaker; failing the people of North Battleford 
with their water; gouging the seniors, Mr. Speaker, on 
long-term care; not protecting us from car thieves, Mr. Speaker. 
All of those things are failures created by this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as people pick up and move out of this 
province, the last thing they see as they cross the border, in 
whatever direction they’re going, Mr. Speaker, is the failure of 
the Minister of Highways because the last thing they see is 
another pothole as they cross the border, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, they see the failure of the 
Minister of Agriculture to provide for agriculture. They know 
of the destruction of the GRIP program. They know, Mr. 
Speaker, how . . . The Minister of Agriculture from 
Saskatchewan has lost the confidence, not only of the people of 
Saskatchewan, but of the federal government. They can’t even 
talk to Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa. And the fact is today, 
it turns out a program that the Minister of Agriculture believed 
would provide 1,500 permits for access to water in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, for drilling wells, digging dugouts, it 
turns out is only 800 because he failed to be able to 
communicate with the Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, people are desperate for water in this 
province, and the minister fails to be able to deliver even a 
minimal program of 1,500 units of assistance and comes up 
with 8 because he can’t talk to the Minister of Agriculture in 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. That’s a very sad comment, very, very 
sad comment on the abilities of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and if there is one last cabinet minister who has 
failed utterly and dismally in providing for this province, it’s 
the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote, the minister 
of Economic Development. I don’t know why it’s even called 
that, Mr. Speaker, because there is no economic development in 
this province. 
 
You know, today in my mail, I got a fancy little brochure that 
said, “Major projects in Saskatchewan.” Well most of those 
major projects, Mr. Speaker, are pie-in-the-sky dreams, projects 
that have been on that list time and time and time again. As 
long as this government has been in power, those same 
programs, projects have been listed and yet they have still failed 

to even turn the first sod, Mr. Speaker. They’re pie-in-the-sky 
dreams and nothing more than that. But yet, Mr. Speaker, they 
continue to brag about them. 
 
That’s their economic policies, Mr. Speaker, economic policies 
that do not provide any assistance, do not provide any jobs. If 
they did provide jobs, then perhaps this government would have 
succeeded in reaching its goal that it set out for itself in 1999 
when it last ran for election, an election which my colleague 
from Rosthern pointed out a number of times that the 
government opposite, the government party opposite, received 
fewer popular votes than did the members on this side of the 
House. 
 
But they promised in that election, Mr. Speaker, that there 
would be 30,000 new jobs created in this province by the time 
that the next election rolled around. Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 
lost 24,000. They now face a deficit of their promise, Mr. 
Speaker, of 54,000 jobs. 
 
Fifty-four thousand taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. Can you image the 
benefit to this province that 54,000 taxpayers would add? You 
know what, Mr. Speaker? That’s almost 50 per cent of the 
people that pay taxes in this province, that pay in more in taxes 
than they collect back from the government, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s almost 50 per cent more. 
 
If the government was successful in creating those 54,000 jobs 
— not that the government should be creating the jobs, but 
rather creating their environment to create those jobs, Mr. 
Speaker — but if we had those 54,000 jobs, it wouldn’t be 
necessary to gouge the seniors in the nursing homes, Mr. 
Speaker. It wouldn’t be necessary to raise the tuition fees for 
students, Mr. Speaker, in our universities and post-secondary 
education classes. 
 
It was just related to me the other day, Mr. Speaker, that 
students in university look at those students that remain in this 
province and don’t leave as losers, Mr. Speaker. That is how 
bad it has become under the NDP government. When their 
classmates look at anyone who stays in Saskatchewan as a 
loser, Mr. Speaker, that’s unacceptable. That’s unacceptable, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of attitude that needs to be 
changed, and the members opposite are not capable of making 
that change, Mr. Speaker. They are stuck in the time warp of the 
1940s. The only view they see, Mr. Speaker, is in their 
rear-view mirror. Their only policies are a half a century old. 
And they have failed for that entire half century, Mr. Speaker, 
and they will not succeed in the future. 
 
Yes, there are a good number of people, Mr. Speaker, who are 
very, very interested in the debate tonight because they have 
made up their mind, Mr. Speaker. And when you go across 
rural Saskatchewan, when you go across urban Saskatchewan, 
when you go to any corner of this province, it doesn’t matter, 
Mr. Speaker, whether it’s downtown Regina, downtown 
Saskatoon, whether it’s downtown Alida, or any rural 
municipality, there’s one question, Mr. Speaker, on the minds 
of everyone in this province. And that is: when is the next 
election? 
 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

They know what they want to do, Mr. Speaker, they know. 
They just want the opportunity to get rid of this government, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s all they’re waiting for, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re waiting for the opportunity to get rid of this 
government. And it doesn’t matter, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 
the cab driver, whether it’s a nurse, whether it’s a school 
teacher, a farmer out on his tractor, or the waitress at her job, 
they all want a chance to express their opinion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry, members, I’m having difficulty 
hearing the speaker and the speaker right now should be the 
member for Cannington. Order, please. Order. Order, once 
again. Order, please. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan are as anxious as the members on 
both sides of this House are for an election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But the people of Saskatchewan have an 
idea of what they want, which is not similar to the members 
opposite. If the members opposite had an idea of what direction 
to go, they’ve had 11 years to do it, Mr. Speaker, but they’re not 
succeeding. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want a chance to vote, Mr. 
Speaker. They want a chance to express their opinion in favour 
of free enterprise, Mr. Speaker. They want a chance to express 
their opinion for a responsible government — which is 
something that the party opposite has not accepted in 11 years. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether it was the first day they came into 
power or today, Mr. Speaker, they cannot accept responsibility 
for any of their actions. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the citizens of this province know who is 
responsible for the last 11 years. They know, Mr. Speaker, who 
to hold responsible for that, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan, the electorate of Saskatchewan know, Mr. 
Speaker, how to assume their responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they will — they will exercise their 
responsibility. And when, Mr. Speaker, when they get the 
chance to go to the ballot box, Mr. Speaker, they will mark their 
Xs in a responsible manner, recognizing history, recognizing 
the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s one thing the people of Saskatchewan want. They want 
hope, and they want a future, Mr. Speaker. And they understand 
that under the NDP there is no hope and there is no future for 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members of the Assembly, it now 
being shortly past the hour of 10:30, this House will stand 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. I wish everybody a pleasant 
evening. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:30. 
 


