















































Hansard: May 29, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1667 
 May 29, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
disappointed with the treatment of the snowmobile industry in 
this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails and obtain funding 
for this through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown land and 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registrations. 

 
The five petitions I’m presenting, Mr. Speaker, are signed by 
citizens of Melfort, Choiceland, North Battleford, Debden. 
 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today on behalf of people concerned about the cost of 
prescription drugs: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the 
tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on the petition this afternoon are from the 
communities of Sylvania, Bjorkdale, Porcupine Plain, Hudson 
Bay, and Tisdale. 
 
I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to do with the overfishing of Lake of the 
Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Stockholm, Dubuc, and 
Whitewood. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable 
condition of Highway 42 in the Arm River constituency. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Riverhurst and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens from Emerald Lake who are concerned about 
adequate, reasonably priced telephone service. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins and provide reliable cellular telephone coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Hague, Vanscoy, Emerald Lake, 
Saskatoon, Rosetown, Shellbrook, and Leask. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
won’t come as a big surprise today. I have a petition of citizens 
concerned with Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the good 
community of Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens all over Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
Besnard Lake situation. And the prayer reads as follows: 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nation representatives to 
bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation and 
to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people of the future. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Mont 
Nebo, Parkside, Shellbrook, Leask, Canwood, P.A. (Prince 
Albert), Saskatoon, Holbein, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services; 
 
A petition concerning telephone service to parks in the 
province; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 11, 23, 24, 134, and no. 142. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Health Care 

 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my pleasure 
as Chair of the Standing Committee on Health to rise in this 
House to table the committee’s report. This report was released 
to the public last October 30. Mr. Speaker, today I would like to 
table it for the formal record of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
As members of this Assembly will recall, Mr. Speaker, last May 
16 the legislature established the Standing Committee on 
Health. The committee was instructed by motion of this 
Assembly to receive and report on representations from the 
public with respect to the final report of the Commission on 
Medicare authored by Ken Fyke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you and members of this Assembly will recall that 
the Standing Committee on Health conducted hearings over a 
six-week period concluding in late July. 
 
During that time, 109 individuals and organizations appeared 
before the committee, from which the committee received 134 
written briefs. The committee received an additional 512 
written submissions from a cross-section of interested 
individuals in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of this committee was about listening to 
the people of Saskatchewan and hearing their views about what 
changes they thought needed to be made in the health care 
system. It was about people being heard and those views then 
being considered and taken into account in crafting the 
government’s response to the Fyke Commission, which is the 
Action Plan for Health Care. 
 
During the hearings of the committee, the government and the 

public heard that the people of Saskatchewan strongly support a 
publicly funded, publicly administered health care system. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan people are proud of our system of 
medicare and all that it stands for. They want to maintain it, 
improve it, and strengthen it for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people also realize that in order to 
keep our health care system strong into the future we need to 
change it now. The people told us that they supported change as 
long as it was part of a clearly stated plan. It was made very 
clear to us that people do not want change that would disrupt 
health care delivery in their communities, Mr. Speaker. They 
want the security of knowing that they have reasonable access 
to health care professionals, hospitals, emergency care, and 
other vital services in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public response to the Fyke Commission on 
Medicare was mixed, depending on the particular 
recommendation being discussed. The committee heard 
testimony and received submissions from a wide range of 
groups and individuals with varying degrees of knowledge of 
and experience with the health care system. 
 
It was apparent that at times, Mr. Speaker, members of the 
public and even health care providers themselves did not share 
the same interpretation of the terms and concepts used in the 
commission’s report. As a result sometimes the 
recommendations in the report meant different things to 
different people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard that the majority of respondents 
supported the concept of a primary health care service model 
and creation of primary health service teams. However, Mr. 
Speaker, the committee also heard repeatedly that the proposed 
alternate model of health service delivery must be in place and 
proven to be effective before any restructuring of current health 
care services or any closure or conversions of rural hospitals 
takes place. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, as the Wolseley health committee 
put it, “Do not change anything until the replacement system is 
in place.” Mr. Speaker, the Prairie West Health District also 
advised, “Don’t make any changes without knowing that the 
alternative you are proposing is in place and working.” 
 
Several groups of health care providers maintain, Mr. Speaker, 
that their members should be included in the primary health 
services team. These included the following health 
professionals and individuals: Registered Psychiatric Nurses 
Association, the Canadian Mental Health Association 
(Saskatchewan Division); the medical laboratory technologists; 
the Midwives Association of Saskatchewan; the Chiropractors 
Association of Saskatchewan; medical herbalists; 
complementary therapists; the Canadian Diabetes Association 
(Saskatchewan Division); the Catholic Health Association of 
Saskatchewan; and the Saskatchewan Catholic Health 
Corporation; and Saskatchewan Society of Occupational 
Therapists; the Saskatchewan Palliative Care Association; 
Dieticians of Canada (Saskatchewan Region); the 
Saskatchewan Physiotherapy Association; the Saskatchewan 
Psychological Association; the Representative Board of 
Saskatchewan Pharmacists; the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association; the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses; the 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association; the 
Saskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical Nurses; the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association; and the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all groups that are supportive of a 
primary health care approach to providing health care services 
and who see themselves as making a contribution to that 
process. 
 
While acknowledging that the Fyke report contains some 
positive recommendations, Mr. Speaker, we saw that the 
submissions from towns, rural municipalities, and individual 
rural residents focused almost exclusively on the perceived 
negative effect of the closure or conversion of smaller rural 
hospitals. 
 
Most health districts felt that Mr. Fyke’s recommendations 
regarding consolidation of rural hospitals were much too . . . 
were too much change, too quickly, for rural residents to accept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the commission’s 
recommendations regarding emergency response and medical 
transportation, again we saw that rural residents were almost 
unanimously of the view that the standard distances for access 
to emergency services were unacceptably long. There was some 
skepticism, Mr. Speaker, among rural residents that a 
centralized emergency dispatch system would improve response 
times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard that there was strong support for the 
commission’s recommendations regarding health promotion, 
disease and injury prevention, and developing strategies to 
address the broader determinants of health. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
some respondents felt that the commission did not go far 
enough in addressing these issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who spoke to the issue surrounding northern 
health care supported the recommendation for continuing 
development of a northern health strategy. Mr. Speaker, on the 
matter of health care service delivery for Aboriginal people, 
those who spoke directly to the issue expressed support for Mr. 
Fyke’s recommendation for a structured dialogue. They agreed 
that Aboriginal health care must become a higher priority on the 
health care agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Most respondents were positive about the recommendation to 
establish a Quality Council, Mr. Speaker; however, they 
expressed a need for more clarification about the powers and 
membership of the proposed council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the course of the public hearings and in the 
written submissions received by the committee, no consensus 
emerged with respect to the commission’s recommendations for 
health district consolidation. We heard mixed views on matters 
such as how many districts there should be, and the methods of 
appointing boards. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fyke’s recommendation to clarify 
the relationship between health districts and the provincial 
government met with universal approval. With respect to 
human resources, health care provider groups were supportive 
of the recommendation to coordinate human resource planning 

and management on a province-wide basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many respondents focused their comments on 
current health care staff shortages and the need to address issues 
of recruitment and retention. For example, Mr. Speaker, the 
University of Saskatchewan and health care provider groups 
and others who addressed the issue supported the 
recommendation to increase health research funding. 
 
We also heard strong support expressed for the report’s 
recommendations regarding investments and information 
systems, including the development of an electronic health 
record, Mr. Speaker. Respondents felt our health care system 
should continue to be administered and funded publicly through 
taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many respondents expressed strong opposition to 
user fees in any form. The committee also heard, however, that 
some individuals and communities would be prepared to accept 
some form of user fee rather than lose their local health services 
or facilities. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, several groups suggested health care 
coverage should be expanded to include additional services and 
medications and supplies not currently funded under medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, differing views were heard with respect to how 
physicians in Saskatchewan should be paid. No clear consensus 
emerged on this issue. Some organizations suggested that the 
pilot project approach to the changes proposed by Mr. Fyke 
might be useful. 
 
The possible economic impact of Mr. Fyke’s proposals and the 
questions of whether health care and economic development 
issues should be linked were also raised on several occasions, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some respondents put forward that supporting community 
economic development is an important aspect of rural health 
care. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, let me say that public response to 
the Fyke Commission on Medicare can easily be described as 
mixed, depending on the recommendation. However, Mr. 
Speaker, the Legislative Assembly charged the standing 
committee with the task of listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan express their views on health care in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this report shows we have 
accomplished this task. As I mentioned in the beginning of my 
speech, Mr. Speaker, during the six-week period when the 
committee met last summer, we heard from a wide variety of 
groups and individuals representing various Saskatchewan 
interests. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the work of this committee 
helped to guide the development of the action plan. The 
government has acted on what it heard from the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The Action Plan for Saskatchewan 
Health Care, which was publicly announced by the Premier and 
the Minister of Health on December 5, 2001, is proof of that, 
Mr. Speaker. 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the other 
members of the Legislative Assembly that served on this 
committee with me. Those members include: the Hon. Jim 
Melenchuk, the member for Saskatoon Northwest, as 
Vice-Chair of the committee; Brenda Bakken, the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy; the Hon. Buckley Belanger, the member 
for Athabasca; Bill Boyd, the former member for Kindersley; 
Rod Gantefoer, the opposition Health critic and member for 
Melfort-Tisdale; Warren McCall, the member for Regina 
Elphinstone; and the Hon. Andrew Thomson, the member for 
Regina South. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members are to be commended for the time 
and effort they devoted to this very worthwhile cause. I would 
also like to thank the staff of the Office of the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly for their diligent work on this committee 
and for the assistance provided to the committee by our 
researcher, Ms. Leslie Anderson, in the preparation of this 
report. 
 
The committee also wishes to extend its appreciation to all the 
individuals and groups who made oral presentations and 
submitted written briefs. With that, Mr. Speaker, I hereby move 
the motion to table the report of the Standing Committee on 
Health, seconded by the member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and second the motion tabling the 
report from the Standing Committee on Health 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee spent most of last summer in this 
Chamber listening to the submissions by people across this 
province in regard to their concerns and aspirations and dreams 
and even some fresh new ideas about how the health care 
system can be improved in our province 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know and members of the Assembly know, 
over the last number of years the whole issue of how we can 
better deliver health care, not only in this province but in this 
country, has been studied rather exhaustively. And currently we 
have in front of us as well, in addition to the Fyke and the 
Mazankowski reports that are relatively recent, we have the 
Senator Kirby report. And Mr. Romanow of course is crossing 
the country bringing together another report. 
 
And I think that, Mr. Speaker, if there was as much energy put 
into actually improving our health care system as there has been 
in studying it, we may have indeed some tangible benefits for 
the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people not only in Saskatchewan but people 
across this country recognize some fundamental principles that 
have to be met in order to improve our system. Change is 
necessary and everybody understands that. And nowhere in this 
country is change more needed than in this province. 
 
We have the unenviable position being in a position to have the 
longest waiting lists. We see a real difficulty in deliver 
appropriate and effective health care to rural Saskatchewan. We 

see urban people in the same queue as everyone else on these 
waiting lists and a great deal of demands for pressure on 
long-term care and all the rest of these issues. 
 
We see an exodus of our medical professionals on every level, 
from the very high-end specialists to people that work in our 
institutions who are going to better opportunities. The 
government seems to be content to accept the statistics of 1,200 
registered nurses leaving the province over the last three years. 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is a real crisis in making sure that we 
have effective and efficient training programs for medical 
professionals in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the time has come where we got to simply 
make sure that change is going to happen in a meaningful way. 
The action plan is the government’s latest endeavour at trying 
to change and rejig things. And we are quite concerned that 
again there’s going to be more inaction and navel-gazing than 
concrete steps that are going to be taken to improve health care 
for all of our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, listening to the people with the rest of the 
members of the Standing Committee on Health Care was an 
important and very worthwhile exercise because it told 
everyone in this province that it’s time to take action about 
health care in a meaningful way. And this government now has 
the challenge of doing that; and so far they haven’t met that 
challenge. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: can the minister please 
release pages 1 to 22 and pages 35 to 45 of the Valjean 
Provincial Pasture vegetation and range resource inventory 
report; and further to that, how much did this study cost? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: regarding Review 2000 of the 
Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board: (1) has the 
government made a decision regarding implementation of 
recommendation 5.06 to institute an independent appeal 
tribunal for decisions? If so, what is the anticipated date for 
the implementation of this recommendation; and (3) if not, 
does the government have any alternate plan to ensure that 
an independent appeal process is implemented? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 55 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority: what is the cost breakdown of the 
$82,000 annual cost for the operation of the kitchen in the 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

 

Regina South liquor store, and how many liquor stores in 
the province have this type of kitchen, and what is the cost 
breakdown for the operation of each? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with 
pleasure that I would like to introduce to you today a group of 
58 students from St. Angela Merici School in the constituency 
of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. They’re accompanied by two of 
their teachers, Mme. Dubé and Mr. Walker, and they’re sitting 
in the west gallery. 
 
These grade 4 students are here to learn a little bit about the 
legislature, to explore the building with the guides. 
 
And they are accompanied by parents as well. St. Angela 
Merici has a very active parent-teacher group. I was fortunate 
enough to meet with them earlier in the year to look at the 
budget. And we have today, accompanying these students, 
parents: Lee Phillips, Cindy Hovind, Shelley Dobranski, Paul 
Jakubowski, Barbara Troy-Hebert, Donna Garchinski, Art 
Timm, Mike Brassard, Trudy Hannaford, and Eleanor 
Malinowski. 
 
And so I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
committed parents, teachers, and students to this Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature a 
person seated in your gallery, Chris Veeman, who is a 
constituent of mine, who is home for the summer from his 
studies at the University of Toronto Law School. 
 
Chris is a competitive cyclist and I think he’s spent a lot of time 
in academia, particularly at the University of Saskatchewan. His 
interests are varied in terms of history, politics, and economics. 
And I would like to have all members of the legislature join me 
in welcoming Chris Veeman to the Legislative Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
also, I would like to welcome Chris Veeman who used to work 
in my office as a ministerial assistant. And I’ll ask Chris to 
stand so that you could meet him. 
 
He is presently working for the Aboriginal Justice Commission 
in Saskatoon for two months, then he returns to Toronto to 
work with Torys. And then next year, he’s going to clerk with 
the Federal Court of Canada in Ottawa. 
 
And I guess I want to say, on behalf of all of us, 
congratulations, Chris, on a job well done and on a job 
representing Saskatchewan among the best legal minds in the 
country. So thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you 
today, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, the daughter of our 
Sergeant-at-Arms. Her name is Shannon Shaw. Shannon is 
convocating from the University of Regina tomorrow. 
 
And with Shannon today are her grandparents, Harry and Ann 
Betts from Penticton, BC (British Columbia) and her aunt and 
uncle, Barb and Doug Ferris, who are retired and I understand 
have no fixed address at this time. 
 
And I ask all members to welcome them to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Battleford Old Time Fiddlers Jamboree 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday Shirley 
and I had the . . . we attended the sixth annual Old Time 
Fiddlers Jamboree in the Battlefords, in Battleford. This event is 
organized and hosted by the Battleford Branch 9 of the Royal 
Canadian Legion. 
 
The all-day program gives local performers and other featured 
artists an excellent opportunity for exposure to a large audience. 
The talent is superb. It is especially exciting to listen to our very 
young champions and appreciate their dedication. 
 
Then on Sunday the finale is a church service with a choir of 
fiddles providing the music. This event requires a great deal of 
hard work to pull it off so successfully. I would ask everyone to 
join me in thanking and congratulating the Battleford Branch 
Legion for their job well done. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Nomination Meeting 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, last night an event of 
political significance was taking place in the city of Weyburn 
— the home of Tommy Douglas, Auburn Pepper, Ron 
Wormsbecker, and, Mr. Speaker, as of last night dare I say the 
home of the future NDP (New Democratic Party) MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency. 
 
The Weyburn NDP nominated our first candidate for the 
upcoming festivities. The Premier and 150 enthusiastic 
supporters welcomed Sherry Leach, and she is as good an 
opening act as you can find in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sherry Leach was born and raised in rural Saskatchewan. She’s 
a graduate of the university in Saskatoon and currently in a 
graduate program in Regina. She has lived in the Weyburn area 
since 1982. She has been a partner in a grain farm operation and 
since 1990 has worked in a number of capacities at the 
Southeast Regional College, and since 1998 as the executive 
director of the Southeast Education Foundation. She is, Mr. 
Speaker, rooted in agriculture and in education, and in addition 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

serves on a number of provincial organizations. 
 
As well, Sherry Leach is involved in her community through 
her church, through the chamber of commerce, Rotary, and 
through her children’s schools. She lives in her community and 
she is wired to that community — the kind of candidate that 
Weyburn and that Saskatchewan deserves. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tisdale Twisters 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, the Tisdale Twisters started their club with 100 
members 25 years ago. Over those years, it has offered 
gymnasts participation in recreational and competitive 
programs. 
 
Twister athletes have earned numerous all-around and 
individual apparatus event medals on a provincial level. Their 
athletes have been asked to be members of a Western team and 
teams on the provincial level. Many of the past members are 
coaches and judge right across Canada. 
 
The club has hosted numerous invitational, northern, and 
provincial meets as well as the national trials meet, and in turn 
have been invited to several high-profile competitions. 
 
The Twisters are the longest-standing competitive club outside 
of city limits in Saskatchewan thanks to qualified and 
committed head coaches, devoted athletes and parents willing to 
commit their time and energy to the club, and a community that 
has supported them over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the noise in the House, I didn’t understand that 
the Tisdale Twisters would be so well accoladed by members of 
the House. And I know that they will appreciate the exuberance 
that the Assembly has for their many accomplishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I trust that all members will join with me in 
congratulating the Tisdale Twisters on their 25 years of success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Air Canada Regional Changes 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
days ago Air Canada Regional, now called Air Canada Jazz, 
confirmed it will relocate 65 flight crew positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these positions are currently located in the city of 
Saskatoon. They include 37 flight attendants, 16 captains, and 
12 first officers from Saskatoon. Saskatoon will lose 65 
full-time, well-paid positions plus the families who rely on 
these positions. Mr. Speaker, it seems Air Canada and the 
federal government are determined to isolate Saskatchewan 
from the rest of the country. 
 
(14:00) 
 
On April 1 of this year, I warned the federal government that 

implementing a $24 air security fee on domestic air travel 
would harm our province and our country. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, Air Canada has announced it will be 
replacing the F28 jets with smaller Dash 300 turboprop 
equipment on regional services between Calgary/Edmonton and 
Regina/Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, these measures will further 
harm tourism and business travel and reduce revenues to the 
airport authorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we really must question Air Canada’s long-term 
commitment to providing service to Saskatchewan. And we also 
wonder just where the federal government stands. We have 
confidence in our province, but we need a competitive air 
transport sector to help promote our economic and tourism 
advantages. For that, we need a national government that can 
read a map of Canada. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grade 12 Pleasantdale Student Recognized 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, most of us would agree that 
lifelong learning is fundamental to individual and professional 
success in the new knowledge-based economy. A well-educated 
population equipped with relevant knowledge tools is the 
foundation for growing Saskatchewan. There are differing 
opinions on the size of school most proficient in meeting the 
needs . . . educational requirements of our students. 
 
Today I am honoured to recognize a grade 12 student, Jennifer 
Souter, whose exceptional academic success, leadership ability, 
and contribution to her community has been recognized with 
the awarding of many scholarships totalling over $40,000 over 
the next four years. 
 
At the recent graduation ceremonies in Pleasantdale, which has 
a total K to 12 student population of 100, Jennifer was 
presented with a national excellence award for the 2002-2003 
academic year. She was one of 100 national excellence award 
laureates selected this year because of her academic success, her 
contribution to her community, her leadership, and her 
commitment to innovation. 
 
Ms. Souter is one of 21 winners to be selected for the student 
leadership award by the Canadian Association of Principals. 
This award was based on leadership qualities, full curricular 
involvement, and academic success. 
 
She was also the recipient of the University of Saskatchewan’s 
Premier Award, a chancellor’s scholarship that recognizes 
exceptional individuals who achieved high academic standing. 
 
Ms. Souter received the Governor General’s bronze medallion 
as well as many other local scholarships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to offer congratulations to this 
exceptional student from the rural community of Pleasantdale 
and wish her continued success as she prepares for her future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

 

SaskTel/Telcare Receives Julia Award 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I’ll be much shorter this time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
At the annual general meeting and conference of the Canadian 
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in St. John’s, Newfoundland, 
SaskTel/Telcare was announced as the recipient of the Julia 
award for their contribution towards cystic fibrosis. 
 
The Julia award acknowledges groups or individuals who have 
made a significant ongoing contribution to cystic fibrosis and is 
named in memory of Julia Herbert, the Canadian Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation’s poster child from 1987 to 1989. 
 
SaskTel has supported the North Saskatchewan Chapter New 
Year’s Eve charity ball for over 10 years. The ball is held 
annually and is designed to raise awareness and research funds 
for cystic fibrosis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cystic fibrosis is an incurable, inherited disorder 
affecting mainly the lungs and the digestive system. Those that 
suffer from this disease experience severe respiratory problems. 
Essentially it’s like breathing through a straw. Those diagnosed 
with cystic fibrosis also have extreme difficulty in digesting and 
absorbing adequate nutrients from food. 
 
Researchers in the cystic fibrosis organizations have been 
working hard to find a cure since 1960. Their efforts in research 
and treatment have raised the median age of survival from 4 
years of age in 1960 to over 30 years of age today, adding hope 
that a cure will be found. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nipawin Newspaper Editor Dies 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Monday, May 27 the community of Nipawin and the world 
of journalism suffered a great loss. Dennis Hegland, editor of 
The Nipawin Journal, died suddenly while undergoing a 
medical procedure at the Royal University Hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Dennis was born June 12, 1942 in Prince Albert where he was 
raised. He graduated grade 12 at the age of 15, having skipped 
two full grades. Dennis Hegland began his career in the 
publishing industry 38 years ago when he joined the Thomson 
chain of newspapers as an obituary writer. He then went on to 
hold many positions in the publishing area. These included jobs 
in Moose Jaw, Kelowna, and Ottawa. 
 
In the fall of 1995 he was hired on as the editor for The Nipawin 
Journal and the N. E. Region Community Booster. Since his 
arrival in Nipawin, Dennis was instrumental in the formation of 
the Murals Society, Communities in Bloom program, and was a 
member of the local recreation board. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in offering condolences to 
Dennis Hegland’s family, friends, and co-workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Radio in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if you 
turn to 91.7 FM on your radio in Saskatoon you will find 
Tourism Radio. Played on this station is a message from the 
mayor and listings of events and opportunities in Saskatoon for 
tourists and interested citizens. 
 
Presently messages are updated and changed biweekly. Tourism 
Radio is a big hit with residents and visitors to Saskatoon. The 
8- to 10-minute looped messages will be updated weekly for the 
summer season starting June 3 with updates on festivals, events, 
and attractions, such as Wanuskewin, the dragon boat races, 
Folkfest, Western Development Museum, Broadway Theatre, 
just to name a few. 
 
So I invite all hon. members of the legislature, especially those 
opposite who seem to be very interested in Saskatoon, to listen 
in and maybe plan to attend a few events to show their 
community spirits . . . spirit. 
 
We also want to thank Warren Cargill at Hot 93 
FM/CJWW/Magic 98.3, and T-Bone at CKOM Rock 
102/C95/650 NTR (news talk radio), for providing the 
production of Tourism Radio 91.7 FM and making it sound so 
good. And I’m looking forward to seeing all the hon. members 
out to community events throughout the summer in Saskatoon. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Economic 
Development minister. The Leader-Post is reporting today that 
the NDP’s plan to own ethanol plants in Saskatchewan could 
kill an ethanol deal in Weyburn that was set to go without a 
single dime from this government. 
 
According to the mayor of Weyburn, a plan to build a 30 
million litre ethanol plant in Weyburn may not go ahead 
because the private sector investors do not want to compete 
with government owned ethanol plants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP determined to force government 
ownership of new ethanol plants when government ownership 
is certain to drive private investment out of the province and out 
of the ethanol business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to thank the member for the question. And I can 
clearly understand why she’s posing the question today because 
I think after last night’s events in her own constituency, she 
would want to do anything to divert from the candidate that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — . . . who will soon replace her, by 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would want to tell the member opposite that I 
have met with the principals involved in the proposal for the 
Weyburn ethanol plant. I have discussed with those folks our 
direction in terms of developing ethanol. I’ve talked with the 
mayor of Weyburn and indicated to him my support for their 
initiative; and I want to say as well the proponents of that 
particular investment opportunity have met with Crown 
Investments Corporation officials as well I’m told, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that she can rest with the 
knowledge that ethanol development will take place in this 
province and that we’re going to work with the community of 
Weyburn to see if we can establish that kind of a development 
in their community as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s the 
NDP that should be worried about the Weyburn constituency, 
not the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in Weyburn and across the province 
understand very clearly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people in Weyburn and across the province understand very 
clearly what is going on here. The NDP want to control the 
ethanol industry, just like they want to control most things in 
Saskatchewan. And the NDP is willing to spend $100 million of 
taxpayers’ dollars to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no private sector investor is going to make a major 
investment in ethanol if they will be forced to compete with this 
government. So communities like Weyburn have no choice — 
if they want an ethanol project to go ahead, they will be forced 
to accept government money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP do the right thing, will they get out 
of the way and allow the private sector investors in this 
province to develop the ethanol industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make one 
thing very, very clear. This government will work with the 
private sector investors to facilitate ethanol production. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say — and I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Speaker, what will drive investment 
dollars away is the constant attack by members of the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus on private sector individuals who 
have offered to come to this province with millions of dollars to 
create an ethanol industry. 
 
That member from Weyburn and her colleague from Swift 
Current are doing more to jeopardize private sector investment 
in this province than any two individuals that I know. 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, members from that caucus — 
the member from Tisdale and the member from Thunder Creek 
and the member from Wood River and the member from 
Shaunavon — should stand up and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan whether they support their communities who are 
putting together packages to attract private sector investment to 
create ethanol or whether they don’t support them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, 
Saskatchewan Party, let me tell that minister, that government 
and through them, the people of this province that this party 
supports the development of the ethanol industry in 
communities across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the real difference is — the real difference is — that this 
party believes in and has faith in the ability of the private sector 
in the province of Saskatchewan and across this country to 
grow the industry and create jobs in the province. That’s the 
difference between our two parties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, last week, the minister at least took 
one small step towards rescuing a failing approach to the 
development of the ethanol industry when he promised that this 
government would not enter into any exclusive arrangement 
with any company. We assume, Mr. Speaker, that he meant 
there will be no exclusive arrangement with CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and there will be no 
exclusive arrangement with respect to the domestic market. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, will he take the next step? Will his 
government acknowledge the fact that they did not give the 
private sector enough time to grow this industry? Will they step 
back and let private venture capital develop the ethanol industry 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask that 
member if he will stand in his place and absolutely and 
unequivocally state that they do not support the ethanol 
industry, because that’s what they don’t support. Mr. Speaker, 
they do not support the development of the ethanol industry 
because it’s being done by this government. 
 
And it’s being done successfully by this government by creating 
the environment, creating the legislation, creating the mandate 
to allow it to happen by finding private sector investors who 
that member, Mr. Speaker, attacks on a daily basis. And I want 
to say that he should stand at his place and he should apologize 
to the people of this province who have spent months working 
together with the private sector to bring an ethanol initiative to 
the different areas of this province. 
 
And I want to know if that member from Shaunavon supports 
what this guy is saying, Mr. Speaker. And I challenge the press 
to go outside and ask every one of those members right now 
today whether they support it or whether they don’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what this, what this new . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What this new ethanol 
minister has done to the work of the former ethanol minister, 
what he had done on this file, Mr. Speaker, is pathetic bordering 
on tragic. Let’s just quickly review. Let’s review. 
 
Two months ago that minister, the former minister, indicates 
that the government of Saskatchewan wants the private sector to 
lead the ethanol . . . development of the ethanol industry. While 
those words are coming out of his mouth, this minister, and the 
minister for CIC, Mr. Speaker, are already cooking up a deal 
with the private . . . with the company out of the United States 
for 80 to $100 million worth of direct investment, with the help 
of his political buddy, Reg Gross, who’s brokering the deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government certainly intimates throughout that 
process that the reason that they’re forced into this flip-flop two 
months later is that the only way we’ll grow this industry is 
with the government. Yesterday the news out of Weyburn 
contradicts what the minister says, that the private sector can 
grow this industry. 
 
(14:15) 
 
So the question to the minister is this: is that his approach to 
ethanol development in the province of Saskatchewan? That he 
will chase around these ethanol projects with his bag of 
taxpayers’ money, Frank Hart and Reg Gross in tow, Mr. 
Speaker . . . that he will drag those two around with his bag of 
taxpayers’ dollars trying to get in on all of the ethanol deals in 
this province whether they want him or need him or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, what I’m hearing here 
today again is consistency from the member from Swift 
Current, because he’s not going to let the facts get in the way of 
his questions or of his comments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he’s going to do everything he can to destroy 
opportunities in this province to create ethanol and to create 
through that an intensive livestock industry. He’s going to do 
everything he can in his power to destroy that opportunity. 
 
But I’ll tell you who he won’t stop, Mr. Speaker. He will not 
stop the people from Shaunavon who have put months and 
months and months of work into this initiative and who have 
asked Crown Investments Corporation to work with the people 
who they have put together who have found some private sector 
capital. He will not stop them, Mr. Speaker, any more than he’ll 
stop the people from Melville, anymore than he’ll stop the 
people from Shaunavon, anymore than he’ll stop the people 
from Tisdale. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this government’s going to stand 
behind them foursquare. We’re going to be there, we’re going 
to be there to put this proposal together. And I tell you I’m 
going to invite that member to the announcements when we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Assistance for Livestock Producers 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the Saskatchewan Party predicted that this year’s drought 
could lead to a major sell-off of the cattle in our province. And 
the story in today’s paper appears to confirm this. 
 
Heartland Livestock Services sold 1,200 head of cattle at this 
week’s sale. That’s three times the normal number that they sell 
at this time of year. Mr. Speaker, Heartland’s manager said he 
has never seen so many cows sold in May in over 20 years, and 
it’s all due to a shortage of feed and water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, APAS (Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan) is predicting that the cattle producers may be 
forced to sell as many as 800,000 cattle this year. 
 
What specific steps is this government going to take to prevent 
the massive sell-off of the cattle in Saskatchewan due to this 
year’s drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget we 
provided some incentives to ensure that the livestock industry in 
Saskatchewan would be protected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that we did is we implemented this year 
the forage program, Mr. Speaker, which the member opposite 
stood up when we implemented the forage program and made a 
mockery of it, Mr. Speaker. Didn’t support it, Mr. Speaker, for 
a minute. And that was one of the initiatives that we provided, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, we provided again, $1.5 million last year 
for water. And the member opposite — who wasn’t the member 
from Watrous, but the member from Kindersley who was here 
before — said that it was a joke, Mr. Speaker, that we put 
additional money into the livestock industry. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing, we’re working with 
livestock producers. We’re putting money through the Crop 
Insurance program for forage and for hay programs in the 
province. And I made a commitment to this House and to the 
media only a couple of days ago, where I said that our 
government would participate in the water program with the 
national government. 
 
And because on this side of the House this government works 
with farmers; on that side of the House they work against 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will repeat what 
I’ve said before in this House. A loopy little lottery that only 
2,000 producers in this province can qualify for is not providing 
feed and water for our cattle today, and they eat everyday — I 
hate to tell the minister — every single day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP obviously has no plan to deal with this 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

crisis, so last week we suggested one. The Sask Water 
Corporation could immediately commit $10 million for drilling 
wells, digging dugouts, and for pumping equipment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this drought is not a surprise to anyone. 
We’ve known for many months that there could be a drought in 
this province. Did the NDP come up with one single plan that 
would address the drought this year? No, they did nothing. And 
now over half the province’s cattle herd could . . . may be sold 
off and it’s going to take years to recover from this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP have no plan of their own, will they 
please adopt the Saskatchewan Party plan to help the livestock 
producers to deal with the crisis today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s just what I thought would happen 
by this opposition party. It’s only taken them a week, Mr. 
Speaker, to get there. I thought it would take them about 10 
days, but they’re in there a week. 
 
Last week we said in this House and the Leader of the 
Opposition stood up and said, do you know what? We support 
the provincial government because we have international trade 
issues and that the federal government should be putting its 
money on the table. And he said that, Mr. Speaker. He said that 
to the conference that we had . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — At the forum on Friday the Leader of the 
Opposition stands in front of the mike and he said, do you know 
what? In Canada today by the early OECD (Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development) numbers, 
Saskatchewan puts the largest amount of money into agriculture 
than any other province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And then he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the national government puts in 1.1 per cent — 1.1 per cent 
it puts in. And a day later in this House, Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite from Watrous gets on her feet and says what 
we should be doing is we should be taking $10 million of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money and putting it into water 
programming. 
 
And what the Leader-Post says to that, Mr. Speaker, what the 
Leader-Post says to that is they see that as a dumb, dumb, 
dumb, dumb idea, Mr. Speaker, because it is a dumb idea and it 
contradicts the Leader of the Opposition in spades, Mr. Speaker 
— in spades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the auditor’s report released some very controversial 
information. It indicated that Cajon Leasing and R & R Leasing 
have received over $50 million worth of Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund money which was used to buy cars 

and equipment and lease it back to the government. 
 
Over $50 million worth of government leases, Mr. Speaker. 
There are many businesses in Saskatchewan who could lease 
cars and equipment to this government. I’m sure they would 
have liked the opportunity to bid on these contacts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, were the $50 million worth in leasing contracts 
held by Cajon Leasing and R & R Leasing tendered by the 
provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
member opposite is very, very curious with respect to the 
leasing arrangements and I respect that, Mr. Speaker. So I have 
asked the president of the Saskatchewan Government Growth 
Fund to be here today to answer the detailed questions that the 
member opposite is quite interested in. 
 
I can say that there have been arrangements made with Cajon 
and R & R Leasing as it relates to procurement of arrangements 
for vehicles and for other equipment. I can say that it’s been 
done, as I understand it, in a competitive fashion. 
 
I can say that those leasing companies are competing with the 
rate at which government can borrow money as well. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we will have all of the answers 
for that member. I can say that none of this has been any kind of 
a mystery. This is all above board and it’s all very honestly 
done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 
that answer I think we can conclude that indeed these contracts 
were not tendered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP took $50 million worth of immigrant 
investor money, money that was supposed to go to small 
businesses in Saskatchewan, and they used it to buy, buy 
government cars and planes. 
 
What’s worse, none of these contracts were tendered. That’s 
what we just heard from the minister. So no other leasing 
company in Saskatchewan had access to $50 million worth of 
leasing contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why weren’t these contracts tendered? Why did no 
other Saskatchewan company have the opportunity to bid on 
these contracts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
make sure that people here in the House understand how this 
operates in terms of the government purchasing vehicles. 
 
When the government goes forward to lease the vehicles there 
is a financing operation — this is what has happened in terms of 
Cajon and SGGF (Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund 
Ltd.). But in terms of where the vehicles come from, they are 
allocated from all over the province. We make sure that all the 
dealers across the province are able to participate in the 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

 

program. 
 
So there’s nothing untoward here. What we have simply gone 
with is a financing arrangement — an arrangement which is 
dealt with through SGGF, through the Crown Capital Partner 
program, which is incidentally a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Crown Life. There’s nothing untoward here. 
 
I know the members opposite desperately want something to 
help pick up their spirits that they can hang their hat on. I just 
simply encourage the member to move on; it’s not here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at one of these 
specific companies. R & R Leasing. Mr. Speaker, R & R alone 
has received over $15 million in SGGF money to buy 
equipment and lease it to Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a corporate search that shows R & R Leasing is 
owned by Roy and Rose Lloyd of Saskatoon. The SGGF annual 
report shows that Roy Lloyd is an investment advisor to SGGF. 
So he’s one of the people advising SGGF where to invest their 
money, and he’s one of the people receiving money from 
SGGF. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this not a conflict of interest? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, let me pick up where I 
left off in terms of explaining how SGGF and the Crown 
Capital Partners work in terms of providing the money. What 
we have is that we have a board that lays out an investment 
policy within the rules. Fair enough — this is what the auditor 
has commented on. 
 
Then there are a set of managers. These managers are from the 
Crown Capital Partner corporation. That is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of Crown Life. They are the ones that make the 
recommendation on whether or not these are good investments 
and which company should provide the financing. This is 
arm’s-length from government — there is nothing at all here for 
that member to be casting these kind of aspersions against 
people about. 
 
Let’s understand that what is happening here is the government 
is leasing vehicles. Those vehicles are the same vehicles some 
members opposite drive, the cabinet ministers drive, that are in 
the CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) fleet. There’s actual 
property there, there’s a financial transaction there, the 
transaction meets the agreement and it fits in with what Crown 
Capital Partners tells us we can use the money for. 
 
That’s the way it works and I wish the member would 
understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the summary of SGGF III, IV, 
V, VI, and VII and VIII show that R & R Leasing appears to 
have $15 million worth of SGGF money and has bought 
equipment and leased it back to the NDP government. None of 

these leasing contracts were ever tendered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this the same Roy Lloyd, who was chief 
planning officer in Allan Blakeney’s office in the 1970s? And is 
this the same Roy Lloyd who was appointed acting president 
and CEO (chief executive officer) of SaskTel by Roy 
Romanow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m sorry, I was seven years old in 1970 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As I was saying, I was seven years old in 1974, so 
you’ll forgive me if I don’t have a current list of who worked in 
Mr. Blakeney’s office at the time. The issue here is what is the 
process that’s followed in terms of moving this money from the 
investor’s fund over to purchase perfectly legitimate 
government equipment. 
 
Well what’s the process? We’ve moved the process to arm’s 
length through Crown Capital Partners. This is a perfectly 
appropriate way for us to do it because it is an arm’s length 
approach. 
 
The government is not loaning itself the money, it has a fund 
manager, it goes through the process. We take their advice and 
where possible, we use them for financing. That’s as simple as I 
can make it for the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — We are talking, we are talking about a fund 
that is called the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund, 
okay. We want to know why these two companies were chosen 
to receive a large amount of money, in excess of $15 million 
worth of SGGF money and government leases. It seems to me 
that other Saskatchewan companies might have been interested 
in these contracts, yet they never got a chance to even bid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people would like to know the 
terms of these contracts. Will the government release the 
leasing contracts with Cajon Leasing and R & R Leasing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
that we’re pleased to be able to shed some light on this and 
there will be more shed in a few minutes. The members 
opposite will want to know that I’ve asked Mr. Benson, who 
manages Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund, to be here 
today so that he can explain to you the details of the 
arrangements, how they were reached and how they were 
achieved. And he will actually talk very slow so that even they 
can understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have are two companies in the private 
sector in this province who are doing legitimate work on behalf 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

of the Government of Saskatchewan in terms of offering the 
lease capacity to have CVA vehicles available to all the civil 
servants in this province and to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing untoward here. I can understand 
why members opposite are grasping. Mr. Speaker, question 
period in this place has been getting more and more dismal 
every day. They have no issues. 
 
The Provincial Auditor — and I’ll quote the headline in the 
Leader-Post — says: 
 

Gov’t doing OK: (Provincial) auditor. 
 

. . . for the most part the nearly 135 government agencies 
and funds covered by the report have adequate financial . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Sorry, the member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order, members. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 58, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 59, The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 
Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, order please. Order. Order. Order 
please, members. Order. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Consequential Amendment Act, 2002/ 

Loi de 2002 apportant des modifications corrélatives 
à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 60, The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Regional Health Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of taking action 
in this province, I move that Bill No. 61, The Regional Health 
Services Act, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF ERRATUM 
 

The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I wish to 
put on record that I did, right after prayers today, submit . . . 
table an erratum to the 2002 Spring Report which was given to 
me by Fred Wendel, the Provincial Auditor. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government to table responses to 
written questions 227 and 238. And as a note, Mr. Speaker, I 
didn’t think we could surpass the number of questions asked 
last year but we’ve already done it in less than 50 days. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 227 to 238 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Justice to introduce 
his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to 
my right, someone most familiar to all of us, Susan Amrud, 
Q.C. (Queen’s Counsel), who is director of legislative services 
in the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and welcome to the minister’s 
official. We didn’t spend very much time on Bill No. 15 earlier 
on because it’s fairly self-explanatory and doesn’t seem to 
create a whole lot of problems. 
 
But we do have a number of questions that we have today. And 
one is, we noted in your second reading speech that was given 
by the minister, that recent court rulings had called into 
question the inadmissibility of all communications in the course 
of a pretrial conference. And I’m just wondering if the minister 
would please elaborate on that to some extent. 
 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, the member might be aware that the 
Saskatchewan Court of Appeal held just a year ago that 
evidence of statements made during a pretrial conference was 
inadmissible in a subsequent court hearing, in spite of the 
Queen’s Bench rules. 
 
So essentially we are responding to that decision and 
responding basically to the call by the court that we make 
amendments to The Queen’s Bench Act rather than have them 
simply respond on the basis of the rules of court. So we’re 
responding to that Court of Appeal decision to ensure that there 
is the same protection from disclosure of statements made 
during a pretrial conference as exists for statements made 
during mediation. 
 
The important thing being that people need to be able, in that 
process of pretrial mediation and conferencing, to be open 
about the issues without the risk of being prejudiced in later 
court proceedings. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as was explained, I believe 
that in most cases this situation was already covered in most 
cases and that we were just covering the thing in its totality. 
And so then this Bill is essentially just closing a few minor 
legislative loopholes that are there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — That’s right. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002/ 
Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Justice to 
introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to my 
right, again, someone who is familiar to most of the members 
here, Andrea Seale from legislative services in the Department 
of Justice. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon to the 
minister and his official. 
 
Mr. Minister, Bill No. 24 is a response to a report, I understand, 
of a steering committee on the abuse of adults in vulnerable 
circumstances. And the intent of this Bill, as I understand it, 
was to protect vulnerable adults from potential financial abuse. 
So I just have a few questions, three or four questions, 
regarding some details of this Bill. 
 
I understand that this proposed legislation came about as a 
result of that report and that report is nearly five years old. And 
we know that there has been a number of serious cases of 
financial misuse and abuse in that same time period. 
 

What was the reason, Mr. Minister, for the delay in 
implementing the committee’s recommendations? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, she’s right about the purpose behind the 
Act and about the process which generated the Act, the 
consultative committee which was made up of members from 
across the community, a very large number of people who 
worked on these general issues of protecting those who could 
not make decisions themselves which would be in their best 
interests. 
 
The government is bringing forward legislation from that 
consultative committee, and there are a number of pieces of 
legislation which we’ve been working on. The first with The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act, later the adult guardianship Act, 
and then the public guardian Act. 
 
And this is the fourth and it is the . . . it is simply been the case 
of going through the committee’s recommendations and acting 
on them as appropriate. And the . . . it would be I think wise to 
thank the committee for their work because they did come 
across complex questions which required them to seek solutions 
that were not always the most straightforward. 
 
And I think we’ve been, we’ve been diligent in moving forward 
with the committee’s recommendations, and implemented those 
legislations and those recommendations in four separate pieces 
of legislation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I accept your 
explanation of the delay in implementing the recommendations 
partially, certainly not wholly, because it seems to me like five 
years is quite a long time. And as I’ve mentioned to you before 
there were probably a good number of serious cases of financial 
abuse and misuse during that time. 
 
I would like to just move on to my next question. Do you know 
how many cases of financial abuse are prosecuted on an annual 
basis and what will be the anticipated impact of this particular 
legislation on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asked how many cases 
there have been, how many prosecutions for fraud or theft 
against the resources of vulnerable people. 
 
I don’t have the number and I’m not so sure it would be easy to 
bring that number together. But I’ll certainly check with the . . . 
with prosecutions to see whether or not they could respond to 
that question. 
 
And I think that we would all agree that one case of taking 
advantage of a vulnerable person in this circumstance would be 
too many. But let met explore whether or not we have those 
numbers kept in that way. 
 
This piece of legislation would be more — The Powers of 
Attorney Act — would be more focused on ensuring that a 
vulnerable person had someone making decisions for them 
whom they could trust and who had the interests of that person 
at heart rather than focusing on the commission on fraud or 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

theft. 
 
But the two are plainly linked together because if there’s a 
responsible, caring person making these decisions, whether it be 
as a result of a family connection or a friendship or a business 
arrangement, obviously we would be in a better shape . . . we 
would be in better shape in the sense that we would be less 
likely to have theft and fraud committed by those, by those 
attorneys. 
 
And the legislation does set out, for example, who would . . . or 
what would disqualify someone from being an attorney. And 
those are things like the commission of criminal offences and 
being generally unreliable for this kind of work. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in view of 
your last comment or the last part of your statement, and you 
talked about anyone that may have been involved in criminal 
activity, etc. I just want to expand on that bit of our debate here 
a little bit or our conversation. 
 
Section 6(b) of the Bill says that: 
 

6(1) No person shall act as an attorney: 
 

(b) if the person’s occupation or business involves 
providing personal care or health care services to the 
grantor for remuneration. 

 
So with respect to the term, personal care, what specific 
occupations does this exclude? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — On a straightforward reading of 
section 6(1)(b), it would include people providing personal care 
or health care services either as their occupation, say a nurse, or 
in the context of a business, say running a personal care home. 
 
It was the latter that was our primary focus. But the issue here is 
to ensure that someone with first of all a conflict of interest, and 
secondly someone who could exert influence over the person in 
question, would be precluded from being able to act as an 
attorney for that person. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not quite sure 
that I can accept or, in fact, understand your reply totally. I 
think probably if we deal with instances, it might be easier to 
understand and to come to some clarity as far as this clause 
goes. 
 
So what I’d like to ask you today is: with respect to the term 
personal care, does that term apply to people that might be 
giving personal care for instance to a senior that is not . . . if 
that person is not a care home service provider? 
 
So for instance if there were people coming in to do personal 
care for a senior, for instance hairdressing or any kind of 
aesthetics, would that person be included as a personal 
caregiver? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises here an 
interesting, an interesting point. And she could have also raised 
the example of somebody who was a friend or a family member 
who came and provided care but whose occupation or business 

didn’t involve that, and would that person be covered too. 
 
And I think what the member highlights is the need to define 
that term, personal care, in the regulations. And we’ll certainly 
do that. And I appreciate the member raising that. 
 
It wasn’t something we’d thought required a closer definition, 
but on reflection and on . . . based upon what the member has 
put forward, it plainly, it plainly does. So we’ll address that 
phrase personal care in the regulations and ensure that we’re 
talking about somebody who’s providing these services in a . . . 
really for remuneration, either as a business or as an occupation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in section 5, 
the Bill says: 
 

If a form of enduring power of attorney is prescribed, the 
use of that form is not mandatory. 

 
What specifically is this referring to and how will this impact 
on someone’s ability to act as power of attorney if he or she is 
so appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thanks to 
the member for that specific question too. Section 5 is a 
relatively standard provision in legislation of this sort. It would 
also be contained, for example, in legislation dealing with 
health care directives and so on. 
 
And it provides for two things. It basically provides for the 
regulations to contain a standard form as a guide to those who 
might decide to ask for a power of attorney or award a power of 
attorney. So what it says here is that the regulations might 
contain . . . it says: 
 

If a form of enduring power of attorney is prescribed . . . 
 
It’s not required that the government provide that in regulation 
but most likely that is what we would do. 
 
If that form is prescribed, it’s just a model. It’s not designed to 
be the only form of providing . . . of appointing the power of 
attorney or of appointing an enduring power of attorney, but it’s 
just a guideline for someone. 
 
So a lawyer for example might suggest another form but it’s . . . 
the form would be there in the regulations just to be used if the 
parties thought it worthwhile. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So, “if a form of enduring power of attorney,” that 
phrase within itself, does the enduring power of attorney refer 
to just anyone a judge may pick or the courts may pick? Or is 
there a slate, for instance, of references that the courts may refer 
to in order to appoint another person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, if the person is incapable 
of making any decisions for themselves then under those 
circumstances a court would . . . If the circumstances required it 
a court would appoint a representative of that person. 
 
What we’re dealing with here is someone who has some 
capacity, in fact, has the capacity to understand that they can’t 
make decisions for themselves but nonetheless understands the 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

 

importance of having somebody making those decisions for 
them. So they would then basically be of the view of the need to 
appoint somebody to act for me because I can’t make these 
decisions myself. And they would also be cognizant of what 
would happen when they were no longer capable of deciding 
they needed a power of attorney. 
 
So what we’re talking about here and what this Act is basically 
. . . and what this part of the Act in particular is basically about 
is providing for the ability, for the opportunity, to appoint the 
power of attorney which would continue beyond your capacity 
to understand that you needed one. 
 
And so the reference in section 5 is further explained in sections 
3 and 4, talking about what that power of attorney is about. And 
it points out in section 3 that an enduring power of attorney is 
not terminated by the lack of the capacity of the grantor that 
occurs after the power of attorney has been executed. 
 
So in other words that power of attorney continues after 
somebody loses the capacity to decide they need that person. So 
it’s providing for the opportunity for that power of attorney to 
continue after you no longer . . . the grantor no longer has the 
capacity to make any decisions for themselves. 
 
So here we’re deciding or here we’re providing for a person 
who can make . . . who understands the need to have decisions 
made on their behalf but doesn’t feel capable of actually making 
those decisions themselves. They understand enough to say I 
need somebody but they don’t understand enough to make the 
decisions themselves. 
 
But what happens when they don’t have the capacity to know 
they need somebody? Well, the power of attorney will continue 
on their behalf. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, section 13 
refers to interprovincial application of the Bill. Is that correct? 
Does section 13 refer to interprovincial application of the Bill? 
As I understand it, that’s what I’m reading. I just want you to 
confirm or deny that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to that 
question, if a power of attorney has been executed outside of 
Saskatchewan, it would be a valid power of attorney here if it 
was . . . if in the place where it was executed it was valid. 
 
And secondly, it provides in subsection (b) that: 
 

. . . the power of attorney is not terminated by a lack of 
capacity of the grantor that occurs after the power has been 
executed. 

 
So those two things have to be satisfied in order for a power of 
attorney outside of . . . which was executed outside of the 
province to be applicable here. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m just 
going to ask you a subsequent question to that as far as 
interprovincial legislation regarding this issue. And I’m just 
wondering whether or not other jurisdictions . . . if you’re 

aware, rather, that other jurisdictions in Canada have legislation 
parallel to this piece of legislation in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question about other provinces having similar 
legislation, certainly other provinces don’t have this piece of 
legislation, but very similar responses. And certainly in terms of 
the extra-provincial powers of attorney, it’s now, of course, 
common that people move from province to province and that 
families are in different parts of the country and even in 
different countries. 
 
So these kinds of rules would be applicable in other provinces 
too. And would be, if there wasn’t legislative power, these 
would be fairly reasonable and normal interpretations of how 
you would ensure the extraterritorial application of a power of 
attorney. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, section 
24(1) and (2) make reference to the transition of the legislation. 
 
One of the concerns that we’d like to clear up is this: if power 
of attorney is signed before the new Act comes into effect, is 
that no longer valid without a certificate of independent legal 
advice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, that power of attorney 
signed prior to the coming into effect of this Act will be valid 
and nothing will be required in order to . . . nothing extra will 
be required in order to make it valid. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. So once this legislation is in effect, 
that means that all previous power of attorney contracts are still 
valid? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Okay. They don’t have to be redone in any way or 
form . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
That’s all the questions I have. And I thank you and your 
official for answering these questions on this piece of 
legislation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Independent Officers’ Remuneration 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I introduce to 
you someone again who’s very familiar, Madeleine Robertson, 
who’s Crown counsel in legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister. And I welcome your official today. 
 
Mr. Minister, in regard to Bill No. 16, I note that the Bill comes 
into force on assent. Given that the Bill indicates that all three 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

independent officers salaries are deemed effective April 1 every 
year, which of course coincides with the government’s fiscal 
year-end, I’m wondering if you’re aware of any negotiated pay 
increases for a senior executive 2, which would be a Chief 
Electoral Officer’s pay now or deputy ministers’ pay increases 
or acting deputy ministers for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The short answer to the member’s 
question is that the salaries for those officials, deputy ministers, 
and senior executive 2 range will be adjusted at July 1 by what 
is called an economic adjustment rate, which is a relatively 
modest amount. 
 
The salaries for the auditor, the Ombudsman, the Children’s 
Advocate, and the Chief Electoral Officer would already reflect 
those increases. 
 
So the impact of tying the salaries of the Provincial Auditor, the 
Ombudsman, the Children’s Advocate, and the Chief Electoral 
Officer to appropriate ranks in the civil service means that when 
there’s an increase in July 1, it will be reflected . . . it is 
reflected in the salaries of those officers. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But as I’ve mentioned, 
the government’s fiscal year-end is April 1. And so I’m 
wondering if there’s going to be any retroactive pay for these 
three officers beginning in this fiscal year from April 1 onward, 
or is their increase going to start and . . . just start in July? And 
if so, will they not be granted retroactive pay after April 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — With regards to the Chief Electoral 
Officer, that position is not tied to the fiscal year. And so on 
April 1 . . . on July 1, I’m sorry, that person’s salary will be 
fixed at . . . to the . . . at the . . . to the same level as the 
maximum for a senior executive 2 range on that date, July 1. 
 
And in terms of the Provincial Auditor, the Ombudsman, and 
the Children’s Advocate, their salaries will be adjusted on July 
1 by the same amount as the average of the deputy ministers 
would be adjusted. So it won’t be retroactive but it will take 
effect from July 1. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m very glad 
that you could clarify that because I think it’s very important 
that if there was . . . if there is going to be any retroactive pay, 
that the general public should be aware of it and should know 
about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe this is all the questions that I have 
regarding this Bill and I do thank you and your officials for 
coming forward today to give these answers. Have a good day. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Registered Plan (Retirement Income) 
Exemption Act/Loi portant insaisissabilité des régimes 

enregistrés (revenu de retraite) 
 
The Chair: — And I would invite the Minister of Justice to 

introduce his other official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my right is 
Darcy McGovern who’s in legislative services with the 
Department of Justice. I believe he too is a familiar face to the 
members opposite. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you and welcome to the minister’s 
official. It’s fortunate he doesn’t have more than 50 Bills this 
year or he’d have a large staff, I’m afraid. 
 
The Bill that we’re working on right now, No. 23, I think the 
government has actually achieved something very rare with this 
one. There’s not a single person that we’ve met that has any 
objections to the concept of this particular item. 
 
And the second thing is . . . that’s very surprising is that this 
basically does what people have been looking at for a long time 
with the general direction where people are going with handling 
their own retirement funds. This one goes in that particular 
direction, which is quite contrary to where socialists usually 
want to go and that’s to run everything for everyone. So this is 
really an amazing, amazing Bill. 
 
The only thing that’s a little bit worrisome is, is there some 
apocalyptic financial event that’s occurring that makes the 
government want to get out of handling our pension funds? But 
I guess we’ll know the answers to that in a little while. 
 
As we related earlier on when we had this Bill in another 
committee, we did have one concern and that comes out of 
when this Bill will come into effect. And I’m . . . would like for 
the minister to make some statement when this Bill will actually 
. . . what the timeline for this Bill is, because we know that 
there are Bills that have been proclaimed that are still sitting on 
the shelf gathering dust. 
 
This one, with the support that it seems to have from the public, 
we’re wondering why this one is worded on being proclaimed 
rather than on coming into force on assent? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, a couple of responses. I 
understand the member’s concern to move as quickly as 
possible on this review and that would be our concern as well. 
 
This is a piece of uniform legislation across the country and our 
hope would be that a number of provinces, if not all, would be 
in the position to have this legislation in effect at about the 
same time, primarily because of the mobility of people and 
capital. We wouldn’t though want to wait forever in the event 
that we couldn’t see that. But we do also think that it’s 
important for financial institutions to get their procedures in 
order so that they can respond effectively to these changes. 
 
So our sense is that by January 1 of next year, we would be able 
to proclaim this. So what I’m saying is it’d be useful if more 
provinces implemented this legislation at the same time. We 
can’t wait forever for that to be the case. And so we were 
thinking of January 1 as an appropriate time in order to move 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

 

this . . . to proclaim this legislation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think we share the 
government’s desire to see this go through as quickly as 
possible. But also knowing this government’s penchant for 
dragging its feet after they’ve made a public proclamation on 
something, when we get to the number . . . clause 6, I will be 
moving an amendment that this Act comes into force on assent. 
But those are all the questions that we have on Bill No. 23. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Heppner: — On clause 6 we’re very concerned that this 
could end up gathering dust. We also see no reason why 
Saskatchewan can’t lead Canada — and I know we’re not 
exactly in the lead on this one, because I believe there are a few 
provinces already ahead of us on this one, so we want to see 
this into force as quickly as possible. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment that I 
propose that: 
 

Strike out Clause 6 of the printed Bill and substitute the 
following: 

 
“Coming into force 

6 This Act comes into force on assent.” 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002/ 
Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Independent Officers’ Remuneration 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I move this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Registered Plan (Retirement Income) 
Exemption Act/Loi portant insaisissabilité des régimes 

enregistrés (revenu de retraite) 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Justice to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
introduce officials today. Again, most of whom will be very 
familiar to members. 
 
To my right, John Whyte, the deputy minister of Justice and the 
deputy Attorney General. To my left, Susan Amrud, who’s 
director of legislative services. To John’s right, Murray Brown, 
who’s the exec . . . acting executive director of public 
prosecutions. Behind me is Colleen Matthews, who’s the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister. To her right is 
Elizabeth Smith, who’s the deputy . . . is the director of 
administration. And behind Susan is John Baker, who’s 
executive director of law enforcement services. 
 
The Chair: — Did the minister introduce the individuals at the 
back as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I can introduce them to you, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. I think I have a 
list. To left, to the . . . at the end there is Rod Crook who is 
executive director of courts and civil justice — they must all be 
sitting in order; Keith Laxdal who is the associate deputy 
minister for finance and administration. Actually they’re not 
sitting in order. 
 
Betty Ann Pottruff is next to Keith, who’s the director of policy, 
planning and evaluation. Gerald Tegart who’s the executive . . . 
acting executive director of civil law — those are the only two 
not sitting in order; oh no, another one not sitting in order — 
and Rick Peach who is the director of law enforcement 
operations. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials, I’d like to do some follow-up. Last year we did . . . 
had some discussion — the past few years — regarding shared 
parenting, regarding the rights of fathers and some of the 
problems they’ve been facing. And it’s interesting to note just 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

today one of the headlines in today’s paper is, “Deadbeat 
parents tax courts, judge says.” 
 
I’m not sure if the minister’s had a chance to look at this release 
in the paper. But basically I think what the judge is saying: 
 

Too much . . . money is spent hauling deadbeat parents into 
court when they have no money to pay court-ordered child 
support, a Saskatchewan judge said in a recent judgment. 

 
And it goes on to say that in many cases while the numbers 
aren’t that large, there’s a percentage of cases that come into the 
courts trying to extract funding from individuals who really do 
not have the resources any more. 
 
And I think part of the problem arises from the fact that some of 
these individuals have resorted to alcoholism or other . . . or 
have just given up of trying to even find a quality job any more 
because every time they turn around their ex-spouse may be 
looking for more money or the awards that were granted were 
so exorbitant that there was just no desire or no ability any more 
to even try to work because you are basically left with nothing. 
And as a result they continually are brought before the courts. 
 
And I think what the judge is basically saying is the courts are 
becoming a little exasperated with a number of cases that come 
to the courts where there really is no monetary value left and 
ability to actually extract any more funds from these individuals 
to provide the maintenance that has . . . was awarded originally. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it just seems to me that while it’s a small . . . 
the percentage of individuals that we’re talking about here is 
rather small; I don’t think we’re dealing with a lot of 
individuals who would be considered as deadbeat dads, or 
deadbeat parents as the article says. I guess we should use the 
word parents versus dads all the time, although the majority are 
dads. 
 
The concerns — and I’ve raised them before — is the fact that 
there seems to be a real lack on the bench of acknowledging 
exactly where each individual partner is and how we deal with 
these situations and the problems that individuals face in trying 
to live up to the awards the court’s made. And in many cases, I 
think, as we’ve discussed before, the awards that have been 
made have been based on the information that’s presented to the 
courts. And probably, in most cases, it’s the ability of one 
partner versus the other partner to actually be able to hire a 
lawyer who has a better knowledge about how to present a case 
in the courts when it comes to addressing custody issues as well 
as the level of maintenance. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, there’s a group called Shared Parenting has 
made a proposal and I believe the federal government last year 
did a tour of Canada to see if they could . . . there were ways 
they could address legislation to bring some fairness and equity 
into this whole debate. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, where the province is and if 
you’re aware of any changes at the federal level regarding 
legislation that may bring some equality into this whole 
equation, if there’s any changes coming or what individuals 

such as the referral to some of these . . . the persons that this 
judge is making . . . where they turn to when it comes to 
maintenance agreements. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me 
introduce the only official I didn’t already introduce, Lionel 
McNabb who’s director of family services, directly behind me. 
He was watching us from up there until you asked your 
question. 
 
Let me just say in response to your first points, that it’s not of 
course our . . . in anyone’s interest to drag someone in front of a 
court when there’s absolutely no prospect of them being able to 
respond to their responsibilities. Sometimes that . . . sometimes 
it . . . There will be examples in which perhaps we’ve been 
overzealous in that regard. 
 
But generally, I’m informed that when people are brought to 
court, when parents . . . when the paying parents who are not 
fulfilling their obligations are brought to court, they generally 
pay. So it’s an important enforcement mechanism to remind, 
whether it be fathers or mothers of their responsibilities. 
 
But it’s in no one’s interest to be overzealous in that regard. In 
particular, also it’s worth remembering that if a person can’t 
pay then the court will — can and will — vary the order to 
respond to the ability to pay. 
 
And the member, I think, raised some concerns about ensuring 
that courts in fact act in an appropriate way in that regard. As 
the member will know the courts are independent, respond to 
their own assessment of what is fair and what is not fair in the 
context of the communities within which they live. 
 
So there are opportunities for someone, who is brought before 
the court to fulfill his or her obligations, to indicate to the court 
the difficulties they face and to seek a variance of the order. 
And as I say — and it worth, I think, for restating— generally, 
I’m informed when non-paying parents, who are responsible to 
pay, are brought before a court they respond appropriately to 
their responsibilities. 
 
You asked in the second point . . . your second point was about 
child support guidelines and where we are across Canada after 
the various consultations that have taken place, where we are 
with regards to changes. 
 
And the Minister of Justice . . . the federal Minister of Justice 
just a month ago on April 29 presented his report to parliament 
which did include suggestions for changes to the child support 
guidelines. So we will beginning the process . . . we’ll be 
engaged in the process of consultation with Minister Cauchon 
in the near future as we work on this together. 
 
The member will know that we’ve . . . there’ve been federal 
consultations, provincial consultations in which the one point of 
agreement is that the solutions here should be child-centred and 
child-focused. The differences tend to come in what that phrase 
actually means. 
 
And it’s always particularly important and particularly difficult 
for the non-custodial parent who is not feeling that he or she is 
receiving access to the child as they might want. And also 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

 

particularly difficult to the custodial parent when problems of 
payment arise. 
 
So these are constant and difficult questions. I know the 
member has a long-standing interest in resolving these 
questions as do we. So the consultations in short will be taking 
place in the near future. And once again, it’ll be a question of 
federal and provincial governments across the country trying to 
find solutions to what is, I think the member will agree, a very 
difficult question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I thank you but I guess 
the question is when can we see the legislative changes that 
may be necessary to actually change some of the forms, if you 
will, that will really address the questions that have been raised, 
that have come forward through the consultation process both 
on the federal and the provincial side? 
 
Because I think we’ve talked about this for a number of years. 
We’ve talked about the recognition of thinking about the 
children and making sure that there’s . . . there is, if you will, 
that equal shared-parenting time even though the courts in the 
current system will award custody and then will also grant 
access when they give their orders. 
 
But it seems to me that for a good period of time we’ve been 
debating this issue and we haven’t come up with a common 
ground or a common bond that would address the questions that 
still arise currently in the system as we know it today. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you can give us an idea of 
when we will finally have some direct guidelines, if you will, 
and changes that will address the inequities that have been 
discussed over the past number of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks when can we expect 
some changes, I think is essentially his point. 
 
The federal minister will be introducing his . . . or will be 
reporting to . . . in the fall, his custody and access consultation 
document, which is the product of the discussions that have 
taken place under the federal aegis over the last while. 
 
We would then anticipate changes to the Divorce Act and some 
further consultations. It’s anticipated I think that the earliest 
date by which the federal minister would respond with changes 
would be probably the spring of next year. 
 
But it is the case that this is the federal government’s 
responsibility to ensure that provisions under the Divorce Act 
are . . . or to introduce changes to the Divorce Act, so we’ll be 
actually tied to his timetable, but he I know is cognizant of the 
need to move as quickly as possible on this. The consultation 
process has been ongoing for a considerable period of time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials welcome. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a specific case. I have to ask where you 
believe I could go to help a parent out. We have a child custody 
case where a father has been paying his maintenance support 
and he’s tried to have . . . the court has appointed or given him 
some allocation of time to see his child. 

The child is three years old now, and they were divorced when 
the child was one. He really hasn’t seen the child at all. 
 
And he’s taken all kinds of steps — he’s gone to a lawyer, he’s 
actually gone with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) to the house where the child is and the mother keeps 
saying the child doesn’t want to see you. And the child is crying 
and all this type of thing. So I mean the child doesn’t even 
know his father and yet the father wants to get to know his 
daughter. 
 
I know that the interests of the child is of prime concern at all 
times, but at the same time we have a father who is longing to 
see his child. He’s taken all the steps that he can think of to do. 
He doesn’t want to unduly influence the child, he doesn’t want 
to hurt anybody, he just wants to see his child. 
 
Is there any steps that you can give me . . . any ideas that you 
have that may allow this father to actually be a parent to his 
daughter? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce two guests who are in the Speaker’s 
gallery. And I’d like to welcome Joan Anderl, who’s from 
Minneapolis, Minnesota. She’s a project analyst with the 
Minnesota Department of Children, Families & Learning. And 
she is accompanied by Kjersten Hordern of Regina. 
 
Joan and Kjersten are graduates of Concordia College in 
Moorhead, Minnesota. And they are catching up on old times, 
and also building those links between Minnesota and 
Saskatchewan that are so important for many of our residents. 
 
And I’d like all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member raises what is 
not an uncommon situation and which is plainly a troublesome 
one for a parent who is trying to have . . . to build a relationship, 
as she points out, with a young child who may not in fact 
remember the father in this case, and who maybe is subject also 
to discussions with the mother which are not exactly conducive 
to the building of this relationship. 
 
The first part of my answer is really not an answer at all in a 
situation of this sort. But generally, the first step would be to 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

engage the mother and the father — and sometimes the child — 
in mediation to try to find a solution to the problem which is 
child focused. It doesn’t sound like this would be a very viable 
option in this case. 
 
And the only option then available to the father — to the 
non-custodial parent in this case — is really access to the court, 
to explain to Queen’s Bench, which is not always the easiest or 
cheapest process, but to explain the situation he or she . . . he 
faces himself, in this case, and to seek a further order from the 
court. 
 
Now the other problem that flows from this — and I think I’m 
not being terribly helpful here — but the other problem that 
flows from this is then, whatever that order says, how do you 
enforce it? And you’ve indicated that he’s attempted at different 
times to enforce it. 
 
The solutions in the longer term are of course to try and find 
ways to ensure that the mother and the father understand what 
child . . . what the child’s centred response should be; that it is 
appropriate for that child to have access to both parents. But if 
one parent does not want to respond, then other than to seek 
remedies for not responding to the court order, there is little 
available to the father in this case. 
 
But the consultation — the consultative documents — the 
consultations that have taken place across Canada and here in 
the province indicate the significant challenge that this presents. 
And we can’t just say well, so I guess this father’s not going to 
see his child; and I guess we can’t just say well, I guess this 
child is not going to see her father. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So the product of the consultation suggests that there is a fair bit 
more work to do to try to find ways to provide services and 
support so that people can in fact come to the conclusion about 
what is appropriate for the child. The law of course can do a 
whole pile of things, but it can’t force mothers and fathers to 
pay attention to the best interests of their child if they choose 
not to. But we can provide mechanisms to make sure that that is 
more likely rather than less likely. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think at the 
beginning where you said you didn’t know if you had any real 
solutions — and I guess maybe there isn’t any real solutions — 
the idea of collaborative law or . . . is something that I 
understand is working in some cases. 
 
The father in this case has contact, has gone through court. It 
cost him an extra $5,000 and he’s gone back to see if he can . . . 
if he could see his daughter. That’s when the RCMP got 
involved. That’s when he went to the house and that’s when the 
child couldn’t be torn from the mother’s arms, screaming — 
and that’s not what he wanted either. 
 
So is there ever any case when you go back to court that a letter 
is written or that information is given to the custodial parent 
that the law has said this and that you must make an opportunity 
available for the child to see this . . . the non-custodial parent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I don’t think I have very much that’s 

helpful to say here either. But it’s, I think, the course that you 
might consider that that’s normally the case and that it would be 
nothing very unusual . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 
didn’t mean it. 
 
There are a number of things that, you know, that plainly do, do 
have to be tried and one certainly is . . . And we know this is 
taking place in a trial way in the province and has taken place in 
other provinces prior to separation, and it probably is useful to 
engage discussion as early in the, in the breakup as possible. 
 
Things like mandatory parent education, obviously, I think an 
important contributor to having parents understand the impact 
of the separation on their child and the impact that they can 
have further if they make, if they make decisions which are not 
focused on the interests of the child but are focused on their 
own personal interests as mother or as father. 
 
In the event that an order is made, that order essentially will be 
an order to the custodial parent — in the instance the member is 
raising — to provide access. And there are a number of 
enforcement measures that flow from that, none of them very 
helpful in terms of being child focused. I mean the person who 
— the mother in this case — who refuses to abide by the court 
order is subject . . . could be subject to contempt of court or 
subject to a fine. This is not necessarily terribly helpful to 
finding out a solution to the child. 
 
So you know, there are a range of suggestions coming out of the 
consultation, which all are about intervening early and 
intervening in a constructive way and providing some education 
and supports to parents in the hope that they will make better 
decisions, make more child-centred decisions. 
 
But I think it does again come to the point that if mothers and 
fathers are not thinking about their children first, while there are 
measures that can be taken to enforce those child-focused 
remedies, they are not terribly useful. 
 
In the final result, the court could order that the non-custodial 
parent become the custodial parent and take the child away 
from the non . . . from their present custodial parent. Again, you 
know, not a terribly . . . not necessarily a terribly helpful 
response. 
 
Those are the range of responses to what is, as the member 
points out, a dilemma that requires supports from both parents 
and for them to truly put the interests of their . . . of the children 
first. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess getting a 
child-friendly solution isn’t happening very easily. And I 
understand that education on sharing responsibility of parenting 
is of the utmost importance. And we’re talking about children 
who are involving emotions here. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other issue here is the grandparents. And I 
know that previously that I spoke to the previous minister of 
Justice who had indicated there is a type of grandfather or 
grandparent legislation which would allow a grandparent to 
have some access or at least be able to see a grandchild. Could 
you explain that to me? What, in effect, is possible to allow 
grandparents to see their grandchildren in a case of divorce. 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Leave, Mr. Chair, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
thanks to the minister and the critic for the interruption in the 
proceedings. 
 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to members of the House 29 
students from grade 6, St. Mark School in the constituency of 
Riversdale in the city of Saskatoon who have joined us in the 
gallery. With them are their two teachers, Mr. Strasky and Mrs. 
Bassingthwaite, and a number of chaperones whose names I 
don’t have but look forward to meeting in just a few moments. 
 
I would invite all members to welcome the students and I look 
forward to a chance that we’re going to have in just a few 
minutes to have a photo and then you can ask me some 
questions. And somebody tells me they’ve got some news for 
us. 
 
So welcome to the Assembly and I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming these 29 students from St. Mark. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chair, to ask for leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. It gives me great pleasure to join the Premier and 
welcome the guests from Saskatoon. And in that group, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, is a very special guest for me and it’s my 
daughter, Taylor. And Taylor is part of the group. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that as far as I’m 
concerned, she’s the best child at age 11 in my family, in the 
whole world. And I would sing the baby song I sang to her 
when she was small, but it’s a kind of a personal song, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, so I won’t do that. 
 
But I want to take extreme pleasure in welcoming my daughter 
and to thank her class and her staff for making this trip and to 
again joining the Premier in welcoming them all here today. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Let me 
thank the Premier and the Minister of the Environment for 
giving me the opportunity to think of the answer to that 
question and also to take the opportunity to welcome the 
students and staff from St. Mark. 
 
The member, if we recall, asked a question about the access on 
the part of grandparents to children who, generally, will be 
children who are in the custody of not their child but the other 
partner in the former relationship. 
 
There is legislation which provides access to, on the part of 
grandparents, to their children both in the provincial Children’s 
Law Act and also this can apply under the divorce Act. So there 
are opportunities for grandparents to seek access to their 
children. 
 
I should say that the test is once again what is in the best 
interests of the child. And so it is not based upon a relationship 
between grandparent and child, but based upon whether or not it 
is in the best interests of the child to have . . . for their 
grandparents to have access to them. That follows in the normal 
run of child-centred responses here. 
 
So the issue is not whether there is a formal relationship of 
grandparent to child, but whether or not that person . . . Or I 
should say it’s not driven by the formal relationship between 
grandparent and child, but is driven by what is in the child’s 
best interests. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, normally then the custodial 
parent will be the parent of the grandchild that . . . So basically 
then this custodial parent gets to make the decision. And this is 
the question: who actually gets to decide what’s the best interest 
of the child? If it’s the custodial parent, then often that’s not the 
grandparent that they want them to see. So as a grandmother, I 
know that this would be very upsetting to me if I wouldn’t be 
able to see my grandchild. 
 
So my question to you is who actually gets to make the 
decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The grandparents would make access 
. . . make application to a Queen’s Bench justice to make the 
argument that it would be in the best interests for them to have 
access to the child. If the judge recognizes that it is important to 
the child, beneficial to the child, for that access to be available, 
then he or she will order it. 
 
So it’ll be a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench who will 
make that decision based on what is in the best interests of the 
child. And the grandparents can make application, and of course 
present arguments as to why their access would be in the best 
interests of the child. 
 
Ms. Draude: — But then it is kind of still sort of the chicken 
and egg, because even if they go to the court and the court 
decides it’s in the best interest of the grandchild to see this . . . 
to see the grandparent, if the parent that has the child doesn’t 
want them to, it’ll be no more worthwhile than having a court 
order saying that the parent could see the child. 
 
So really, it’s again, it’s going to have to work in collaboration. 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

And if this case that I’m talking about specifically, I’m going to 
have to go back to the grandparents and say, yes, you can go to 
court; yes, you can get the application. And if you can talk your 
former daughter-in-law into seeing the child, then perhaps you 
can see her, but otherwise it’s not going to be possible. Am I 
correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member begins by being . . . 
by accurately stating that the challenges to grandparents seeking 
access . . . or seeking to enforce an access order are essentially 
the same as for a parent enforcing an access order. 
 
I should point out that only about 3 per cent of all cases are of 
the nature the member has presented — only about 3 per cent 
are these, what we might see as outrageous or egregious, cases 
of not focusing on the interests of the child. 
 
The norm is compliance. The norm is the parents will respond 
appropriately to the court, to the court order. And also the norm 
is that parents respond to what is in the best interests of the 
child. It doesn’t help those . . . the 3 per cent of the . . . in those 
3 per cent of the cases where there are these challenges. 
 
The other kind of aspect of this particular challenge is that if a 
custodial parent refuses to respond to a court order, then there 
are repercussions . . . or there could be repercussions when they 
seek other orders or when they wish to pursue other interests. In 
other words, if they don’t enforce a court order and they wish 
some other remedy in the future relating to the child and the 
other parent, they may not get it. 
 
So I think the core of the response is that only 3 per cent of 
cases are these serious problems. They require a response, 
plainly, in order to ensure that those children are protected and 
their interests are enhanced as well. And that is what the 
consultations have addressed and that is the challenge we face. 
And that is the challenge we’re all working to respond to. And 
it’s, as we’ve said and as we’ve agreed I think, not very easy 
when the parents don’t fully participate. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I 
am in the different position of saying that I’m agreeing with the 
minister right now, and I know this is a situation that we all feel 
strongly about. And I know that 3 per cent isn’t a large 
percentage of people, but at the same time every one of those 
children are one . . . and parents are ones that are being hurt. 
 
(16:00) 
 
We’ve had a number of very frustrated parents, both fathers and 
mothers, that are non-custodial that are saying, I have to pay the 
dollars, I pay my maintenance amount of money every month 
and yet on the other hand I’m not allowed to see my child. 
 
I have two questions. Is there any cases across Canada where 
they’re saying, if you don’t allow access as allowed or 
suggested by the courts, that then the dollars will be withheld? 
And secondly, does Saskatchewan Justice have any suggestions 
to make to the federal government as they’re coming forward 
with their legislation or what they feel should be done? What is 
your government doing to say, this is something that I’m 
suggesting? 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises again an issue 
which we will have all received letters about, people who . . . 
non-custodial parents who dutifully pay their child maintenance 
on a regular basis and are concerned to ensure that their 
children have the material needs . . . their material needs met 
but who find themselves denied access and who reach a level of 
frustration to . . . which leads them to argue that they should not 
provide support because they’re not getting access. 
 
I think the important public policy and social policy here is to 
ensure that we treat support and access, both, as rights of the 
child, that they are not things which we trade off. 
 
So the courts will endeavour to ensure that . . . and of course the 
maintenance enforcement office will endeavour to ensure that 
support payments are made. And the courts and the appropriate 
authorities, the police and so on, will ensure that access orders 
are enforced as well. 
 
So there is not . . . Or it’s not wise, I think, to have a link 
between these two things such that a person could not provide 
for the financial support for their children because they’re not 
able to have access to their children. But I know from many 
years in political life that people are very concerned about this. 
They get frustrated. They don’t know what to do and so they 
kind of take it out, in a sense, on the child by saying, I’m not 
going to provide the support. 
 
Now the solution . . . the member asked what kind of solutions. 
Well these . . . the kinds of solutions that are in . . . that will be 
in the minister’s report in the fall address these enforcement 
challenges and do so in the kind of supports and program and 
mediation ways that we’ve talked about before. But again, this 
is another one of those difficult, if not intractable, problems. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
just want to do a follow-up in regards to maintenance and the 
custody and access. 
 
I think one of the major issues . . . And while, as I indicated 
earlier and then you’ve indicated, the numbers, the percentages 
of people who renege in the area of access or custody and 
access to custody, while they’re still required to meet their 
maintenance obligations, it would seem to me that the 
maintenance department should have some authority 
whatsoever. 
 
If a court orders that you’re responsible, the one parent is 
responsible for so many dollars a month for the care of that 
child and custody is awarded to the other parent but we’re also 
awarding access to the one parent, that maintenance should 
have the ability, if you will, at the end of the day to basically 
say, when the one parent begins to complain, of saying listen, 
we’ve . . . there’s a court order here that says this is what the 
requirements are; obviously you’re not following through on 
your part of the court order. Because maintenance can come 
down very heavily against the person who is required to make 
the payments and yet, on the other hand, kind of shrug their 
shoulders on the access side. 
 
So it seems to me that it should be . . . if the court order is such 
that the one individual should not have to go back to court to 
ask again for access or for the courts to . . . or an avenue 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

 

whereby they . . . the person has to comply with that court 
order. And it would, I think it would be very simple for 
maintenance basically to say, at the end of the day, there’s a 
part of this court order that not . . . is not being followed up on, 
therefore we are going to have to proceed in a different manner 
when it comes to maintenance. 
 
And I think if there were some teeth in that area, we might get 
away from this problem of — especially of MLAs, and I’m sure 
on both sides of the House we face this — this debate of the 
fact that the access agreements are not being adhered to. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I would suggest that there should be a 
balance there and that if maintenance can come down very hard 
on the . . . on what we many times refer to as the deadbeat dads, 
they should at least have the option on the other side of saying 
the court order is such, and before we can comply with the total 
court order, there must be compliance on the other side. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member proposes a kind of a link 
between lack of access and non-payment of support and argues 
that the maintenance enforcement office might take the lack of 
access into account when . . . or I think he’s saying, should take 
into account the lack of access when enforcing the court orders 
dealing with child support. 
 
The maintenance enforcement office, as a matter of practice, 
does advise the custodial parent to respond appropriately to the 
court order dealing with access — partly because it makes it 
easier for maintenance enforcement to ensure that the 
non-custodial parent pays. So there is that kind of threat, if you 
would, on the non-custodial parent to respond. 
 
But I think the point remains that if support were not enforced 
because of access not being granted, you simply harm the child 
twice. And you harm the child because the support isn’t 
forthcoming and you harm the child because access to their 
non-custodial parent isn’t available. So I think a solution which 
links access and the payment of support together, further kind 
of harms the child. 
 
But, as I said, maintenance enforcement does encourage the 
access order to be complied with so that it’s easier to raise . . . 
or to make sure that the non-custodial parent pays. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, maintenance can 
order that a person’s licence be suspended if they’re not 
receiving those payments. Like I mean they have a fair bit of 
authority on the one hand to disrupt, totally disrupt a person’s 
life. 
 
And in the article today, this . . . the gentleman by the name of 
Baynton — I can’t pick out his first name — talked about the 
fact that: 
 

. . . also noted that having a parent’s driver’s licence 
suspended for non-payment can prevent the person from 
getting a job so they can make the payments. 

 
And this, we discussed this last year because I had three 
situations right on my desk of that similar nature, where parents 
. . . where the individual that was ordered to make the payments 
actually finally found a decent job, only to have the 

maintenance on the back of their employer for access to that 
employee’s cheque, and find that they’re without the job 
because the employer did not want the hassle of the paperwork. 
 
So maintenance can be fairly, fairly . . . come down very strong 
against the person who’s making these maintenance payments. 
But on the other hand . . . So therefore I don’t see why they 
cannot be somewhat . . . You indicate that they can indicate to 
the other, the custodial parent, you have an obligation as well. 
But I think being a little stronger in that indication would just 
balance the equation so that at the end of the day the children 
are treated fairly and they have actually equal . . . more equal 
access to the parents so that there’s the involvement of both 
parents. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I guess I would have to say I take some 
offence to the fact that maintenance on one hand can be very 
strong and very . . . and basically rule with an iron fist in going 
after payments, whereas on the other hand they basically do not 
have a lot of responsibility. And I think there should be that link 
to act so that there is a balance and that the child has . . . both 
parents have equal opportunity to have some input in the 
development and raising the child. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
Mr. Chair, the hope is that the report of the federal consultation 
and indeed of our consultation too will reflect on ways in which 
we can begin to ensure more effective enforcement of those . . . 
of access orders and to ensure that they are effective and fair 
and in the best interests of the child. 
 
The member links the maintenance enforcement office authority 
to take away someone’s driver’s licence or to ensure that the 
person loses the driver’s licence with the opportunity to vary 
the court order based upon — regarding access — court order 
on payment, based upon lack of access. 
 
I mean I would only say that the maintenance enforcement 
office has the legal authority to take . . . to ensure that someone 
loses their driver’s licence for non-payment. But the court order 
providing for access is not something that the maintenance 
enforcement office can vary or can question the fairness of. 
That’s something only the court could do. 
 
So there’s not actually a similarity between the legal authority 
the maintenance enforcement office has to ensure someone 
loses their driver’s licence and an authority to amend or to vary 
the court order regarding access . . . regarding support, I’m 
sorry. 
 
But our hope is that the federal report will find . . . assist in 
finding ways to address this issue and in fact the other issues 
that both members have raised. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I guess that’s the 
part we’re arguing. We’re not arguing about the fact that the 
maintenance office would vary a court order. 
 
We’re suggesting that the maintenance office take a look at 
what the court order is and when a custodial parent comes and 
says, my ex is not keeping up to their part of the bargain, that 
the maintenance office basically has some authority to say, well 
are you keeping up to your part of the court order? 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

And in that case, if you’re not honouring your part of the court 
order, then there seems to be a one-way street here. And the 
court order is a two-way street where we’re trying to not only 
guarantee that the child is looked after and provided for through 
maintenance payments, but the child actually has the same 
opportunity to have time with the other . . . with both parents. 
 
And I think that’s the issue that’s being debated here, not 
changing the court order. Because if there are changes to come 
in the court order, again I think you’re . . . the avenue to change 
that is to then go back to the courts for that change. But to just 
follow through with what the original court order was or 
whatever the changes are and make sure that both parents are 
living by the order that has been presented. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The kinds of discussions the member 
is talking about do take place between maintenance 
enforcement office personnel and the custodial parent. I mean 
those kinds of ranges of discussions take place. But at the end 
of the day, the maintenance enforcement office’s job is to 
enforce whatever the court order says. And if the court order 
provides for support, then that is the job of the maintenance 
enforcement office. 
 
Now that’s not to say that that’s the end of it. But I think there 
would be some caution regarding changing the legislation 
without some pretty serious thought as to what the implications 
would be for the child. But our sense is that the federal report, 
on its consultations, will move us forward to trying to find 
solutions to this challenge. 
 
So the job of the maintenance enforcement office isn’t in a 
sense not to mediate between the parents, although it does that, 
but it is to enforce the court order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister, just one follow-up. 
And I guess what I’m saying is we’re just basically suggesting 
that the maintenance office actually have the authority to apply 
both ends of the court order and make sure that both individuals 
comply with that court order rather than . . . so that you have the 
opportunity for the child to have access to both parents and 
have . . . and the child to actually have an opportunity to have 
that bonding, and grow up with a greater understanding of . . . 
and have parenting both of the mother and father. 
 
And that’s what we’re asking. We’re not really asking for the 
maintenance office to actually start changing court orders, but 
to follow through on the court order and to use that to guarantee 
that there is . . . that that child has equal opportunity to both 
parents. 
 
And the question I would have to ask, Mr. Minister, is while 
there’s been this ongoing discussion and debate, there’s been 
this consultation, what is your office doing to address these 
concerns, and to make sure that there’s . . . that we address 
those court orders fairly on both sides of the court order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — There are two points in response to 
this question too, Mr. Chair. 
 
The first I think is that it is not very often in these cases of high 

conflict to get . . . it’s not very often easy to get to the bottom of 
what actually is taking place. There will be conflict between the 
two parents in terms of what each says happens and what each 
says didn’t happen. 
 
So there will be concerns about . . . there’ll be issues about 
non-custodial parents going to the home, the custodial parent 
saying the child is sick. Is the child sick? Well it’s not always 
clear. Did the non-custodial parent turn up when they were 
supposed to turn up? Well one parent will say yes, the other 
parent will say no. 
 
So I think it’s, in these very highly conflicted, conflictual cases, 
it is very difficult to find out what really the facts are. And the 
judge does his or her best to assess what the facts are to the 
extent necessary to decide what is in the best interests of the 
child. So I think these are complex factual cases and it’s 
important to bear that in mind. 
 
The other point I think worth making in response to the 
question the member raises, and these are questions I think we 
all anguish over and in particular when faced . . . where these 
challenges become very, very difficult cases for parents, but if 
there is a denial of access, then what is the appropriate 
response? The member is suggesting maybe the appropriate 
response on the part of maintenance enforcement is not to 
enforce the support order. 
 
Well our view is that that’s not good public or social or family 
policy and would not be in the best interests of the child. So 
then we need to find some other ways in order to work in the 
best interests of the child, ensure access, and ensure that support 
payments are made. 
 
As I said, maintenance enforcement advises the custodial parent 
to respond to the appropriate . . . to the access order. And the 
consultations which have taken place federally and provincially 
dealing with these questions we anticipate will provide some 
avenues to address these kinds of questions. 
 
What are those avenues? Well they are all about mediation, 
parent education, intervening early so that parents understand 
what these kinds of conflicts can do to their children. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, last 
year we discussed at length a specific type of a problem an 
individual was having — and it seems to be an ongoing thing 
— and that is regarding the level of maintenance that’s awarded 
and if a change takes place in a custodial parent’s income. And 
I believe at that time the indication was you can go back to the 
court to have the court review and see if there’s a balance in 
regards to the maintenance versus what the custodial parent 
may now have as an income. 
 
Now if in . . . as in the one case that I’d raised and certainly it 
came since our discussion, where the person did go back to 
court trying to find a balance because of the number of days 
that the current . . . the individual’s employment was where the 
individual actually was on EI (Employment Insurance) because 
of the down days in the industry that that individual was 
involved in, and about three days after the court appearance 
found out that actually his ex-spouse had employment in 
another mining sector which actually was paying higher than he 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

 

was getting on his job. 
 
Now I think the argument they could go back to court . . . but 
when would you be able to go back to court because normally it 
seems to me the court would be looking at taxation documents 
that would indicate that this person is now receiving that 
income and therefore will make a decision based on the income 
either/or. 
 
Could a person . . . would you have to wait until the end of a 
taxation year to have that taxation period filed or would it be a 
matter of being able to prove to the court that the other person is 
now in . . . has quality employment and to have that balance, the 
maintenance equation, balanced out in regards to what both 
persons were actually making as an income for that year? 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us an idea of 
where you go on that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks, first of all . . . asks 
a number of questions. First of all, when is it appropriate or 
when can a parent go to court to vary the various orders that 
have been made, in this sense, the order requiring support? 
Essentially that can happen at any time when there’s been a 
variation of the person’s situation. 
 
So if for example a person finds that they no longer have the 
earning capacity upon which the support order was made, then 
they can go to court to point that out and to get a variation. 
 
The other question the member asks is: what if the custodial 
parent’s earnings increase significantly? The custodial parent’s 
earnings are not of any significance when the court decides 
what should the non-custodial parent pay to support children 
being looked after by their custodial parent. 
 
Now it’s not so easy when there’s shared custody. And in that 
instance, the parent . . . both parents’ income will have an 
impact on the amount paid by the, by the parent when they are 
. . . when the . . . on a monthly or other basis. 
 
The member also asks or gives me the opportunity to talk a 
little bit about the support variation pilot project which we, 
which we have underway. And in this pilot project an 
out-of-court alternative is available to lower income parents 
who can agree on varying their Saskatchewan child support 
order when children have been moved from one parent to 
another, or graduated, or circumstances have changed. 
 
And the project is designed to assist low-income parents and 
will facilitate communication between them, will manage the 
exchange of financial information, will prepare the required 
forms and the draft agreement or order and bring it to the court 
for the judge’s approval. And it will also — the support 
variation pilot project — will also be an information . . . there 
will also be an information centre where parents can obtain help 
to fill out the various self-help variation kits, child calculation 
forms, financial disclosure forms, and so on. And where other 
services are necessary, the referrals will be made so that they 
can . . . so that those services can be, can be accessed. 
 
So the member raises an issue which we share as a concern and 
which we are addressing in a pilot project way, first of all with 

low-income parents. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I guess as we’d 
been discussing and certainly just listening to your answer 
again, one of the biggest problems still continues to be the fact 
that we’ve always got to rely on the court, you got to back to 
court. Which means it costs money and for some parents 
becomes a real challenge just to try and get some fairness, 
because you’re forced back into the court system into a costly 
measure of trying to, trying to address a problem. 
 
And I guess I’m just going to end my discussion at this time on 
the fact that I, since hearing it, I think the collaborative law 
avenue, there’s a lot of things that certainly I think can bring 
some positives if we can . . . I think at the end of the day we 
would all agree that the confrontational mode that our court 
system has had — and probably in some cases our legal 
community have through the years played a major role in this 
confrontational aspect — if the legal community can begin to 
realize that maybe it’s time we started putting aside our 
differences and the avenue of, well if you do this, you’ll get this 
and let’s see how we can work it out — especially when it 
comes to family law — we might find a more amicable way of 
dealing with these problems and save ourselves a lot of 
confrontation. 
 
And as MLAs maybe it’ll take . . . cut down on our workload. 
To be honest with you, I wouldn’t mind if that actually took 
place because I think at the end of the day we still think . . . 
we’re thinking of the children, we’re thinking of the individuals 
and the fact that a love relationship or a . . . (inaudible) . . . hate 
relationship is much better off. 
 
So I certainly would encourage your department as well to give 
even more serious thought in working with how we can make 
the collaborative law form, if it’s one of the positive methods, 
work much better and bring people . . . bringing people together 
rather than driving them apart. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your time, your comments, and 
your officials. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you. If I might just comment 
briefly on the member’s words, and I thank him for his thanks, I 
guess. 
 
And he’s quite right and we’ve had, as he says, we have had 
many discussions about this in this forum, and plainly access to 
justice is a problem because if there . . . if you don’t have the 
resources, you don’t have the access. Or at least the access is 
delayed. 
 
And he’s . . . the member is also right that the confrontational 
nature of the way in which decisions are made in the legal 
system don’t always work so well in a family environment. But 
it is nonetheless important that when there is not agreement 
between the parents which is in the best interest of the child — 
and it’s easy to conceive of agreements between parents which 
are not in the best interest of the child — but if there are . . . if 
there is a need to decide, for an independent person to decide, 
what is in the best interests of the child, then we don’t have a 
whole range of options. 
 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

And certainly we have chosen — Canada as a whole and most 
countries have chosen the judge to be that independent 
decision-maker. We can, I think, look back and say that this 
confrontational adversarial legal system is not best in this 
context but . . . and we could I suppose blame lawyers in that 
sense, but it’s also lawyers who are bringing forward the 
collaborative approach and recognizing how important it is to 
work together. 
 
And I think it’s also important to recognize that the pilot project 
dealing with variation is a big help here too. 
 
So I think I share the . . . At the risk of being non-adversarial in 
this place, I share the member’s concern and the need for us all 
to focus on what would be the best alternatives. And they are, 
after all, always child focused. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good evening once 
again to the minister and good evening to your numerous 
officials here with us this evening . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Good afternoon. Well, it’s almost evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just have one comment that I’d like to make 
regarding maintenance enforcement in Saskatchewan and then 
I’d like to go on to other issues regarding family law. 
 
This is not going to be a lengthy dissertation on maintenance 
enforcement except that, throughout my years as a 
representative for the Humboldt constituency as well as hearing 
from many people throughout the province on maintenance 
enforcement, there remains yet and still a great deal of 
frustration that people cannot get through to the maintenance 
enforcement office. One person told me that they had been on 
the phone for four days trying to access someone in that office 
and were unable to do so. They either got a message manager 
. . . Most of the time that’s what happened and it took a full four 
days before they were able to access and talk with somebody in 
that office. 
 
Could you explain, Mr. Minister, why this is happening. And I 
think I’m going to start to suggest that we should go back to 
maybe a fuller complement of people to answer those phones 
rather than have to put them through answering machines, 
especially when it takes that long. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the question of 
access to maintenance enforcement office over the telephone. 
And for the vast majority of the month, phone calls will be . . . 
phoners will only have to . . . well, will have to wait about 15 
minutes is as much time as they will have to be on the line. 
 
The beginning of the month is when most of the problems arise 
because that’s when people don’t make their payments. At that 
time, there is some delay. 
 
There are now two people answering the phones, so we’ve 
added the resources to the process. And also there’s a . . . the 
telephone system is automated, so you can easily access without 
speaking to a person — the latest payment information, balance 
of your account, and enforcement actions and so on. So there’s 
a process to find out a lot of information without having to wait. 

There are 14 incoming lines. They operate 24 hours a day and 
they receive about 11,000 calls each month. 
 
I mean I’d say to the member this is a perennial challenge to be 
as accessible as is necessary. Certainly when a person phones, 
they’re not phoning because it’s a minor issue of which they 
don’t have much concern. It’s an important question that needs 
to be addressed, in their estimation, quickly. And we do our 
best to respond as quickly as possible. I think this will . . . this is 
less of a problem than it was, but I think it will always be a bit 
of a challenge in those, the early days of the month. 
 
In the context of maintenance enforcement, I know the member 
will agree that this is a very successful project in the sense that 
it collects millions of dollars a year for custodial parents. And 
in that process also saves Social Services money, but even more 
particularly, makes sure that parents fulfill their responsibilities 
and the children have the resources they need in order to lead 
the lives that they are entitled to lead. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I thank you 
for your response, but the fact of the matter is that many people 
trying to access the office of maintenance enforcement need to 
talk in detail usually about some dispute between the office and 
the non-custodial parent for instance, or the payee, as to 
whether or not payments have been made, when there’s a 
dispute with that, and there may be a necessity to point out 
some transaction that was overlooked or made by the custodial 
parent rather than through maintenance enforcement. 
 
So it’s about disputes with . . . between maintenance 
enforcement, I guess in a way, the office, and the non-custodial 
parent. And those disputes cannot be resolved when you’re 
talking to a machine. It doesn’t matter how many messages you 
get about services that are available or that kind of thing, these 
kind of disputes are not resolved and they’re very frustrating. 
 
And in the meantime, as the member from Moosomin has 
mentioned to you just a few minutes earlier, when this happens 
it is the MLA’s office that usually gets the phone calls and then 
we start on the phone trying to access maintenance 
enforcement. 
 
As you well know, there is a great number of issues that we 
deal with as elected representatives and certainly we expect to 
represent our people well. But I do declare that there must be a 
better way to have these issues addressed on a more immediate 
. . . in a more immediate way so that this constant delay and 
frustration does not happen. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was wondering if you could just answer me one 
more question in this regard. Has the staff been increased in the 
maintenance enforcement office for . . . in this budget year? 
And if it has been, how many staff have been added? I would 
hope to goodness that it has not been decreased. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes, the member is quite right when 
she says that when a person needs to talk to an official at 
maintenance enforcement, they need access. They’re not going 
to find that by tapping in a number and getting another 
machine. 
 
But 50 to 60 per cent of the calls are about, are about seeking an 



May 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

 

update and can be done easily through the automated system. 
That doesn’t deal with the other 40 to 50 per cent who need 
someone to speak to. 
 
And the member asks, so do we have more people and do we 
have more in investment in maintenance enforcement? And I 
can tell the member that the budget for maintenance 
enforcement, which is now called the family justice services 
branch, increased from 2.75 million to 3.15 million in 
2002-2003. That’s an increase of about 9.3 per cent. 
 
And that translates into five positions — new positions — last 
year and one new position this year. Last year there were two 
enforcement officials, a telephone answering person, two client 
services people, and this year we have another enforcement 
officer. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: Mr. 
Minister, that clock is ticking away and I have a lot of questions 
to ask you, so I’m going to ask you to be very precise in your 
answers and I’ll try to be very precise in my questions. 
 
Could you just repeat, please, what the difference now is in the 
budget compared from last year to this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Because it’s such a significant 
increase, Mr. Chair, I’d be more than happy to do that. It 
increased from . . . It increased by $256,000 — about 9.3 per 
cent. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, $256,000 is 
substantial. Five staff members for $256,000, pardon me, is not 
very substantial. I’m just wondering if that budget increase 
pertains to the maintenance enforcement office, then $256,000 
should have hired more people to deal with the office. If it 
hasn’t — and I don’t know what the salary for people is in that 
office — if it hasn’t, I would suggest that if there’s a lot of that 
money being directed into telephone answering machines and 
the likes of that, then we’re making a big mistake. 
 
So could you please tell me how that funding is broken down so 
that we can assess whether it’s a worthwhile expenditure or 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member will, I’m sure, be happy 
to know that this is a good investment and she wouldn’t have 
had any questions as to whether it was a good investment, I’m 
sure. 
 
About half the increase is salary, is for salaries, Mr. Chair, and 
the other half is to establish the support variation pilot project 
that I mentioned which will assist low-income parents to obtain 
variations to the orders that have been made by Queen’s Bench 
judges when circumstances change. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right, I’ll have to dig into that part of it another 
day . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, if you would send me 
an explanation of that I would appreciate it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the problem that I have mentioned with a delay 
for clients — I prefer to call them people — who need to access 
services through maintenance enforcement is also a problem 
that is being experienced through the Rentalsman’s office, 

okay. There is the whole issue of people phoning and getting a 
recording. And so this is another office that is very frustrating 
to the people of this province when they’re trying to access 
some help. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d just like to go into family law for a 
moment with the time that we have left. And I know that the 
Federal-Provincial-Territorial Family Law Committee was 
formed in 1990. And I know that their mandate was to look into 
maintenance, custody, and access. And we’re talking today a lot 
about custody and access and the need to deal with that issue as 
well as maintenance payments. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I’d like to ask you today is did the 
Saskatchewan government work with that committee, with the 
Family Law Committee? Were you there as one of the 
provinces when this committee was formed and have you been 
working with them throughout the years that that committee 
sat? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, let me first thank the 
member for drawing my attention to problems with regards to 
the Rentalsman’s office and access over the phone. I’ll look into 
it and provide her with an explanation and with an indication of 
what responses have been made to . . . or what responses we 
have made in order to deal with that situation. But I want to 
thank her for drawing my attention to that. 
 
The member asked have we been involved in the consultations, 
the federal consultations over custody and access. And Betty 
Ann Pottruff tells me she’s been intimately involved with this 
since 1981. So we have had many meetings with provinces and 
the federal government over this matter. And I think that . . . 
aren’t you the Co-Chair, yes . . . that in fact Betty Ann Pottruff 
is the Co-Chair of the committee looking into this work. 
 
So we, through Ms. Pottruff, have been intimately involved and 
integral to this work. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I guess I 
need to be more, sort of, specific. Did the Saskatchewan 
government support and participate in the joint Senate-House of 
Commons committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — When the House of Commons — was 
it a joint committee, I think, who knows — when the committee 
came, it was argued that it was better for citizens to present 
their views to the committee. 
 
We as a government have many opportunities to participate and 
to provide information. We’ve obviously provided all the 
information and research we had, but left the time for 
presentations at the committee to ordinary citizens who 
wouldn’t have all those other opportunities to have their views 
heard. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m just 
wondering why the . . . why your government did not make a 
submission to that committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well it was our view that — and 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2002 

 

we’ve followed this practice in other instances, too — that we 
have many opportunities to make our views known to the 
federal government, to senators, to members of parliament, that 
we can do that at any time, that we work closely with federal 
and other provincial and territorial officials so we have many 
opportunities to engage in debate there, and that it was, in our 
view, more appropriate for those who didn’t have all of that 
access to make presentations to the committee. 
 
I mean, I think it’s worth remembering that we are, through 
Betty Ann Pottruff, really very active in the 
federal/provincial/territorial process, and that we are also very 
active at the ministerial and the deputy ministerial level. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I guess I 
need to have some clarification on your comments that Ms. 
Pottruff is active in that committee because from the 
information that I have, the report from that committee was 
submitted in 1998 already, so I don’t know how we could be 
ongoing with consultations and so on with that committee. 
 
In fact I understand that a report entitled For the Sake of the 
Children was released and it was a very good report. And 
unfortunately, for some reason or other, on May 10 of 1999, the 
Hon. Anne McLellan and her Federal-Provincial-Territorial 
Family Law Committee rejected the joint Senate-House of 
Commons committee report. 
 
So it’s taken so long already. You know, we’re dealing here 
with custody and access issues. We’re trying to come to terms 
with how we’re going to act as an entire country so that all 
provinces are in alignment with these issues of custody and 
access as well as with maintenance, and have some common 
terms, some common goals, and some common resolutions to 
these problems. And the federal minister rejected the joint 
Senate-House of Commons committee report. 
 
So it’s too bad that it’s taken this long but, I mean, it’s going to 
take even longer yet. This has been going on since 1990. 
 
And then in November of 1999, from the information I have, 
the FPT (Federal-Provincial-Territorial) Family Law 
Committee came out with another consultation process, a 
review of technical issues and proposed solutions, feedback 
booklet. I mean, from what I understand, that booklet was an 
absolute flop because the results of the consultations were held 
in secret in the first place and the context of the questions put 
forward showed really very clearly that the Family Law 
Committee didn’t know very much about what they were doing. 
 
In fact, I’m wondering if you can tell me what the purpose of 
the whole FPT Family Law Committee was. What was their 
mandate? I mean it states a mandate but in fact I don’t know if 
they’ve put any major objectives into place, or goals or 
outcomes, and they just didn’t seem to understand what the 
purpose was that they were getting together. 
 
So if the minister could please talk to me about that right now 
and give me some idea of whether he was under the influence 
. . . or not under the influence, but under the impression, under 
the impression that there was a real purpose for this committee 
and that they knew what the outcome was going to be. 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member indicates a certain 
frustration with, I think, the time that it has taken to address 
what are, I think, extremely complex issues which do not 
present very easy solutions. 
 
I should say that the joint Senate-House committee report that 
the member refers to was presented to the Family Law 
Committee of which Betty Ann Pottruff is the Co-Chair. The 
committee did not reject it, the Minister of Justice did not reject 
it, but passed it on to the Family Law Committee. 
 
And the Family Law Committee was primarily responsible for 
ensuring consultations on the approaches that needed to be 
made with regards to children, child access, with regards to the 
consequences of separation and divorce on children and 
families, and was charged with dealing with not only the 
substantive issues which are wide ranging and complex, but 
also proposals for how to respond. 
 
So I would merely say to the member, not to prejudge the 
response of the Family Law Committee. It will be discussed in 
Quebec, I think, next week, the publication of the report. And 
we certainly look forward to moving forward as quickly as 
possible in this area. 
 
But I think it is important to remember that these . . . the reason 
that these issues are taking time is because first of all they’re 
extremely complex and secondly there is no consensus on how 
the challenges might be met. 
 
There certainly are . . . there certainly is agreement that the best 
interests of the children should prevail. There certainly are . . . 
there is agreement that there are roles and responsibilities for 
parents after separation or divorce, that there are issues of high 
conflict in these relationships, and that we have to find 
solutions. 
 
But this is not easy. It takes time. There is not easy consensus. 
But as I say, I would ask the member not to prejudge the Family 
Law Committee report and it will be available shortly and I’m 
sure we will be discussing it further. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 
 


