















































Hansard: July 08, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2611 
 July 8, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are very 
upset with the government’s decision to transfer the surplus 
from the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund to the General 
Revenue Fund. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
refund the $1.6 million intended for the Saskatchewan Fish 
and Wildlife Development Fund and discontinue its present 
policy of using this money for other government purposes. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by over 500 individuals 
from the communities of Delisle, Saskatoon, Chelan, Humboldt, 
Warman, Martensville, Leader, Outlook, Moose Jaw, Hudson 
Bay, Lucky Lake, Waldheim, Nipawin, Muenster, and 
Dalmeny. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand once again today to present a petition on behalf 
of people in the Humboldt area; people that would like to see 
the territorial operations office for Saskatchewan Housing 
Authority remain in the city of Humboldt. And the prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt and the community of Englefeld. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with the overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 

Esterhazy, Churchbridge, Gerald, and Yorkton. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents surrounding Craik and 
Davidson and area that are concerned about their health care 
facility. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from the Craik and 
Davidson area and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Davidson and 
Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents concerned with the state of the regional health care 
facility in Swift Current. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its 65 per cent share of funding for a 
new regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from the great city 
of Swift Current, save for one signature from the community of 
Morse. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here, to people opposed to the reduction of services in the 
Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as well as lab, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, long-term care services available 
to the users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Hawarden, Girvin, 
Bladworth, and Craik. 
 
I so present. 
 



2612 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon by people who are opposed to the possible reduction 
of services to the Davidson and Craik health centres. And the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
services at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, 
emergency, and doctoral services available as well as 
laboratory, physiotherapy, public health care, home care, 
and long-term care services available to users from the 
Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people from 
Davidson and Elbow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens who are concerned about people who have been 
injured in a vehicle or a work-related accident and been denied 
or cut off of benefits from WCB (Workers’ Compensation 
Board) or SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) no-fault 
insurance. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to treat 
injured and disabled people and their families with absolute 
fairness and equitable treatment. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by the citizens of Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert, North Battleford, Battleford, Loon Lake, Rosetown, 
Theodore, Osler, Ruddell, Sonningdale, Porcupine Plain, Duck 
Lake, Christopher Lake, Mayfair, Nipawin, Biggar, Buffalo 
Narrows, Melville, Milestone, Regina, Batoche, Warman and 
Martensville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned about the hike in 
crop insurance premiums. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from 
young farmers from my hometown of Spiritwood. 
 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 7, 23, 59, 157, and no. 168. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 
it was just about at this time 21 years ago that I had the good 
fortune of meeting someone I’d like to introduce to the 
Assembly here today and it’s my good friend Mr. Jim Walters, 
who was a colleague of mine as well in a previous lifetime, and 
continues to work with me in my constituency office. I’d like 
everyone to please welcome Jim Walters to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you were 
getting up with the same intent in mind, but it’s hard not to 
notice in your gallery all the folks from Week in Wascana. And 
I’d just like to, through you, get the Assembly to help welcome 
them today because my granddaughter went to this program the 
last two summers. 
 
And they go to all of our excellent sites in Wascana Centre, 
including the Science Centre, the legislative buildings, the 
museum of natural history — the Royal Museum now called, 
and all the various other places. And the kids have a terrific 
time and learn about a lot of our special facilities that we have. 
 
So I’d like everybody to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Canadian Special Olympic Summer Games 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the slogan is Pure Sport, Pure Competition. The slogan I’m 
referring to belongs to the Canadian Special Olympic Games 
which kick off tomorrow in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow through Sunday, the Canadian Special 
Olympic Summer Games will play host to several hundred 
Special Olympic athletes from across the country, all competing 
in various sports such as swimming, softball, soccer, and track 
and field events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these games in Prince Albert are the second 
multi-sport Special Olympic event of the new millennium. 
They’re also a great opportunity for the Prince Albert 
community to showcase its many natural attractions. As well, 
athletes, coaches, families, and spectators will get a first-hand 
look at our province’s incredible group of ever ready 
volunteers. 
 
Members from Saskatchewan’s Special Olympic team will also 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2613 

 

be in attendance in Prince Albert and we wish all of them the 
very best. Their dedication and commitment to not only their 
team but also to the games themselves instills much pride and 
respect in all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Provincially the athlete’s oath at the Special Olympics is: 
 

Let me win; 
But if I cannot win, let me be brave in the attempt. 

 
This simple oath is one that all of us can apply to our daily 
personal lives. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in wishing all those attending 
the Canadian Special Olympic Summer Games in Prince Albert 
the very best. May you realize success and enjoy the many 
friendships. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Ethanol Act 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. The National and The Assiniboia Times can 
identify good news and groundbreaking legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. A recent article reported that the Canadian Renewable 
Fuels Association praised the Saskatchewan government for our 
groundbreaking Ethanol Fuel Act. 
 
CRFA (Canadian Renewable Fuels Association) president, 
Bliss Baker, said this courageous legislation will chart a new 
course for the fuel business in Canada. A bold initiative 
according to the Canadian Renewable Fuels Association, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Baker went on to say that the province of Saskatchewan has 
shown the way and now it’s up to the federal government to 
follow suit to help build a new farm economy. 
 
Good news for the province, Mr. Speaker, resulting in both 
growth and jobs in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can criticize this bold 
initiative if they like, but to say the least, Mr. Speaker, they 
have never encountered good news that they wouldn’t rain on 
or a fire alarm they wouldn’t pull, Mr. Speaker. It’s too bad 
they’re so negative, Mr. Speaker. Too bad they live with doom 
and gloom — too bad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Craik Eco-Village 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 
about the community of Craik — a community which has 
shown that it has a vision of living more closely in tune with 
our environment. 
 
On Saturday, I had the pleasure of attending the sod-turning 
ceremony and grand opening of the Craik Eco-Village. This 
remarkable new concept of living more closely with nature is 
taking the form of building a model ecological village using 
alternative energy and construction techniques. 

The model village is to begin construction as early as this fall, 
will consist of a highly insulated, energy efficient building 
made of straw bales. The building will house meeting rooms, a 
restaurant, and a gift shop in order to draw interested people in 
seeing just how alternative living would be in the future. 
 
This interpretive centre would educate local residents about 
sustainability as well as help people become aware of how 
much electricity they use and how much waste they produce. 
Activities like energy audits, retrofits of current homes and 
farm buildings are planned as part of the education project. 
 
The projects seeks to expand its sustainable community to 
include several homes built on the same lines as the interpretive 
centre in the near future. The entire project will be built 4 
kilometres from Craik near the regional park and the golf 
course. The location was chosen to accommodate the ongoing 
pesticide-free golf course project and future building of the 
ecological safe marina on the nearby reservoir. 
 
Tourism will also benefit this project as it will be highly 
promoted as both an environmental project and an educational 
project for those wishing to learn about living successfully with 
nature. 
 
This project is one of the many initiatives that the residents of 
Craik, led by Mayor Rodney Haugerud and many dedicated 
volunteers, have undertaken to take the community viable in the 
wake of recent elevator closures. 
 
With that, I want to wish them the best of luck and I know the 
members will congratulate them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Saskatchewan Festival of Words 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 
festival coming up in the province later this month that I’m sure 
a few of us, those who use words on a daily basis in a number 
of forums and for a variety of purposes, would truly benefit 
from attending. 
 
That festival, Mr. Speaker, is the sixth annual Saskatchewan 
Festival of Words which runs from July 25 to 28 in the fair city 
of Moose Jaw. The Festival of Words is a three-day 
extravaganza of dramatic performances, singer/songwriters, 
readings, recitations, interviews, panels, talks, workshops, 
competitions, and various innovative activities all centred on 
the creative use of language. 
 
The theme for this year’s festival is Our Living Roots. Among 
the headliners are award winners, fantasy writers, poets, 
historians, and children’s authors including Sandra Birdsell, 
Will Ferguson, Jack Whyte, George Elliot Clarke, and The 
Arrogant Worms. 
 
A number of Governor General’s award winners for poetry, 
children’s literature, and other genres are also on the schedule 
as presenters and workshop moderators. 
 



2614 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Another notable participant in this year’s festival is the former 
clerk of this legislature and current academic director of the 
legislative internship program, Dr. Gordon Barnhart. Dr. 
Barnhart will be in Moose Jaw on the Friday of the festival to 
discuss his book about Saskatchewan’s first premier, Walter 
Scott. 
 
This year’s festival, Mr. Speaker, is dedicated to Anne 
Szumigalski, who was among other things a vital force in the 
development of Saskatchewan’s writing community. 
 
I would like to wish all organizers and participants the best of 
luck in the festival. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Regional Hospital Facility 
 
Mr. Wall: — The push for a new regional hospital facility in 
Swift Current continues, Mr. Speaker. In fact residents of the 
Southwest are more determined than ever to make this dream 
become a reality. 
 
You will recall last year when hard-working volunteers spent 
countless hours collecting signatures on a petition for a new 
hospital. They did a fantastic job, Mr. Speaker, so much so that 
they had over 6,000 signatures on these petitions that I had the 
honour to present here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And another petition drive is underway currently, Mr. Speaker, 
because the situation hasn’t improved any and the people of the 
Southwest haven’t given up hope. The hospital in Swift Current 
desperately needs to be replaced. Mr. Speaker, our hospital is so 
old that a postcard featuring a picture of the Swift Current 
Hospital is being sold on the Internet auction giant, eBay, as a 
collectible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If a picture of the hospital in Swift Current is considered an 
antique, Mr. Speaker, what of the hospital itself? 
 
Mr. Speaker, constituents continue to raise concerns about the 
hospital, both front-line health care workers and patients. They 
continue to raise concerns about the state of the hospital in 
Swift Current. 
 
The taxpayers of the Southwest deserve better. They deserve a 
top rated health care facility. They deserve a new hospital. And 
on behalf of the constituency of Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, I 
would again respectfully request this provincial government 
approve their commitment for a new hospital in the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Job Contest 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Friday we got the big 
picture on jobs in Saskatchewan. Here’s a nice little addendum 
— not as momentous, but in its own way more good new for 
Saskatchewan, and particularly Saskatchewan students. 
 
Last Thursday, July 4, the Saskatchewan Human Resource 
Centre of Canada for Student Employment issued a challenge to 

its Alberta counterpart to see who could place the most students 
in summer jobs in the one day — a friendly competition, as 
most of ours are, with our good neighbour. During the day, both 
provincial offices counted the number of full-, part-time, and 
casual jobs that came from local employers. 
 
The results, Mr. Speaker? In Saskatchewan, 365 total jobs in 
one day. That’s 68.1 jobs per 100,000 people in the 
participating centres. In Alberta, 336 total jobs or 33.14 jobs per 
100,000. 
 
We win, Saskatchewan, in total numbers and on a per capita 
basis. Like that football game on Friday night. 
 
As I said, friendly competition. But I do like that number, 365 
jobs for Saskatchewan students in Saskatchewan. And we’ll add 
those to the 12,800 new jobs in June. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology Achievement Scholarship 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At a recent 
scholarship ceremony at Kelsey Campus, Stuart Redekop, who 
was a student in the machine shop program, was awarded a 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) Achievement Scholarship. SIAST achievement 
scholarships are awarded to full-time students based on 
academic standing in both theory and practical and the 
individual’s application of skill and initiative. 
 
Redekop graduated from Delisle Composite School in June of 
2001 and began his training at SIAST the following fall. 
Throughout his life he has been very active within the 
community and been a member of the Vanscoy multiple 4-H 
club for eight years, covering cattle, woodworking, and 
mechanics as projects. During that time he held executive 
positions and won many awards in public speaking and record 
books. 
 
While growing up he was involved in hockey for twelve years 
and ball for seven. School kept him busy in addition to his 
studies with football, drama, outdoor education, cross-country 
running, and track and field. 
 
Showing initiative, he started work as a farmhand with Ward’s 
Red Angus in the summer of 1999 and still finds time to fill in 
where he can between classes. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Stuart Redekop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Drought Assistance for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. When I was home at my constituency last weekend, 
the only thing people wanted to talk about of course was the 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2615 

 

drought. It’s devastating — the Northwest and the north-central 
of Saskatchewan, and again this year there’s just no crop, and 
there’s no hay. In fact there’s no grazing and very little water to 
be had. 
 
This week in the Lloydminster Booster they describe the NDP’s 
(New Democratic Party) approach to this drought as all talk and 
no action. Producers, and I quote: 
 

Producers are asking the government to throw them a bone, 
but instead they’re getting a bunch of hot air. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this just further exasperates the drought. Now the 
farm families in north Saskatchewan are hurting. They’ve lost 
another crop and another year of livelihood and they’re losing 
hope. 
 
My question is, what action is the provincial government taking 
right now to help farm families survive this devastating 
drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
from Lloydminster — because I too travel in his part of the 
world, and plan on being there again in the near future and have 
an opportunity to speak with some of his producers and his 
farmers in his area — some of the things that farmers in 
Saskatchewan are saying, Mr. Speaker, are these things. 
 
Over the last two years in this province, this government has 
delivered for — and in concert with the federal government. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, we provided additional dollars for a 
crop insurance program which that member, and those members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, will vote against, Mr. Speaker, I expect 
when voting against the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is part of the province . . . in their part of the province, 
Mr. Speaker, we implemented this year a grass program for 
producers across Saskatchewan of which their side of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, would be the greatest benefactors. And 
the member from Watrous stood up in her place and criticized 
the grass program in Saskatchewan. 
 
People in the Lloydminster, and farmers in the Lloydminster 
area are saying that those members opposite — that party 
opposite and that group of men and women, Mr. Speaker— 
speak against agriculture, not for agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Premier. Mr. Premier, drought is 
devastating in the Humboldt constituency also. For a large 
number of producers drought has wiped out any chance of a 
crop this year, and everyone in my constituency is feeling the 
pain. 
 
While conversing with a large number of producers from areas 
such as Domremy, Vonda, Bruno, and up to the Humboldt area 
the people are asking, they want to know why the provincial 
government has left struggling farm families to face this 

drought crisis alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agriculture crisis is the most important issue 
facing the legislature in this session. The Saskatchewan Party 
has consistently pushed the NDP to come up with a plan to help 
struggling farm families but so far all we have heard are a lot of 
NDP excuses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the Humboldt constituency want to 
know when the NDP is going to stop making excuses and start 
taking some action to help our community survive this year’s 
devastating drought. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting now, two 
consecutive speakers and maybe others from the Saskatchewan 
Party will be picking today, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the 
drought and the issues as it relates to the farming community in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is now July 9 in this province and across the country and 
the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 
just woken up to the fact that we have today a farm crisis in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — just woke up to the issue. 
 
It’s just been recently that the member of the opposition stood 
up, the Leader of the Opposition, and I said . . . not more than 
about two weeks ago, he stands up in the House and he says, I 
tabled for Saskatchewan people on May 1 in this province a 
statement that says we have a problem with agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. It’s on May 1. 
 
And today on a regular basis now, I’m hearing two members 
stand up and say, what are we doing. We have a litany of 
things, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve done for Canadian farmers and 
Saskatchewan farmers in the last year and a half, Mr. Speaker, 
led by this Premier. We’re at work, Mr. Speaker, building an 
agricultural policy for Saskatchewan while the members 
opposite, led by the opposition leader from Rosetown, Mr. 
Speaker, is void of any ideas as it relates to agriculture in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to point out 
to the Deputy Premier that the Saskatchewan Party Ag critic has 
asked over 40 questions concerning ag-related concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the Premier. Producers in 
my area of west-central Saskatchewan are also being hit hard by 
drought. Crops are being decimated and there’s no feed and 
water for livestock. And in many places . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, producers in my area of 
west-central are also being hit hard by drought. Crops are being 
decimated and there’s no feed and water for livestock. And in 
many places, the government has maintained road bans so 
producers can’t truck feed in or truck livestock out. But so far 
all we’ve seen from the NDP is to cut agriculture funding by 
$15 million. 



2616 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, many farm families in my constituency consider 
the NDP to be part of the problem. With many areas of 
Saskatchewan enduring one of the worst droughts in the 
century, why has this NDP government left farm families in 
Redberry Lake constituency high and dry without an effective 
long-term safety net program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, 
this government and this ministry and this department put 
together a year and a half ago, a plan for agriculture for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it’s clearly articulated, not 
only in this province, Mr. Speaker, but it’s attached to what 
we’re doing as a national program today in agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we’ve talked this year about putting additional dollars into 
crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. This year we’ve put additional 
money into a transition program, Mr. Speaker. This year we’ve 
put together for the very first time an expansion to our crop 
coverage program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On every occasion that we’ve put ideas and we’ve put money 
into the program and agriculture . . . and the member from 
Watrous whom he says has asked 40 questions, Mr. Speaker, 
has — but on each occasion stands up and is critical of every 
one of the programs that are going to help Saskatchewan people 
and Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a government, Mr. Speaker, and a ministry and a 
department that’s building agriculture in Saskatchewan. That’s 
an opposition, Mr. Speaker, and a leader that’s taking 
agriculture apart in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Agriculture minister because people in 
northeast Saskatchewan also understand that this government 
has cut $50 million from the agricultural budget instead of 
doing anything real for producers. And now the drought has 
extended as far into the Northeast as the RM of Connaught who 
has declared itself a drought disaster area last week. That’s 
north of Tisdale, Mr. Speaker, and the drought extends to that 
far part of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Health minister gets up and talks about 
everything wonderful that he’s doing for Saskatchewan farm 
families affected by drought. But what is he going to tell the 
people in the RM of Connaught about what he’s really doing for 
agricultural families in light of the fact that this government cut 
the agriculture budget by $50 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What the opposition members don’t talk 
about when they review the budget on agriculture this year, Mr. 
Speaker, is that in this year’s budget we have not included the 
emergency payment for C-SAP, Mr. Speaker. That’s not 
included in this year’s budget. And if you don’t include the 
C-SAP emergency money, Mr. Speaker, you will find that this 
year’s budget in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, exceeds what last 

year’s budget in agriculture was, Mr. Speaker. It exceeds it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(14:00) 
 
And the reason why it exceeds it, Mr. Speaker, is that we made 
investments this year in the crop insurance program — which 
those members, Mr. Speaker, will vote against. We made an 
investment this year in a transition program for farmers — 
which those members, Mr. Speaker, will vote against. This 
year, Mr. Speaker, we made an investment in the crop insurance 
cover program — which those members, Mr. Speaker, will not 
support. 
 
And we’ve been talking about support money nationally, Mr. 
Speaker, for trade injury, of which finally the member of the 
opposition has got on board on. And I see and hear today, Mr. 
Member, member after member preparing themselves — Mr. 
Speaker, I expect — to step off the train, Mr. Speaker, as we 
work to build an agricultural policy for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, we have a government over there that’s 
spending $6 billion of taxpayers’ money and hundreds of 
millions of dollars of Crown money, yet they have no plan for 
agriculture at all. If you want to know what we’re going to do, 
call an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this last weekend, I travelled my constituency and 
the main question that people asked me was, what is this 
government going to do for farmers in the drought area? 
Everywhere people asked me, why has the NDP abandoned 
farm families in this drought situation? The Premier owes the 
people of Kelvington-Wadena and right across this province an 
answer to the question. 
 
Why has the NDP abandoned farm families struggling to 
survive a terrible drought? They are a proper long-term farm 
care safety net, and what specific action is the provincial 
government doing to help these desperate families right now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is a most interesting 
strategy today employed by the opposition party because, as 
you know, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan today, producers 
across the province in spades are talking about how in fact the 
Saskatchewan Party has abandoned agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s all over the place. And so today, the members of the 
opposition are standing up, and they’re trying to find a place for 
themselves in the agricultural file. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, I quoted the . . . from the article from 
Mr. Kyle Kosior from Fillmore, Mr. Speaker. A long-time 
Saskatchewan Party supporter, Mr. Speaker, in that area of the 
province, and he says, Mr. Speaker, that he’s disappointed with 
the involvement of the Saskatchewan Party in building 
agricultural policy because that party, Mr. Speaker, has been 
void of agricultural policy for the better part of a year and a half 
 
And because of what’s happened, Mr. Speaker, is that Mr. Boyd 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2617 

 

has left the party, Mr. Speaker, has gone home to his farm, and 
agricultural policy has disappeared, Mr. Speaker, from the face 
of the Saskatchewan Party because he’s the guy who was the 
leader who provided agricultural policy, and today they’re 
bankrupt of any idea on agricultural policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Results of Governmental Restructuring 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Premier. When the NDP 
government unveiled its most recent budget at the end of 
March, it made much ado about government restructuring. The 
Premier announced he was eliminating approximately 350 
public servants’ positions and after departmental restructuring 
there would be a total reduction of four government 
departments. The public certainly expected to see a tighter run 
ship. 
 
However, CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio 
reported this morning that only 150 people were actually cut 
from the civil service, and senior management positions in 
government were only reduced by 32. They are also reporting 
that there are four bureaucrats who are still on government 
payroll but have been at home since the end of May because 
there is currently no position for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public was expecting more from this 
restructuring. Why has the Premier’s restructuring process 
turned out to be so much less than originally announced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of reorganizing 
and restructuring government, we indicated there would be four 
fewer departments. There are today four fewer departments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We indicated . . . The critic has it right. 
We indicated that it would be a reduction of approximately 350 
positions government wide. Mr. Speaker, there will be 350 
positions less in government as we work through this and next 
year’s budget. Mr. Speaker, we have downsized cabinet. 
 
But what we have done, Mr. Speaker, here is not to attempt a 
hack and slash of the civil service that would be intended by the 
members opposite. I understand why they’re not happy. They 
propose a hack and slash of the public service in Saskatchewan. 
We didn’t intend to do that. 
 
We intended, Mr. Speaker, to put together an organization of 
government that better serves the people of Saskatchewan and 
the needs of the future of this province. We’ve done that and 
we’re proud of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier should consult with 
his Finance minister and find out the two sources of revenue for 
this government. Taxes and non-renewable resources are down 
$600 million from two years ago — $600 million. And the 

Premier, you know, sloughs it off. In his March 26 
communiqué, he says: 
 

With these changes, (with these changes) Saskatchewan 
people will have a leaner, more efficient government . . . 

 
Yet to CBC, he said that: 
 

. . . people have to accept a certain degree of inefficiency 

. . . 
 
In fact, he said, and I quote: 
 

But if your fundamental goal is to reshape government in a 
way that better serves, that doesn’t necessarily mean 
smaller government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier led Saskatchewan people to believe 
that this was a large reduction and would benefit all taxpayers 
of the province. Mr. Speaker, now the people found out that not 
only were the cuts not that deep, the NDP is paying people to 
stay at home until they can find a job for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier now admitting to inefficiencies 
due to restructuring when he promised Saskatchewan people the 
exact opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Point number one, the Saskatchewan 
Party should get a better research wing than the CBC. Mr. 
Speaker, when we spoke to the journalists, we took . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . if it wasn’t clear before today, it’s 
clear today the intention of the Saskatchewan Party should they 
ever form government — should they ever form government — 
it is their intention obviously to slash and hack at the public 
service of Saskatchewan. There is no doubt about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They intend, and they volunteered so — the leader has 
volunteered — so to follow the BC (British Columbia) model 
which is disregard contractual obligations; that will disregard 
contractual obligations. And we all know and the people of 
Saskatchewan know what the Leader of the Opposition said 
before he assumed the post. He said, quote, in the Moosomin 
World-Spectator when asked about the public service, this is the 
Leader of the Opposition today. He said, quote: 
 

Elwin Hermanson: “Before I agreed to run for the 
leadership I asked the MLAs: ‘Do you know where the 
deadwood are? Do you know where the skunks are?’ They 
assured me they know who those people are. Civil servants 
can be very powerful. Look what they did to the Devine 
government.” 

 
That’s the attitude, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not . . . 



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier wants to hear what other people think 
about the government’s plans or the lack of plans. Let’s look at 
some of the things that Saskatchewan people are saying. Not 
only are they convinced that the Premier did not keep his word, 
other experts are pointing out that the NDP’s restructuring was 
little more than cosmetic surgery. 
 
Ken Rasmussen of the University of Regina calls the 
restructuring timid and superficial, saying it had more to do 
with politics and public relations than public policy. And the 
former NDP Finance minister Janice MacKinnon says the NDP 
government didn’t go far enough. She says, and I quote: 
 

It’s not exactly clear to me what the priorities of the 
government are. I think that’s part of what the concern of 
the public would be. 

 
She also says the NDP government itself probably won’t know 
if they’ve really saved any money with these moves for at least 
a year. Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier promise more 
efficiencies and tremendous cost saving with government 
restructuring if he had no intention of delivering? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the most significant 
reorganization of the provincial government in 30 years is 
underway — underway under the leadership of this 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote a more recent comment, 
October 2, 2001, from the current leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party who said, quote: 
 

I’ve been watching closely what is happening with the new 
government in British Columbia. One initiative I believe 
holds tremendous value for Saskatchewan is a project 
launched by Premier . . . (Calvert) called the Core Services 
Review . . . A Saskatchewan Party government will launch 
a similar Core Services Review in this province within 30 
days of taking office. 

 
Here’s the result of a core services review — 11,700 jobs axed 
in British Columbia. My question today to the Leader of the 
Opposition, and the question that the people of Saskatchewan 
are asking, is: which public servant jobs are they going to axe? 
Are they going to axe the 88 new people we put into the 
fighting of fires in the North? Are they going to axe those 
people? Or under his program of cutting $50 million from 
Social Services, are they going to axe the new child protection 
workers? Where are the jobs they’re going to axe? Where are 
the deadwoods and skunks that he talks about? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legislation for Paramedics 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. In April The Paramedics 
Act or Bill 38 was introduced by the Minister of Health. And in 
a government press release that day the minister stated the Bill 
would, and I quote: 

. . . improve the quality of emergency medical services for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
In fact the news release goes on to say that this legislation is 
part of the government’s broader goal of improving Health Act 
services and access to care. However since the Bill was given 
second reading on June 6, it has not moved any further and 
there is no indication that the NDP plans to move it forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister intend to give Bill 38, The 
Paramedics Act, third reading and Royal Assent before this 
House prorogues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill will not go forward 
in this session. There have been a number of issues raised by 
municipalities, by fire departments, around the fact that about 2 
to 300 EMT (emergency medical technician) people are 
working in the fire departments, and some of the issues that 
relate to the kind of work that they do need to be resolved 
before we proceed with this legislation. 
 
We are going to continue to work with all of the people 
involved because it is important to have paramedic professional 
legislation, but we need to do it in a way that includes 
everybody. And rather than push the whole thing forward now, 
we’re going to end up taking another number of months to sort 
out these various issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this legislation will regulate 
and set professional standards for the approximately 1,800 EMS 
(emergency medical services) personnel in Saskatchewan. The 
Bill is widely supported by the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, 
the Saskatchewan Paramedic Association, and the 
Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association. 
 
They are supportive because this legislation would ensure 
emergency service personnel who now follow professional 
standards, just as they do, and because the legislation would 
ensure a high, consistent level of patient care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister is the problem for not consulting 
with the Association of Fire Chiefs, and now he’s going to 
delay essential legislation because he didn’t do his homework 
correctly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said in second reading that this was an 
important bit of legislation that should be passed, and now the 
emergency measures paramedics are concerned about the fact 
it’s not going to pass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will give the minister our support to seeing, 
too, that this legislation is passed. Will he move it forward? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that 
happens with legislation when you’re working on it, especially 
when you’re working on professional legislation, is that there 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2619 

 

are areas where some of the jobs overlap or are related to other 
kinds of jobs. And in this particular case, there are some very 
interesting issues around fire . . . the fire service in our 
municipalities and the emergency medical services that are 
provided through the various health districts. And these kinds of 
issues are not just Saskatchewan issues; they’re Canadian and, 
in fact, North American issues. 
 
We want to continue to take a look at this particular thing 
because I do agree with the member opposite — there are . . . 
there is much support for this kind of legislation. But the 
legislation has to go forward in a fashion that covers all of the 
various options that are identified. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister should know, if he’s done his homework, that the 
Saskatchewan Paramedic Association has worked for five years 
with this government, trying to get this legislation brought 
forward. And here we are near the end of the session and finally 
the minister says, oops, I didn’t consult properly with people 
who have a legitimate stake in the concerns addressed by this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the paramedics association has worked five years 
on this legislation and they’re very concerned that they’re not 
going to be able to trust this government to see to it that this 
legislation is properly brought forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is on the floor of the House today. 
The official opposition — Saskatchewan Party — is prepared to 
support it. Will the minister bring it forward? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about a basic fact 
that happens as it relates to professional legislation. In this 
particular case these people, who are involved in going ahead 
with this legislation, have to deal with all of the various people 
involved. How we go ahead with professional legislation on this 
side of the House — and there are 27 pieces of professional 
legislation in Health — is to make sure that the groups 
themselves work with others. 
 
In this particular case, that member opposite got a call in the 
last 48 or 72 hours and all of a sudden he’s got a big position on 
this one. And I guess what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is we on 
this House are going to work over the next five years to make 
sure we get the legislation right, however long it takes; because 
what we know is, we will never let those members on that side 
get involved in preparing the professional legislation because 
they don’t have a clue how to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today on behalf 
of the government to convert written questions 436 through 440 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — 436 to 440 converted to orders for return 
(debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I would like to 
introduce to you and to the members, the president of Sask 
Water, Stuart Kramer to my immediate left; vice-president 
Wayne Dybvig who’s the vice-president of water resource and 
infrastructure management, behind Mr. Kramer; Tom Gehlen, 
who is next to Mr. Dybvig, who is the vice-president of the 
utility and engineering operations; and Terry Hymers who’s our 
corporate comptroller. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome 
the officials here and start with some of the questions that were 
dealt with today in question period. Some of the members were 
getting up today and talking about the drought that’s been 
happening in . . . through their constituencies with dugouts 
basically drying, the wells drying up. 
 
What is Sask . . . is Sask Water doing anything at all to address 
some of these problems in them areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the 
member, there has been a 25 per cent increase in the pumping 
units that have been obtained in order to assist people that are in 
a situation where they have a shortage of water. That’s trailer 
units and a mile each of pumping units as well. 
 
And the member may remember as well that there was an 
announcement some time earlier in recognition of the 
impending drought and perhaps shortage of water, that Sask 
Water had agreed to reduce by 50 per cent the cost of pumping 
any of these water . . . over 1 mile. 
 
So there has been some significant matters that have been taken 
to address the . . . what’s happening throughout the province. 
And we continue to work with people right across the province 
and work with communities in addressing their needs in this 
type of a situation. 
 
Happily and once again we are very, very thankful — I’m sure 
all the people are in those areas — that we’re fortunate enough 
to see mother nature recognize that there was a great deal of 
distress, and that we’ve had a significant amount of rains in 
some of the areas of the province that really looked like they 
were going to be in a lot of trouble. But happily that problem 
has been reduced, again I say in some areas. 
 
In those areas that continue, continue to suffer severe stress as a 



2620 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

result of a lack of moisture, there are ways that perhaps we may 
continue to address those water shortages in those areas. But 
again the ongoing commitment to work with communities, to 
address the shortages of water in dugouts, and however we can 
best utilize the technological and experienced staff that we have 
to try and help people overcome these problems. And again, to 
help people, working together with people to help overcome 
these problems. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
dealing with that, you’d said 50 per cent, a reduction, was it for 
the first mile or anything after that? I wasn’t sure. 
 
Can you give me the cost figure of what you charged for pump 
rental last year and what you’ve taken in so far? And how much 
this will cost in the future . . . this program by reducing by 50 
per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to first of all 
apologize and clarify for the member that it’s over 1 mile would 
be reduced by 50 per cent cost. I think maybe I confused the 
issue by saying it was less than a mile. But it’s . . . did I say less 
than a mile? I apologize for that. 
 
But anything over a mile the costs are then reduced by 50 per 
cent, which should indicate a significant savings for people that 
need to go to that extent to draw water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can we talk over the 
mile? When we are talking about cutting the rental rate by 50 
per cent, you talking about the cost of the pump or . . . and is 
also the piping also included in this? What does it . . . what is a 
normal rate that you charge for pump rent and for piping? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the normal cost for the one 
mile, which includes the pump and the pipes, is $410. Now the 
regular cost for the additional mile was $205. That has been 
reduced to $100. So it is some help for those people that need to 
go that extra mile. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many people 
have taken you up on this new program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that up to this 
point in time we have had 410 applications and just over 100 
that are over the . . . require the additional mile. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — How much money was taken in last year on 
pump rental and piping rental? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the total amount, I’m told, 
was $425,000 for this aspect of the dugout pumping program, 
as it’s referred to. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For last year, would 
that be considered cost or was that considered a revenue when 
you figure out your capital costs of your equipment . . . of the 
equipment you purchased, stuff like that? Would that be . . . 
how much of that would be considered revenue? Would you 
have a breakdown of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the program is set in such a 
way that it’s cost recovery or revenue neutral. That’s how the 

program’s established in order that it winds up revenue neutral. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
glad to hear that. The question I was going to ask on this year, 
how much money have you taken in so far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. As you will 
appreciate, as the member will appreciate, that the season’s not 
yet over and up to this point there are only the 410 applications. 
But it is anticipated by the corporation that the costs . . . the 
dollar amounts will not be much different than last year. So 
we’re looking in that 400,000 — what did I say — 425,000 
range. So there shouldn’t be much change. 
 
We still have some time to go that people may in fact want to 
avail themselves of this program. So that’s just a very tentative 
. . . it’s difficult to say what the final amounts will be. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. With drought conditions persisting 
in the northwest part of the province, are you looking at doing 
any other assistance there, in that general area, especially with 
some RMs (rural municipality) that have declared disaster 
areas? Are you looking at doing something for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. I wonder 
. . . I’d like to respond to that question in this fashion. And 
again in previous discussions, it’s been pointed out that Sask 
Water technicians have been constantly engaged with 
communities to try and assess and determine potential problems 
within communities. 
 
I am told that over the winter, or last fall, there were something 
like 500 communities that were surveyed and another 117 that 
were followed up this April that appear to perhaps have 
potential problems. 
 
Now the purposes of these surveys were twofold. One, very 
clearly to determine what the problems might be or what the 
potential problems might be; and the other to assist 
communities where it looked like for certain there might be a 
problem, offer some technical advice, assist them in 
determining access to groundwater, and also assist them 
perhaps in determining locations for underground water sources 
as well. 
 
So it’s, once again, we go back to the co-operative spirit 
between the technicians from Sask Water, the communities, and 
those that may be faced with some situations requiring technical 
assistance and/or advice because it’s not . . . people are not 
compelled to take only the directives or the advice of Sask 
Water. 
 
They certainly can avail themselves of going to other 
technicians and sources for assistance and/or advice. But the 
bottom line is that the Sask Water Corporation is there to do the 
surveys; to alert people, if you wish, to potential problems; and 
also, perhaps, offer some advice as to how they might deflect or 
circumvent some of the impending problems. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the people 
that are facing them drought situations, I think they’re long in 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2621 

 

advice but short on financial aid, and that’s probably what they 
are looking for. 
 
With that federal package that was announced a short time ago, 
it also dealt — I’m looking at it — dealt with some well digging 
and dugout assistance. There was money in that; how much of 
that will be coming to Sask Water to work with them? Are they 
also throwing in some matching? 
 
Can you give me if it’s going to affect your budget for this year 
with that program that was announced with the federal ag 
package? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And that is a 
good question, I must say to the member. But the short answer 
is that there is no money that goes to Sask Water. That money is 
directed to PFRA, (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) 
who will be working on water source locations. So it’s a federal 
program that will be enhancing the . . . be enhanced by the 
federal money. 
 
Having said that, it may not be finalized totally what further 
steps the federal government might see fit to take in addressing 
the drought problems. But as far the program the member is 
referring to, Mr. Chairman, I guess as I answered, there’s no 
money that’s going to Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you for the answer. We’re talking about 
towns and villages pumping water. I have a town of Liberty that 
I believe is pumping water to their town well. Can you tell me 
what assistance is available to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . what I’m told is that 
Liberty is using Sask Water pumping equipment, and at the 
reduced rate that we had spoken about earlier for the length, I’m 
told, I believe it’s seven miles that they have to pump their 
water. So they will benefit from that 50 per cent reduced rate on 
the over the 1 mile. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will there be any 
grants available to them through Sask Water for towns like that 
that have to pump for a sustained period of time? I would take it 
that they’re going to be pumping through most of the summer, I 
believe. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there . . . I guess . . . and 
it’s not the kind of short answer that anybody likes to hear, that 
there are no grants or there is no funding, special funding 
available. 
 
But I do want to once again point out — and here’s another 
example of the technicians and people in Sask Water that are 
prepared to work with communities to try and overcome their 
problems right on site —that Sask Water technicians have 
offered the town of Liberty or the village of Liberty the 
opportunity to participate in having Sask Water assist them with 
their water treatment plant right on site. Once again, that would 
be on a cost recovery basis. 
 
So I guess the short answer that nobody wants to hear is no, 
there are no grants. But hopefully that, again, working with 
those small communities and under some of the various other 
opportunities through municipal financing or reserves and some 

other fashion, that communities may be able to evaluate their 
situations, evaluate their needs, and determine whether or not 
they proceed with any projects which will involve financing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the minister and 
his officials, Mr. Minister, I have a couple of questions from 
constituents. One of them is regarding a permit that has been 
requested from Kipabiskau Lake for irrigation . . . for an 
irrigation project. The application was put in a while ago and 
we were wondering what the state is of this application. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that there’s some 
uncertainty whether there’s been formal application made for 
. . . to take water from that particular lake. The other thing I’m 
told is that there’s . . . It’s a controlled structure that’s owned by 
the regional park, and there are concerns, and there are other 
lakes in the area that are part of this chain apparently. 
 
There needs to be apparently a determination as to whether or 
not the water in those lakes is sustainable if they become 
involved in an irrigation project. The water levels, quantities, 
and the like are of a concern. 
 
There is . . . one other issue that needs to be dealt with is the 
determination of the land and the area to be irrigated whether or 
not it is suitable for irrigation. 
 
Now those are some of the technical aspects that are . . . that 
people are being faced with at this point. But again I go back to 
the assessment needs, both of the water supply and the 
suitability of the land. But most importantly, a determination as 
to whether or not there has been formal application made. 
 
There may have been inquiries made, and if there is a hold up in 
responses to whether it would be allowed or not, it would be as 
a result of the assessments that would require to be made in 
order to determine whether it’s worthwhile going through the 
application, or if it’s . . . if it would just not be a viable 
operation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The member from 
Watrous I believe asked that question on this issue probably 
two to three weeks ago, and she was told at that time that 
someone would be getting back to this constituent and give him 
the answer. 
 
If there’s some question as to whether there was a formal 
application made, then I guess the constituent should have been 
made aware of that because he has been waiting. At the same 
time, if there’s questions on whether it’s going to be viable, if 
it’s going to affect the water table, again this is something that 
the constituent should be made aware of and have an open 
discussion with him. 
 
Everyone knows right now with the drought problem in our 
constituency, if there’s anyone still having faith in this province 
that the people are working towards a solution should be dealt 
with. 
 
(14:45) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I will give you the number of the constituent 
after this proceedings . . . after these questions and perhaps you 



2622 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

can get a hold of him as quickly as possible because he is very 
frustrated, waiting for a response from your department. 
 
I know he feels that an application has been received, has been 
sent in, and he is waiting for a reply. I’m sure that the permit 
process is something that should be available quite quickly 
because you must have the information available on the 
waterways and what would be considered feasible or not when 
it comes to irrigation. So on this issue then I’m going to ask you 
to . . . if you will get a hold of them, of this constituent. 
 
In another area I’ve had two villages phone me because of a 
lagoon pumping . . . lagoon pump-outs this spring. Normally 
with runoff, when the lagoons are pumped, it isn’t affecting the 
waterways, the natural runoffs . . . the natural waterways or 
even the C&D (conservation and development) ditches that are 
connected to the lagoons so the water can be discharged. But 
this year with no runoff it’s caused problems in two areas, and I 
think your office has received information from both of those 
towns. 
 
But now they’re wondering if there’s . . . the soil is . . . is the 
soil contaminated? Is there some way that they can actually . . . 
if some determination has been made that this is something that 
. . . if we have another drought is this going to be happening 
again? What is your department doing to work on this issue to 
ensure that people who have land right along a lagoon 
pump-out area aren’t going to be adversely affected in future 
years if this drought continues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the member 
for that question. It is very valid and one that is of concern to 
many of the small communities around the province that may 
be faced with similar situations. 
 
The member again will know . . . First of all, I want to respond 
to the initial concern about the application. There will be a 
response, an immediate response to that. I’ll give the good 
member my word that that constituent will be contacted with 
respect to the application . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
probably later today. 
 
Now on your other concern, droughts are . . . How do you plan 
for drought? And they, always being unexpected and as 
widespread as they have been this year, offer different 
challenges for different reasons in different areas and 
communities. 
 
As the member knows with the province here over the last 
couple, three months we’ve been working very diligently on a 
long-term water strategy program which will work towards 
protection of water by the Watershed Authority right at source, 
right to the drinking water tap, and any other matters that may 
be involved with getting the water from point A to point B and 
discharge of water and so forth. 
 
So I guess what I can say to the member is the two particular 
communities that the member has a concern about, I would 
appreciate having the names of those communities to have 
officials contact, people contact the folks as quickly as possible. 
 
And the only other thing I can say, as far as some assurance for 
the future is concerned, is that it’s an ongoing, well if you want 

to refer to it as a labour of love or a work in progress that will 
be continued to ensure that we do have safe water sources and 
safe drinking water and try to protect those people who may be 
in situations where they have some concerns about 
contamination. 
 
Let’s face it we all very desperately want to make sure that, 
regardless of our situations — whether in rural Saskatchewan, 
urban Saskatchewan, towns or villages — that we do our very, 
very utmost to ensure that people are safe, given the 
experiences that this country has recently gone through. 
 
So there is that commitment to work with communities. And if 
the member will send over the names of those communities, I 
will have officials contact them immediately. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Minister. And yes the 
contamination and the type of thing that happened in North 
Battleford can’t be allowed to happen again, when you have 
small communities that have very little tax base and they’re 
working hard to ensure that they have safe water supplies and a 
sewage system that is up to all of the standards that are set by 
your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, my final question is on, I think it’s a rumour that 
I’ve heard, but I want you to squelch this rumour because it’s 
causing a lot of concern for the people that have phoned me. 
And that is that someone has told me that a well that is being 
used to supply water for a very large herd of cattle was checked 
out by department officials from Sask Water. And there was 
some word that there could be some charge for using well water 
on your own property. 
 
Is that something that you’ve heard of, are considering, is in the 
works? Just please tell me it’s a rumour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize to the member 
for the slight delay in coming up with a response. But you know 
when you want to squelch a rumour, you want to be absolutely 
certain. 
 
So what I can say to the member is that there is an industrial 
water usage policy for major businesses. For example, if they 
discover water . . . if a potash company discovered water or 
whatever, they could be charged for that use. But having said 
that, for ag-related businesses, no, there is not. For the 
agricultural operations, there would not be any charge. 
 
So I hope that puts that rumour to rest. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, just a follow-up question now 
then. Because we are in the process of changing, of putting hog 
barns under Labour Standards and maybe making an exemption 
under the Act now, does this mean that someone who has a hog 
barn could be considered not in agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That is still an agricultural operation, so 
they would not be affected as would the . . . what I mentioned 
about the industrial water users. So the agricultural sector 
would not be affected. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And, Mr. Minister, that can’t be changed by 
regulations sometime in the dark of the night? 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — That is government policy and with no 
intent at this point in time to review it or change it. And I don’t 
know why there would be, just offhand, but we want to make 
sure that people in the agricultural sector are not adversely 
affected so it would be difficult to suddenly turn around and say 
well, you find a well out in your back forty, then we’re going to 
charge you for it. I don’t think that would be appropriate. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — That’s good. I’m glad that you’ve said that and 
we’ll hold you to that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Going through the budget here, some of the items here, I notice 
on Crown corporation debt, you have $43 million. Is that still a 
. . . it was forecasted; is that still fairly close to what it is? Can 
you tell me what some of that debt was incurred as? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the bulk of the debt is . . . 
can be attributed to the two regional water pipelines — the 
Wakaw-Humboldt and the Melfort treatment facilities — that 
had been invested in. And that’s where the . . . some 30 to $35 
million is invested. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In 2003 I see 
projected debt going up to 53 million. What are you planning 
on building or buying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. Some of 
that debt that will be incurred will be as a result of some 
cogeneration projects. And one of the . . . over and above the 
cogeneration projects, there will be that extension of the 
Saskatoon water supply to Hague which was raised as an issue 
earlier this spring, the lack of water in that community. So Sask 
Water will be assisting by investing to assist. 
 
SaskPower at the Cory Potash Mine . . . SaskPower and Sask 
Water will be involved in the cogeneration project as well. 
 
So that’s basically, that’s not the total 10, but that’s the . . . 
those are the types of investments that once again are either 
partnerships or addressing with communities the need to 
address their water concerns or issues. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the cogeneration 
with the Cory Potash Mine, can you do a follow-up of how 
much money you need for that and exactly what’s going to 
entail between you, SaskPower and the Cory Potash Mine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That particular one, the Cory Potash — the 
cogeneration, I’m told is $2.7 million, thereabouts. And then the 
Hague is $3.8 million. So the Hague pipeline connecting — or 
getting water from Saskatoon — so that takes up a good chunk 
of the additional costs that will be incurred. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the Cory potash 
mine, you’d mentioned that you’re going in partnership with 
SaskPower. Can you give a little more detail on what kind of 
partnership with that? And are you taking a pipeline to that? Is 
that the reason of the added cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, our costs basically include 
the pipeline for the water which will be required for that 

cogeneration project. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m sure 
that you’re aware that there are repairs, I believe you would call 
it, being done to the dam at Avonlea. I wonder if you could 
outline to me and to this Assembly what repairs are being made 
and what stage that work is at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the repairs that were 
required for that particular dam and I think the member recalls, 
we had some discussions about that. And I’m familiar from 
previous meetings. It was to decrease the slopes, I believe, and 
improve the spill lay, as it was an inlet drop program. And that 
phase 1 is completed. That is done. 
 
The phase 2, which is still under consideration, is once again a 
deliberation with the community to determine the financial 
viability, feasibility, determination as to whether or not to 
proceed to phase 2 which means increasing the capacity of that 
reservoir. And we have had some meaningful meetings with 
respect to long-term benefits for increasing the size of the 
reservoir. But those circumstances are still under deliberations 
because of financial considerations, immediate financial 
considerations. 
 
And I know, Mr. Chairman, and I’ve shared with the member 
that in the long-term we’ve heard what the potential benefits 
could be to the community. And given some of the direction 
that the government is taking with respect to rural revitalization 
and certain other projects, feedlots, that it may very well . . . 
this is an opportune time to be talking about and deliberating on 
the benefits of increasing the reservoir. But as well, the 
financial implications need to be taken into account as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that, Mr. 
Minister, that you have been in consultation with the 
community and particularly with regards to the feedlot project 
and I commend you for that. 
 
I wonder if you could outline . . . I understand the expansion, 
the phase 2 expansion proposal is about three metres of height 
on the dam. And I presume that that would also entail the 
purchase of some extra land surrounding the dam. I wonder, is 
there a cost figure available for that phase 2 dam expansion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I can tell the member, in 
consultation with my engineers and the officials, that a two 
metre rise for that dam would cost in the vicinity of $2.4 
million. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that you’re 
also aware, Mr. Minister, that the village and surrounding 
municipalities are prepared to help with that cost. While the 
feedlot option is still available to us, they are willing to help 
with that cost anyway. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you see the urgency in increasing the 
size of the dam and taking advantage of this window of 
opportunity to share costs with the local communities while that 
offer still exists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, yes, and I know the 
members will appreciate that I, as well, can see a lot of the 



2624 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

benefits that would accrue to the communities involved. And I 
can say that we are in fact still discussing the potential for going 
ahead while there’s some work being done. 
 
It makes a little more sense, if you can save some money in the 
long-run by carrying out some excavations or whatever to 
achieve an increase in the size of the reservoir, that it might be 
undertaken better sooner than later. And again to save some 
money. 
 
But we are discussing the potential again and the possibilities 
with those communities — and the members know which they 
are — and that’s where it’s very, very important. I think more 
important than ever. Probably not only in this situation, but 
anywhere where we need to partner up with communities for 
various projects. 
 
There is still no determination of the source of the money to 
proceed at this point in time. But the good thing is, the positive 
thing is, that we are still discussing that potential and hoping 
that we can come up with some suitable arrangement where we 
can access the money. And I know the communities are 
prepared to work with us on that. But it all comes down to that 
source of those dollars, but we’re continuing to talk about it. 
 
So I can assure the member we’ve not just shelved it and said 
forget about it, we have nothing further to do with it. That’s not 
so. So I can give you that assurance. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I do 
appreciate that. And the community of Avonlea and 
surrounding municipalities will as well. 
 
I do hope that something can be done in the near future on that 
project. And I, on behalf of my constituents, I appreciate your 
efforts to make that happen. 
 
Now I think that is about all I have for questions. And I’d be 
happy to turn you back over to the capable hands of the member 
from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you for the compliment. Can you tell me 
what the travel was for 2001 for in province and out of 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the total amount of travel 
for Sask Water was $1 million, of which $30,000 was out of 
province and the balance in province for all staff and all 
participants with the corporation . . . within the corporation. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I actually . . . I think, 
in province was $1.3 million, and out of province was $36,000. 
 
How come so much in province? $1.3 million, that’s to me, like 
a lot of money for travel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The member is correct in referring to that 
1.3 million. That three . . . that point three is considered as a 
grant for a water control program. So it’s grants to clients under 
that water control program so it’s not actually been attributed as 
actual meals and travel for staff. But the purpose for the costs 
within the province, they’re substantial given the piping, the 
water pumping stations, the . . . there’s a significant amount of 

— and the surveys that I mentioned — over 500 communities 
that were surveyed last year with respect to potential needs in 
the spring of the year or what the water situation might hold, 
and then the revisit to those communities in the spring of the 
year. 
 
So it doesn’t take much to, you know, much of that to add up. 
And I appreciate that. It seems like a lot. But when you have the 
vastness of our province, and particularly given the significant 
attention that needs to be paid to our entire water strategy 
program and the attention that’s been received to not only our 
access to ground water but well water and concern about 
contamination of waterways and so on, there’s been a great deal 
of emphasis placed on ensuring that people are right on top of 
what’s going on in any and every area of this province that may 
be affected by something that’s not right with our water 
systems. 
 
So it’s . . . it seems like a lot. But when you break it down to all 
the requirements and the essential needs of communities with 
pumping stations and treatment plants and so on that rely on 
Sask Water for assistance in any way, shape, or form. That’s 
primarily where that expense is occurred . . . incurred. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You talked at the 
beginning, when you got up, about grants. Can you follow up a 
little more about . . . they . . . you said it just wasn’t travel, you 
said some of it was grants for water advisory. How much of that 
. . . Was that for Sask Water workers, or is that for employees, 
or was that for people that are just on boards? And how much of 
that travel goes to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the 1.3 was the total 
amount for travel, okay, for Sask Water. Now the implications 
of the extra $300,000 is that is seen as a separate grant from 
Treasury Board, strictly for water control programs. And a lot 
of the staff — Sask Water staff — that travel to deal with 
Watershed Authority people and discuss various aspects of 
water control, would charge their travels against that particular 
$300,000 grant. 
 
I guess, and it all boils down, the $1.3 million is the travel for 
all Sask Water employees. But the Treasury Board has the $1 
million in regular travel and, in addition, $300,000 as a specific 
grant to Sask Water for this water control program. 
 
I know it may seem like a complex way or trying to muddy the 
waters in some way, shape, or form. That’s not it at all. It’s to 
try and charge back against specific programs what the costs 
involve, and at the end of the day rationalizing whether or not 
the $300,000 was in fact adequate or insufficient to meet the 
needs of the intent of that water control program. 
 
So all in all, the member is correct in the fact that it’s $1.3 
million travel. And that travel is charged back to Sask Water, 
which Sask Water needs to be accountable for under review or 
under audit. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the 
out-of-province travel — 36,000 — was that to go to 
conferences or was that dealing with engineers hired to do work 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

 

out of province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, and I do have a breakdown 
for the member. And the member is correct, that it does involve 
the bilateral agreements, primarily, that we have with our good 
friends to the south with respect to various problems such as the 
International Souris River Board meetings, as an example, the 
Bismarck, North Dakota. Once again these meetings are held in 
different locations within reasonably close proximity to our 
border. So that’s primarily where that 36,000 . . . or where that 
travel money has been spent. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How much money 
did Sask Water receive from your sister Crown, SaskPower, for 
water that was used to generate power at Lake Diefenbaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The amount for 2001 was $6.475 million. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is that up from 
normal years or down, or is that pretty well the average? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the average is about 8 to $9 
million, so it’s down a fair amount and the member will 
probably appreciate some of the reasons for that. But still it’s 
income that’s very much appreciated. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With that income, do 
you use that to pay down capital costs or to pay down the debt 
that has been incurring with Sask Water and has been growing 
slowly over the years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Those monies, Mr. Chairman, go into the 
general operating revenues of Sask Water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What would it cost 
Sask Water? Do they run . . . I don’t believe that they run the 
power plants there. Would there be any cost associated with that 
$6 million coming in — that revenue — that would generate 
that, that would be . . . that you could pinpoint as an actual cost 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that the monies 
that we receive are considered royalties from SaskPower for 
water use. And once again as it’s explained that if there . . . the 
more water there is in the Gardiner dam, the more money we 
get back from SaskPower. I’ll bring that to the attention of my 
seatmate that we’ll have to increase the level of the water in the 
Gardiner dam because . . . but that’s the way it operates. And I 
guess the reason for the reduction in the amount of money 
received by Sask Water in recent years is because of the lower 
level of the water in the Gardiner dam. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the answer to 
my question was . . . I think that answered my question. That 6 
million is revenue. There’s very little cost to generate that $6 
million revenue was the gist of my question. And if I’m right in 
that, the money you said gets dropped back into Sask Water 
general revenue, does that help pay for programs? Or where 
does that money go to? 
 
And also I would take it from the other dams that you generate 
money from could be quite significant. It should have been to 
10, I’m guessing over . . . just going by that one, it should be 

well over $10 million that you’ve generated that should be able 
to basically pass back to the taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the member will know and 
we’ve talked about some of the other projects that Sask Water is 
currently involved in ensuring their stability, at Avonlea for 
example. So Sask Water is responsible for ensuring that the 
Gardiner dam . . . we’re responsible for maintaining the 
Gardiner dam. 
 
Now the monies that are received by Sask Water go into the 
general water management programs that we’ve discussed and 
that Sask Water is involved in throughout the province. Once 
again, it’s money that’s put back; it’s recycled if you wish, 
again to support the kinds of programs and assist people in 
those areas where they may require, may require some 
assistance with their water problems. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information. 
With the restructuring of Sask Water, I believe C&Ds 
(conservation and development authorities) now will be going 
under the Environment. And I know that when I’ve talked to a 
few presidents of associations of C&Ds and I think they’re . . . 
and also when I was at their annual convention they had 
expressed to me that they would sooner stay under Sask Water 
than go under the Environment. 
 
Have you had any meetings with them or have you consulted 
with them to see how that transition process has been going and 
is it going to affect them? Not that I guess . . . like the one 
president pointed out to me, we don’t get any funding any more 
anyways, I guess, so it almost can’t be any worse. But they’re 
more worried about the rules and regulations could be changing 
if they changed departments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I hope the member’s 
question doesn’t have anything to do with the ministers 
involved with each of these portfolios. But I want to assure the 
member that the C&Ds will be moving intact over to the 
Watershed Authority. And since Sask Water will be a 
commercial utility — will be a solutions provider — this was 
felt to be more reasonable in having the C&Ds moved to the 
Watershed Authority, as opposed to being part and parcel of the 
solutions provider for communities and participate within a 
commercial utility operation. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well thank you. I don’t know if you answered 
my question, if you consulted with them, but I know that they 
were hoping that they would stay under Sask Water. 
 
Just one question I think, about a monitoring station on the 
Alberta/Saskatchewan border that’s operated by the Prairie 
Provinces Water Board. What is the cost of that and what’s its 
primary function? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the question the member 
asks, I’m sure he’s familiar with it, but that particular board 
administers the agreement on the apportionment of water, and 
the federal government pays 50 per cent of the costs. The other 
50 per cent is shared between Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 
Alberta. The actual cost to this province is about $40,000. 



2626 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see our time is just 
about up, so I have one more question but in that I will thank 
your assistants and staff for assisting you in questions. And I 
thank you for the answers. 
 
The last question I have is, deals with the channel leading to 
Marquis from Lake Diefenbaker to Buffalo Pound, and it goes 
through the RM of Marquis. And I know that there has been 
talk a couple of years ago of straightening that channel and 
digging it deeper because there was a couple of problems with a 
couple of bridges that were there, of whether the RM should be 
paying for them or Sask Water or Department of Highways. 
 
In this year’s budget is there any money going towards either 
fixing the bridges or have you moved more in the direction of 
restraightening that channel and doing quite a bit more work on 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, there are no 
plans in the immediate future to proceed. But the plans are still 
underway. Again this is like a work in project. There has not 
been any monies budgeted for this year to do anything on that, 
but there will be if we can continue to work with Highways and 
other areas that will be involved. 
 
So if in fact, Mr. Chairman, as the member indicated that would 
be his final question, I hope that’s answered it. I want to express 
my appreciation to the members opposite for the questions that 
they’ve raised, and also my appreciation to the officials that 
have assisted me here this afternoon and will continue to assist 
people throughout the province with any concerns with respect 
to Sask Water Corporation’s responsibility areas. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Subvote (SW01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (SW02), (SW03) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Vote 140 

 
Subvote (SW01) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman I move that we report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR05) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d ask the 
Assembly to welcome to my right, Brent Cotter, who’s the 
deputy minister of Government Relations and Aboriginal 

Affairs. Behind him is Wanda Lamberti, who’s executive 
director of finance and management services in the same 
department. Behind me is John Reid, the executive director of 
Aboriginal policy and operations; you can call him J.R., nobody 
calls him John Reid. And Ross Burrows is at the back; Ross is 
treaty land entitlement analyst. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson, and good afternoon 
to the minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is certainly been a great deal of talk and 
interest in the federal government’s intention to make changes 
to the Indian Act. And I think that there are numbers of people 
in Saskatchewan, particularly including First Nations people, 
who would really appreciate if you could tell the people of the 
province what those changes will entail and how far in advance 
the preparations to get those changes in place are, right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member asks about the 
federal government’s initiatives to replace the Indian Act, or to 
amend the Indian Act. As the member will know, this is a 
matter of exclusive federal jurisdiction, but it is a matter which 
has significant impact here in the province. And it serves to do 
. . . attempts to do two things, really, to increase autonomy on 
the part of First Nations communities. The member will know 
that the Indian Act is one of the last vestiges of colonialism that 
we have in Canada and it is one which has generated significant 
controversy, both amongst First Nations people and amongst 
government figures as well. 
 
So it would serve to increase the autonomy of sovereign First 
Nations and it would also serve to make First Nations or serve 
to encourage First Nations communities to be more politically 
accountable, and particularly the leaders, to be more politically 
accountable to their communities. And also to be more fiscally 
accountable to their communities too — matters of significant 
interest I think across the province. 
 
I would say in the context of Minister Nault’s attempts to . . . or 
legislative attempts, that we would encourage him to be much 
more consultative with First Nations leaders to ensure, rather 
than a hostile environment which appears to be the case at the 
moment, that he finds ways to move these matters forward in a 
more collegial, co-operative, and consultative fashion. 
 
It looks as if . . . Well I think the member will know that that is 
a more productive mechanism for addressing concerns that both 
First Nations have and that governments and citizens have. So 
we certainly would encourage Minister Nault to, rather than 
ram something through, to speak more consultatively with 
leaders across the country. 
 
And he did, I think, begin here with a desire to change the 
Indian Act, which most First Nations people would have 
wanted to and which most citizens would have wanted. So you 
start with something that is generally supportive and supported 
and end up with something which becomes quite controversial. 
 
So the matter, as I mentioned, is one which is of the federal 
jurisdiction, but it is of significant importance to the provincial 
government and to citizens in the province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well you certainly are 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2627 

 

correct in that. It is a very important priority, I guess, for many 
people throughout the province. And of course the whole issue, 
I guess, of the Indian Act and all kinds of policies that are in 
place between the federal government, the provincial 
government, and First Nations has been I guess met with some 
disturbance to say the least. It’s a very difficult thing to talk 
about because there are sensitive issues. 
 
There’s issues of autonomy, which First Nations people would 
desire and have expressed that they would like to have. And at 
the same time it seems that when the federal government 
brought forward, as part of the changes to the Indian Act, that 
First Nations would be able to exercise more autonomy, at the 
same time there is a concern of First Nations people that 
somehow that may not be what they want. So there is some 
confusion on behalf of all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you tell the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 
today, what is it that First Nations people are concerned about? 
Obviously the consultation is important because it shows 
respect. And if that kind of consultation hasn’t taken place 
between First Nations and especially the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and the federal government, then 
I think they need to be taken to task on it. 
 
But on the other hand, if we get right down to what is being 
asked today by First Nations, they have expressed 
unequivocally that they would like to have more autonomy. So 
can you, in your deliberations with First Nations bands and the 
FSIN of Saskatchewan, can you tell the people of Saskatchewan 
what kind of input for instance the First Nations would have 
liked to have in respect to autonomy that they feel they may not 
have respected without proper consultation? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks if I might relate 
what I feel to be the desires of First Nations people in the 
context of Mr. Nault’s First Nations Governance Act. I think it 
would be difficult and perhaps even unwise to . . . for me to 
speak on behalf of First Nations people. And I think the 
member could appreciate that. And so that specific question 
would be better directed to First Nations leaders and 
communities. 
 
But I think we can, from the work that we as a province have 
done with both FSIN and the Meadow Lake Tribal Council and 
the federal government, the self-government negotiations which 
have been taking place over some period of time, we can 
identify that there is at least a desire to work together, each 
respecting each other’s jurisdictions and each other’s rights. 
And in particular, for the provincial and federal governments to 
respect treaty rights, we can work together in a respectful 
manner negotiating solutions to what are essentially very 
complex problems. And there’s significant illustration of 
progress in that negotiation process. 
 
So I think first we can say that it is important to work together 
in a respectful partnership/negotiating/consultative fashion to 
address issues as they arise, and that I think is in pretty sharp 
contrast with the process followed by Minister Nault. 
 
Secondly, I think we can say that First Nations leaders see that 

process, the negotiating self-government . . . or the 
self-government negotiations with FSIN and Canada and the 
province and with MLTC (Meadow Lake Tribal Council) and 
Canada and the province as likely to lead to better solutions 
than Minister Nault’s proposals — better solutions because they 
reflect a discussion about mutual give and take and a response 
to each other’s concerns. And I think obviously a more 
respectful approach to take. 
 
So the success of the MLTC and FSIN negotiating tables has 
led to First Nations leaders in the province not, until recently, 
not paying an awful lot of attention to what Minister Nault was 
proposing. Now though, as you will know . . . as the member 
will know from the media and from her discussions, no doubt, 
with First Nations leaders, there is now a great consternation 
about not only the process but also the contents. 
 
So in short I think we can say that the approach the province 
has taken and continues to take, which is an intense consultative 
process . . . As the member might know, I spend a lot of time 
dealing with First Nations leaders and First Nations 
communities on the issues that they regard to be the most 
important to them, not ones that I say are the most important to 
them, but the ones that they consider to be the most important. 
 
And that consultative process I think works well. It takes a long 
time and it isn’t as fast as directing something to happen in the 
next few weeks or months. But it is . . . it does ensure an 
enduring resolution and one which is likely to be more 
productive for both First Nations people and the people of the 
province. And we will continue to work in that consultative way 
and I know the member would support that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as I 
previously mentioned, some of the questions surrounding how 
things will work in the future for the province of Saskatchewan, 
including all people in the province, some of these issues are 
difficult to talk about because of a different understanding of 
what treaty rights are and what rights, in fact, First Nations 
people do have. 
 
And one of those questions, even though it may be difficult, I 
think it is important to talk about it and certainly I intend to talk 
about it with you in a manner of discussion, not a manner of 
confrontation. So I hope that you will join me in this discussion 
and possibly give some information as to what kind of ideas and 
needs First Nations are bringing forward to you in your 
discussions with them. 
 
You’ve just mentioned that you had consultations with them 
about various issues and so I want to ask you today, for 
instance, if there . . . if changes in the Indian Act deal with 
issues like financial accountability, autonomy for decision 
making on-reserve especially, those kind of things. I want to 
ask if there has been any discussion that you can tell the 
Assembly has taken place regarding First Nations ability to 
generate their own revenue through taxation on-reserve. 
 
Is that something that has been brought forward as a possibility 
and if that is so, has there been any further discussion on 
whether or not funds granted to First Nations would be scaled 
back? 
 



2628 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member raises a question of 
significant concern, and one which does require to be addressed 
if we are to live in harmony in this province in the future. 
 
It’s important though to begin by accepting that the treaty 
obligations that Canada undertook with First Nations need to 
be, need to be observed. They are in place forever, and they are 
. . . they actually form in a sense the . . . when the First Nations 
handed over land, certain promises were made in return. Those 
promises need to be enforced effectively, and of course the 
courts will make sure they are. 
 
Nonetheless I think the member raises a point which is of 
importance and it is a point of stress within our community that 
those treaties, to the extent that they recognize exemption from 
taxation, generate a different, a different citizenship than for 
non-Aboriginal, non-first . . . non-status First Nations people. 
 
The member will know that First Nations people living 
off-reserve pay essentially the same taxes as everyone else, 
except with regards to sales tax. So the taxes — certainly 
people living in Humboldt or living in Saskatoon, if they’re 
First Nations people they are paying significant amounts of 
taxes. 
 
But it’s important for — especially now since the province, as 
you know, no longer charges wholesale tax on gasoline or 
tobacco — to encourage and to talk about First Nations 
communities seeking mechanisms for own-source revenues, 
taxation from their own citizens for use in their First Nations 
communities. 
 
And I would say with regards to that, if the member looks at, 
for example Cree-Way, the gas station that Muskeg Lake owns 
at Packham Avenue in Saskatoon, a portion of what would 
otherwise be provincial sales tax is charged on that gasoline 
from First Nations citizens and is used for development on the 
First Nation community. 
 
So there’s an example there of a business which is on-reserve 
and which uses part of a substitute for taxation, and in fact is, as 
far as the First Nations purchases would be concerned, clearly 
taxation; it’s money charged on top of the purchase price of the 
gasoline. 
 
So there’s an example of a First Nation community taking some 
of those resources and using them on-reserve. 
 
I should also say that in the context of the negotiating, 
self-government negotiating tables, that the generation of . . . or 
the ability for First Nations communities to generate their own 
revenues in the way in which the member suggests is an integral 
part of those negotiations. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I wonder 
if you could tell me what the total amount of taxes that have 
been collected from on-reserve Aboriginal businesses are that 
now the province is not collecting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I understand that the dollar amount 
which covers the wholesale tax on gasoline and tobacco is 
around . . . between 8 and $10 million a year. We’ll check with 
the Minister of Finance and finalize that for the member later on 

today, but I think it’s between 8 and $10 million. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, speaking 
of $10 million, in the government’s budget, it includes $10 
million in funding for new or expanded services in addition to 
ongoing funding, as you mentioned in your budget, for a 
number of other programs. But I’m just wondering, what is that 
$10 million covering as far as . . . what does it cover as far as 
programs go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — People wonder what happened when 
the light goes on. The member asks about the province’s 
investment in essentially the Métis and off-reserve strategy, the 
$10 million which was added as new and enhanced funding in 
the strategy in the 2001-2002 budget. 
 
I can tell the member that $7 million was provided to double the 
number of community schools and to create community high 
schools, and the member will be familiar with those. In addition 
the strategy which, as the member I think also will know, was 
developed through a great deal of consultation with the 
community, with off-reserve First Nations people, and with 
Métis people living in the cities. 
 
The original strategy was developed with their input and indeed 
set out their priorities. And recent consultation to renew the 
strategy was conducted in the same way. And a number of 
consultations across the province took place where essentially 
the original priorities were endorsed by the participants, with 
some interesting readjustments of focus. 
 
So the rest of the Métis and off-reserve First Nations strategy, 
other than the monies made available as I mentioned for 
community schools, is for the following purposes: to provide 
sports and recreational opportunities for young people in an 
attempt to keep young people off the street; to provide what 
those we consulted with talked about as well-being, dealing 
with inner-city housing quality, and indeed ownership as well. 
 
As the member will know, ownership of homes by First Nations 
and Métis people is regarded as important as for everyone else, 
and much needs to be done in that field. 
 
(16:00) 
 
In the context of well-being, there is also a focus on diabetes; 
child support for single mothers to enable them to enter the 
workforce and to continue at school; focus on education, 
especially focusing on the need to encourage more math and 
science education amongst First Nations and Métis people. 
 
Skills training and work preparation. I think the member can see 
that what is involved here is the community recognizing that 
there is a kind of very young — to my age, anyway — focus on 
building skills and development. And also, finally, to focus on 
jobs and economic development. 
 
So the strategy essentially has a number of focuses — foci, I 
guess. Community schools is the largest one. Then youth sports 
and recreation; well-being; housing; diabetes; family supports; 
education; skills training and work preparation; and jobs and 
economic development. 
 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2629 

 

And I might say, in the context of that, that the Métis and 
off-reserve First Nations strategy is a finalist for the national 
award for innovative management in government, and we are of 
course interested in ensuring that we’re not only the finalist but 
that we win. And we will be making a significant pitch with 
regards to that strategy to the board which assesses this. But I 
think it’s a really good indication of how effective this strategy 
is and how important it is that it was developed in the way in 
which it was. 
 
And I might say too that it’s essentially the province’s response 
to a big part of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples 
and essentially is the only provincial response. I don’t mean 
Saskatchewan’s only response, but the only province to have 
really responded in this way in addressing the needs of urban 
Aboriginal people is this program here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate the 
breakdown of the usage of that funding. 
 
Mr. Minister, in spite of the fact that there is quite a lot of 
money being put forward for these initiatives, all of us I guess 
have seen, within some of the reports within . . . in our local 
newspapers, that there remains problems yet, outstanding 
problems in spite of the fact that money is put forward. 
 
And I just bring to your attention an article from the paper May 
30, in The StarPhoenix, and actually it’s an opinion — an “SP 
Opinion.” But it talks about, for instance, even though a number 
of First Nations children are going to university and are 
enrolled in different post-secondary institutions, that oftentimes 
they don’t graduate. And it seems to be attributed to sort of the 
culture shock that many face when they’re on campus. And so it 
. . . you know the advice I guess is it’s important to put 
workable aids in place for Native students, teacher aides and so 
on, so that they can feel comfortable and have teachers that will 
allow them or I guess support them in their endeavours to get to 
the point of graduation. 
 
We need support services. And I’m wondering if, when this 
money was put forward in your budget for these initiatives — 
education being one of them — whether there was also an 
understanding that there must be provisions made for teachers 
that are First Nations people to ensure that there is a culturally 
sensitive environment in place. Because that would probably 
lead to greater success and certainly less frustration and anxiety 
and subsequently failures. 
 
So have you . . . does your government put forward provisions 
to ensure that programs are designed in a way — a culturally 
sensitive way in this instance — so that they can be successful? 
Because in addition to putting money for . . . putting funding 
forward, I think it’s important that every government 
understands what kind of components are needed in order for 
First Nations people to achieve successes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member raises a question 
which is at the core of the success or lack of success of the . . . 
both the challenge and the opportunity we face in this province 
with regards to First Nations and Métis people. I prefer to see 
these issues as opportunities than challenges, but the fact of the 
matter is that with a large, young, Aboriginal population, their 
success in our education system will determine the amount of 

success in the economy as a whole. And the member will know 
that at the core of the province’s opportunity here is to ensure 
that those, in particular baby boomers, who are beginning to 
leave the workforce, can be replaced by skilled and educated 
young Aboriginal people. And the, as I say, the extent to which 
we meet success here will be the extent I think to which we 
meet success in the province as a whole. So it’s a critically 
important question. 
 
The member quite rightly points out that many First Nations 
and Métis students find it difficult, once they move from their 
home communities and their home schools, into Saskatoon or 
Regina and Prince Albert to begin community college or 
technical school or university. I think we might even be able to 
remember this when we made those transitions and found that 
various things that we took for granted at home weren’t 
available when we were out on our own in a . . . what was a 
relatively strange city. 
 
But I think those kinds of concerns would be magnified for a 
young Aboriginal person coming from a small, say northern 
community, into Saskatoon or Regina to attend university; in 
particular, perhaps not having the kinds of family support that 
might . . . that many take for granted. 
 
Just as a personal aside, I remain the only person from my 
whole extended family ever to go to university. So something 
happened that enabled me to find a way through what was not a 
lot of support from my family. Not that my family didn’t want 
to support me, it’s just that they had not attended university and 
didn’t really understand how you could in fact make your living 
out of standing up and talking to people. It’s a modest living, 
but what can you say? 
 
So this transition would be quite complicated and quite onerous 
and leads to many students, as you point out, not finishing their 
studies. So you ask, what is there in place to address this? First 
of all, the member will know that there are now many, many 
more Aboriginal students at our post-secondary educational 
institutions — I think 2,000 at the University of Saskatchewan 
alone. And if we think back 20 or 30 years, that would be a 
huge increase from previous years. 
 
So what kinds of supports are there in place? I’ll just maybe 
mention a few, but agree with the member that there needs to be 
more. There’s the Native Law Program which enables 
applicants for law school to spend a summer getting a sense of 
what law school is about, and then provides them with supports 
once they enter the law school program proper, because it 
doesn’t help much to provide someone with some . . . a bit of a 
leg up in the beginning only to find that they’re thrown to their 
own devices once they enter university. So there are supports 
there too. 
 
The member will also be very familiar I think with the . . . with 
SUNTEP (Saskatchewan Urban Native Teacher Education 
Program) and NORTEP (Northern Teacher Education Program) 
which are essentially run by Aboriginal people themselves in 
the context of universities, with lots of input and lots of focus 
on training for jobs in First Nations and Métis communities, and 
then continuing supports once they enter the workforce. 
 
And I should also remind the member of SIIT (Saskatchewan 



2630 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Indian Institute of Technologies) and Gabriel Dumont Institute 
and . . . as examples of institutions run by First Nations and 
Métis people for First Nations and Métis people. 
 
And lastly, it would be remiss if I didn’t make some mention of 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College which, as the member 
will know, is having an amazing building built right now at the 
campus of the University of Regina, which can only serve to 
assist First Nations students as they acclimatize to university 
education. The member will know that the building is designed 
in a harmonious way with a great deal of input from elders and 
others to be a culturally sensitive environment, and will be one 
too in which the education process and the social and 
community environment will be entirely sensitive as well. 
 
So that I think will . . . that gives a flavour of the kinds of things 
that are available to assist students. But I would agree with the 
member that we need to ensure that no student finds themselves 
without the kinds of support they need in order to complete 
their education. And it shouldn’t be because of something we 
don’t provide that causes them to drop out of their program. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate the information that you’ve put forward about the 
supports that are there for our First Nations people that are 
going to post-secondary institutes whether it be university or 
SIAST or anything else — technical institutes. 
 
But there’s a definite acknowledgement by many people that 
are in the know about . . . that there’s not really adequate K to 
12 preparation oftentimes for First Nations people throughout 
the province. And sometimes when they end up getting into 
university or post-secondary, they either quit or they’re asked to 
leave because they don’t meet academic standards. 
 
And so I’m presuming that one of the initiatives that’s being put 
forward and I’m hoping is going to be very successful through 
the community schools, that there will be added support for 
students at that K to 12 level. 
 
Is there anything else that your government has been able to tap 
into to come to know and understand that would be of 
assistance to help children — First Nations and Métis children 
— from K to 12 to make sure that they do meet the standards 
that are required in order to get into post-secondary and to 
successfully complete and graduate from those institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member identifies another issue 
of importance here, how do you prepare children — Aboriginal 
young people — for a post-secondary educational opportunity? 
And I have a few points to make here. 
 
One is more generic, and that is that it’s important to encourage 
more of our young people to study math and science and to see 
the opportunities available in their futures in that regard. And 
that’s of particular importance I think in Métis and off-reserve 
communities, Métis and First Nations communities, where 
there’s been a focus on education and social work, not to the 
exclusion of all others but certainly there needs to be kind of a 
greater focus. 
 
And with 2,000 students at the University of Saskatchewan now 
and I’m sure huge numbers at the University of Regina too — I 

don’t recall the exact number — that there is now a much more 
representative study program. So that’s one just that’s kind of a 
generic concern. 
 
(16:15) 
 
The member did mention community schools and the reason 
that community schools are a priority in the Métis and 
off-reserve strategy, including high school community schools, 
is to provide the very support she talked about to ensure that 
students at those schools and in particular to ensure that Métis 
and First Nations young people have what is necessary for them 
to meet the challenges of post-secondary education head-on and 
to do so successfully. 
 
And our hope and our anticipation is that that work in 
community schools will enable First Nations and Métis young 
people to do better at university and other post-secondary 
institutions and that it will provide them with the tools they 
need. 
 
Further, the SchoolPLUS program — which the member may be 
familiar with — is also designed to provide the kinds of 
supports necessary to ensure that young people move forward 
with all of the supports they need. 
 
So there’s a holistic approach to schools and to education which 
involves social services, parents, community to ensure that 
there is the most solid and firm and constructive kind of 
community support and family support for young people. 
 
And lastly, perhaps I should mention early childhood 
development, in which the province has invested a great deal to 
ensure that young people in the first years, in the formative 
years of their development before they come to school, are able 
to acquire all of the skills, the knowledge, the experience, the 
ability to function effectively once they do get to school. So 
there is there then, support from very early age into . . . up to 
preschool. 
 
Then there are those two focuses in schools, with SchoolPLUS 
and community schools all designed to ensure that young 
Aboriginal people have the kinds of supports they need in order 
to succeed both at post-secondary education level and also in 
the workforce should they choose to do that after school rather 
than go on to other educational opportunities. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have 
with me a Web site paper that I accessed and it’s about 
enhanced urban Aboriginal programming in Western Canada. 
And the Canada West Foundation has done some background 
study on the kind of programming that is put in place. And that 
would be by federal, municipal, and provincial governments. It 
talks about the delivery of programs and it talks about the 
provision of funding for different programs. And certainly a lot 
of these programs are even enhanced by non-profit 
organizations and so on. 
 
So it seems as though there’s a really good effort, some strategy 
here to ensure that there is universal programming. That was the 
intent, I guess. It’s not clear though whether we have got, 
whether we’re in sync right across all jurisdictions in Canada as 
far as making sure that this urban programming initiative is 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

 

taking place in a really constructive way. 
 
In this excerpt it talks about much of the problematic part of 
these programs seems to be there’s an absence of clear 
understanding of the programming already in place. And what 
has resulted is urban Aboriginal programming that is largely 
disjointed and at times incoherent which creates a particularly 
formidable challenge for urban Aboriginal people in attempting 
to access these programs. 
 
It seems that government policies . . . I mean, this does come, 
like I said, a lot of the information from Aboriginal people who 
have been seeking to access some programs. And they say that 
government policies and the programming activity with respect 
to urban Aboriginal people seems largely unrelated. 
 
So we need to be able to try to understand how we can focus on 
some core services, I think, in municipal government and to 
avoid . . . you know, they can avoid becoming engaged in areas 
outside of their mandate of responsibility. 
 
How has your government attempted to address this problem 
where as Aboriginal people don’t seem to be getting a kind of 
clear understanding or direction of where and how they can 
access programming for urban Aboriginals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member is quite right to identify 
that in many communities there are a large number of 
organizations — not always integrated, not always fitting 
together in a very effective way — all attempting to provide 
services to Aboriginal people. And there is a need to 
consolidate and coordinate and integrate those services more 
effectively. 
 
Certainly the Métis and off-reserve strategy has that as one of 
its goals and the broad consultation which took place as the . . . 
both at the beginning stage and more recently was designed to 
ensure that people did come together and did work together 
more effectively. There remains though a challenge here to 
ensure that we are all working in the same direction and that our 
resources are all used to the best advantage possible. 
 
Part of the problem is that many of these programs are funded 
by the federal government and it’s important for us to find ways 
in which to work more effectively with the federal government 
as they do provide resources for these programs. And we have 
constantly made the point, both with First Nations leaders and 
with the federal government, that we should not spend too much 
time arguing about whose jurisdiction is the appropriate one in 
any given case but to try to find solutions to the problems 
people face. 
 
And the member will know that people from First Nations 
communities come into the city, go back to their home 
communities on a regular basis, and that we need to ensure that 
where they are at any given time is not what dictates their 
availability . . . the availability of services to them, but that 
there is some kind of coordinated approach both on-reserve and 
off-reserve. And that remains a constant challenge. 
 
I would say though that we have provided seed money for five 
urban authorities which serve to try to coordinate integrated 
services within those communities — Yorkton, Prince Albert, 

Regina, Saskatoon, and Battleford . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . doesn’t seem to be there — and Battleford for that purpose. 
 
I’d also say that then the member may be familiar with Regina 
Alternative Measures Program which is I think a very 
successful indication of how an integrated program works. It’s 
primarily a community justice project but it comprises a lot of 
different services to assist young people in particular who get 
into trouble with the law. 
 
So there is a lot of coordination but there plainly needs to be 
more and that is why we’ve been encouraging urban 
management authorities, and encouraging them to continue that 
coordination work. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, this 
issue is one that has certainly been brought to my attention a 
number of times in the last, actually last five years. You know, 
it is said that a lot of this is very complex. There’s multiple 
layers of government programming and often Aboriginal and 
non-profit organizations deliver government-funded programs. 
 
But there’s also governments that are putting forth their own 
programming. And so we need to be able to coordinate this, I 
agree with you, and to make sure that we look into it and do a 
really, really in-depth assessment and analysis of this to ensure 
that there isn’t duplicated services and to make sure that there is 
information out there for everybody about how they can access 
their programs quite directly. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to revert back for a moment to the 
2001-2002 budget of $10 million for Métis and off-reserve First 
Nations people strategy. I know that there are . . . in addition to 
this money there are a number of cost sharing arrangements for 
First Nation and Métis programs that you’re cost sharing 
provincially with the federal government. 
 
And I was wondering if it’s possible to give me or provide me 
with the names of all programs that are cost shared with federal, 
between the federal and provincial government. I know that 
takes a little bit of work but I really would appreciate it, in view 
of the fact that we’re planning on forming government soon. It 
would be very, very helpful. 
 
But you did . . . On one other occasion you did mention, give 
me an example of a cost sharing arrangement, but I would like 
to have if I could please, Mr. Minister, all of those programs. 
And I’d be happy to receive them . . . within the next couple of 
weeks would be fine. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to draw your attention now to I guess a bit 
of a grievance from the Piapot First Nation. The chief there has 
written to the Premier regarding their hopes to have . . . it has to 
do with their inherent right to negotiate self-government and 
they’re talking about child welfare. And there is, the chief feels 
right now, that there is no form of accountability and there is a 
lack of proper representation between provincial and federal 
governments to First Nations communities, to ensure that steps 
are taken to mediate agency compliance activities and that kind 
of thing. He states in this letter to the Premier: 
 

Your current agreements in the spirit in which it was 
written was to ensure that First Nation communities have 



2632 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

access to services comparable to others in the province. 
 
And he also states that: 
 

Piapot services are not in comparison to others as they are 
only receiving emergency services and children are being 
removed and placed off-reserve. 

 
So the chief feels that you’re taking steps backward instead of 
forward, and he urges the Premier to intervene in this situation 
to seek a more viable solution to this matter. Emergency 
services, he said, is not the solution. 
 
From what I can understand, from the concern that the chief has 
put forward, is that there are children being removed off . . . 
from the reserves. And there’s not . . . I guess there has not been 
enough negotiation between that First Nation and provincial 
and federal governments to determine a way that the services 
can be provided for children to have them remain on-reserve. 
 
They would like to see a sound program on-reserve to deal with 
this. And they just feel that there is an impasse. Even though 
there have been informal discussions with other Indian agencies 
throughout Canada, that action hasn’t been taken in 
Saskatchewan, and he would like to see that happen in order to 
reform the provincial Family Services Act and to make sure it 
includes on a reserve child welfare. 
 
Could you comment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises an issue which is 
not unique to Piapot First Nation, but it is one which raises 
some important concerns. And one of the underlying aspects of 
the self-government negotiations is in fact to find a solution to 
these kinds of questions, to negotiate a framework so that 
comprehensive services can be provided in whichever way is 
best. They could be provided by First Nations communities; 
they could be provided through provincial services with 
assistance in terms of direction from First Nations and so on. 
 
(16:30) 
 
But I think the core problem here with regards to services on 
the Piapot First Nation is that this is a federal responsibility to 
provide services on-reserve. And it is one which would be more 
appropriately taken up with the Minister of Indian and Northern 
Affairs and . . . rather than, rather than the provincial 
government. 
 
But it does illustrate, as the member rightly points out, the need 
to find something which works more effectively than is 
presently the case. That is what we are trying to do. That is 
what we are trying to do through those FSIN negotiating tables. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the Fyke 
Commission . . . there was a public response to the Fyke 
Commission health report, the Standing Committee on Health 
that spoke of Aboriginal health issues needing to have a higher 
priority. And I’d like to know how your government is 
intending to respond to that recommendation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question 
about addressing the significant health needs of Aboriginal 

people, I make a number of comments mostly predicated on the 
need to provide the kinds of social, family, community, 
economic environments which enable . . . which enable people 
to grow up in a community which will provide them with job 
opportunities and which will provide them with the skills to 
take up job opportunities. 
 
We know that in an environment in which the economy is 
working well and people are participating in it that we see 
reductions in many health, health indicators in terms of their . . . 
the challenges they face. So that’s why there would be a focus 
on early childhood development in the Métis and off-reserve 
strategy. We also think it’s important to ensure that First 
Nations and Métis people are on health boards and ensuring that 
their input is part of the decision-making process for those 
boards. 
 
The member will probably be aware of provincial strategies 
dealing with fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect, 
diabetes, and she’ll also know of the Fort Qu’Appelle Indian 
Hospital which will soon be built. 
 
So there are a number of initiatives of a health care nature as 
well as more of a social and economic nature designed to ensure 
that Aboriginal people have the same kinds of social and 
economic opportunities which will surely in the end reduce 
some of the negative health characteristics. 
 
Those are long-range issues as the member will appreciate, but 
other more short-term issues like dealing with diabetes are also 
in place. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, my next 
question is most likely going to be regarded as a Gaming 
question but it also . . . it also relates to First Nations projects. 
And I’m wondering if you can answer this. If you can’t answer 
it I would really appreciate it if you could take it to the Gaming 
minister. 
 
I want to know what percentage of gaming revenues diverted 
into the AAF fund are used to fund First Nation projects, if you 
could get that information for me. Possibly you have it with you 
right now, but if not I’d appreciate if you could get it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member’s quite right — it’s 
a gaming question. But I’d be only too pleased to attempt a 
response. The . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Make sure you start by telling her the 
AAF doesn’t exist any more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I think she’s aware of that now. 
But for the First Nations Fund and the community development 
corporations, about 14, $15 million almost a year goes to First 
Nations communities development there. In the coming year, 
that number will be 24.2 million, and in addition $2 million for 
the Métis Development Fund. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I will turn the questioning over to my colleague from 
Spiritwood, and after which I will just have a couple of closing 
comments. Thank you. 
 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials here this afternoon. 
 
My first question is in regard to my constituency and resulting 
of all the fires that’s taken place in my area. Now the question I 
have posed to you, I hope that you’re not going to refer it to the 
Minister of Environment because it has an Intergovernmental 
Affairs edge to it. 
 
In regards to fires that start on the reserve and burn off the 
reserve, and they burn private property off the reserve where 
there’s a loss of a lot of farmer’s assets or whatever, is there 
some kind of compensation through the federal government that 
would help compensate some of the people that have been 
affected with these burning of fires? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In this particular season, this is a 
matter of some importance. On the specific question of 
responsibility for, say, damage done to an RM’s property or to a 
neighbouring farmer’s property, I’ll have to get back to the 
member on that specific question. But there . . . and it would 
depend upon negligence and so on whether there was a duty of 
care and whether it was being broken. 
 
And as the member will know, in many First Nations 
communities there wouldn’t be firefighting equipment to 
address the concern. But there are arrangements made between 
the federal government and municipalities to address 
firefighting conditions and then therefore compensation 
provided to municipal fire services who tend . . . which attend 
to fires on First Nations. 
 
But on the specific question of the liability should a fire move 
from a reserve to a non-reserve property, I’ll have to get back to 
the member on that. But we’ll do that very shortly. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I would 
appreciate your comments back to me because I have a 
gentleman that lost everything in the fire that came off the 
Sandy Lake Reserve and it burnt his whole operation out. It 
managed to leave his trailer but unfortunately the trailer that 
they left was basically not liveable. And he was planning on 
building a house and all the material for his new house was 
there and it also burnt, plus the shop and machinery and 
everything else. 
 
Now he has gone to the provincial government through SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) to ask 
if there was any compensation in regards to it and they said no. 
But they said you may want to check with the federal 
government. So that’s why I thought at this time a question to 
you through Intergovernmental Affairs may be the way to go. 
And I appreciate your comments back to me in the near future. 
 
The second questioning I have is in regards to the meeting that 
was taking place this last weekend regarding the Métis leaders 
of Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan, meeting in Winnipeg 
to discuss Métis issues. Were you aware of the meeting and do 
you know offhand what was on the agenda in regards to that 
meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I was aware of the meeting taking 
place between Métis leaders from the Prairie provinces, Mr. 

Chairman. My understanding is that the meeting focussed, 
amongst other things, on whether or not the Métis had been 
fairly treated in the formation of the province of Manitoba. And 
there was some effort to provide support for the Manitoba Métis 
from the other Prairie provinces. 
 
And the member will know from his own . . . near his own 
community that there are also issues in the province regarding 
Métis land claims as well. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Your comments, I 
think, are correct as compared to what the radio said . . . or the 
news report on the radio said this morning coming in. 
 
But I think there was also to do with talks ongoing regarding 
not only land and land issues but also self-government. Is that 
not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, it’s quite possible. We haven’t 
had the agenda or the results shared with us. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take it that that 
. . . I know it’s early. We just came out on the weekend so I just 
wondered if you knew offhand what exactly was going on in 
regards to it. 
 
In regards to community pastures where land claims are taking 
place on the community pastures, and in the particular 
community pasture just by Landis where a group of farmers 
have a community pasture or have cattle in this community 
pasture and there’s been a land claim against it, now the First 
Nations close to it, the reserve close to it wants to take that 
property over. As you know in the last month or so, there’s 
been some negotiations trying to go on, but the last negotiations 
ended up in not a good scenario. 
 
Has there been any more negotiations regarding the community 
pasture just outside of Landis and what is going on with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, the member raises the issue of 
Mosquito-Grizzly Bear’s Head First Nation and Rosemount 
Grazing Co-op and it has been a complex and difficult set of 
discussions. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The member is right that Mosquito First Nation has selected the 
pasture, and the farmers who have grazed their cattle on this 
pasture over a long number of . . . over many years have . . . the 
two between them have not been able to come to terms as to an 
appropriate compensation for the co-op. 
 
Our expectation and our effort always is to focus on a willing 
buyer and a willing seller and to find a negotiated settlement. 
And for the vast majority of treaty land entitlement selections 
this works fairly well, in particular when it’s . . . when there’s in 
question a transfer of provincial Crown land. 
 
But there are a number — and the member will be familiar with 
Big River and Pelican Lake First Nation too — there are a 
number of complex situations which have to be addressed. We 
have two choices . . . well we have our first choice, which is to 
try to find . . . try to bring the parties together to negotiate a 



2634 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

settlement. We then, if that doesn’t work, we have choices 
available to the province. And the First Nation also of course 
has choices available to them too. 
 
What is at stake here, it seems to me, is a situation which should 
be resolvable. The First Nations is . . . the First Nation has 
basically offered the co-op a co-management agreement and has 
basically offered them exactly the same terms and conditions as 
would be available to them under the present lease they have 
from the province. So the farmers involved will pay no more 
than they paid before and will have exactly the same rights and 
obligations with regards to the province as they would have . . . 
as they have presently. 
 
So all that will happen is the lease, the name on the lease will 
. . . in the offer made by Mosquito First Nation, the name on the 
lease would change from the province of Saskatchewan to 
Mosquito First Nation. Nothing else would change. 
 
In addition to that, there is the offer of a co-management 
agreement so that the farmers, the three, I think it is 
representatives of the co-op, three representatives of the First 
Nation would choose an independent person to Chair the 
co-management agreement. 
 
That seems to me, on the face of it, to be an eminently sensible 
resolution to this challenge. If this doesn’t, if this doesn’t get 
resolved in this way, then as the member will know, the lease I 
think . . . the lease for the co-op runs out at the end of 
December I think of 2005, if I recall properly. In which case a 
decision would then be made by the Department of Agriculture 
and agri-food as to whether or not to extend that lease. 
 
So the co-op will be making some decisions about whether or 
not it thinks that lease would be renewed. And if it thinks that it 
will not be renewed then it would certainly be within its interest 
to find an agreement with Mosquito First Nations. I would just 
urge both sides to work ever harder to try to find a solution 
here. 
 
If we cannot resolve disputes of this sort within our province, 
it’s going to be increasingly difficult to see how we can all live 
together across the province as a whole. This is a relatively 
manageable dispute, it seems to me, and I would just urge 
everybody who’s involved to find a solution here. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to that, 
Mr. Minister — and you are correct it is December 2005 — 
under the treaty negotiations there has to be third party liability 
or third party concerns be adhered to. Now can the patrons of 
the pasture, in other words, the patrons that lease the 
community pasture, can they or can they not purchase that land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — If I heard the member rightly, he 
asked whether or not the co-op could buy the land from the . . . 
Because the pasture has been selected by Mosquito, if the 
province undertook to sell the land to Rosemount Grazing 
Co-op, that would, as far as we think, contravene the treaty land 
entitlement agreement so that would not then be an option for 
the co-op or for the province. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So basically what 
you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is any land that is provincial land 

within the province of Saskatchewan, through the treaty 
entitlement Act, they have first chance at that land. Any person 
living in the province of Saskatchewan who is a taxpayer is 
second citizen and therefore does not have a chance to buy that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The purpose or the function of the 
treaty land entitlement process is to ensure that First Nations 
which did not get land that they were entitled to at the time of 
treaties, now will get them. So if the appropriate amount of land 
had been transferred at that time, this would not be an issue. 
 
So what we . . . what all parties have agreed to, the province, 
Canada, and First Nations, is to ensure that there is a process 
whereby land which should be available to a First Nation is 
available to them. Not the same land that they might have had 
in the first place, but that they’re able to select land in parts of 
the province. 
 
Once that is done, if there are no third party interests like, in 
this case the grazing co-op, or like outfitters as is the case in 
some other selections, if there are no third party interests the 
transfer can take place quite easily. If there is a third party 
interest, if there is a third party which has an interest in this 
property, like the farmers who formed the Rosemount Grazing 
Co-op, then they have to be compensated for their loss. 
 
So the issue then is how much will it take in order to provide 
. . . in order to ensure that the Rosemount Grazing Co-op is 
prepared to give up their rights under that property. In this case 
it’s a very short lease, as the member will know. 
 
So there then is a set of negotiations to try and find an amicable 
solution to that issue. What is the price to buy out the grazing 
co-ops interest? 
 
In this particular case, as the member will know, the lease runs 
out — as we’ve said before — in December 2005. So if the 
lease runs out and is not renewed, the grazing co-op will have 
no interest at all to pursue. 
 
So if the farmers who are members of the grazing co-op want to 
continue to graze on that land — which they obviously do — 
then it would seem to me wise for them to come to a conclusion 
with Mosquito First Nation. 
 
As I said before, Mosquito is offering exactly the same terms 
and conditions as the province has offered in the current . . . as 
the province has made available to the grazing co-op in the 
present lease. And in addition to that, has offered a 
co-management process to ensure that the pasture is managed in 
a way which is acceptable to both the First Nation and the 
members of the co-op. It seems to me an eminently sensible 
solution. And if the members of the co-op are hoping that the 
province will renew the lease in 2005, then I think that is up to 
them. 
 
But it plainly is hoping for something to happen in the future, 
which may not happen. And if doesn’t happen — if the lease 
isn’t renewed — then they won’t have any opportunity to graze 
their cattle on that pasture at all. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your answer. 
Over my years of dealing with First Nations and treaties, if I 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

 

remember right, under the treaty land entitlement Act, the land 
that was to be given to First Nations . . . (inaudible) . . . land 
and treaty land entitlement land, had to be unoccupied land not 
occupied land. 
 
In regards to this instance with the community pasture, this land 
as we speak right now, is occupied. And yes, in the year 2005, it 
will not be occupied because the lease runs out. But this is 
where the whole idea of the third party, which is the community 
pasture patrons, feel they have a legitimate complaint. 
 
They have the right to that land till 2005. Why does it have to 
be given under the treaty land entitlement land when they are 
actually in the process of having it now? 
 
And the second question is: why can’t they buy it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The answer to the second question is, 
as I mentioned, once land has been selected it would be 
contrary to the treaty land agreement process for the province to 
sell the land to the co-op. 
 
But the treaty land entitlement process is not just about 
unoccupied land or about land to which there is no third party 
interest. The member will know of cases in which outfitters 
have been . . . have received compensation for the outfitting 
lease they have on a particular — or licence — they have on a 
particular piece of property. 
 
He will know of a number of those cases in an Onion Lake 
selection where outfitters were compensated to the tune of 
$100,000, and one to the tune of much more than that, as a 
result of, as a result of giving up their third party interest. 
 
In this case, the third party interest in this land is the co-op’s 
lease from the province. The question is — and that lease runs 
out in 2005 — can there be, can there be a settlement to this 
dispute whereby the Rosemount pasture co-op is compensated 
for its interest? 
 
Now my understanding is that — and I might be wrong here — 
but my understanding is that nothing is going to change until 
2005 anyway. But if the co-op does not want to sell out its 
present lease, which is, as you know a very short lease, then 
we’ll just have to await what happens in 2005. 
 
But then the co-op runs the risk of not being able to graze its 
cattle on that land at all unless it gets a lease renewed. Because 
once the lease, once its lease expires, there will be no third party 
interest to worry about and then the process will be very 
straightforward. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you’re saying in regards to the Onion Lake issue where the 
outfitters there were compensated — in regards to the pasture 
that we’re talking about now, you feel then that the patrons of 
that pasture will be compensated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well that’s what the issue here is 
about. It is about whether or not the co-op is a willing seller of 
its interest in the property. If it was a willing seller and the price 
was fixed, then it would be able to be compensated for the 
remainder of the lease in question here. 

But as the member knows, the First Nation has offered to 
continue that lease and therefore continue the availability of that 
land to the co-op. So the issue at stake at the present time and 
the dispute between the Rosemount pasture co-op and Mosquito 
First Nation is: is the co-op prepared to sell its interest, the 
remainder of its lease, in the TLE (treaty land entitlement) 
process to Mosquito First Nation? If it is, then this matter gets 
resolved very quickly. If it’s not, then at best it drags on until 
2005. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I don’t think you answered my question 
though in regards to compensation, Mr. Minister. Is there going 
to be compensation paid . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There 
is. In other words what the Indian band or the First Nations 
band has done then, is said that they will give compensation to 
the patron owners? 
 
(17:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The compensation available to the 
pasture co-op is available to them in terms of their agreement 
with the Mosquito First Nation. So the issue is how, if at all, the 
interests of the co-op will be compensated for by the First 
Nation. 
 
And there are a number of options available and I’m sure 
they’ve discussed them. But one which appears to be the 
strongest option offered by the First Nation is to extend the 
lease for another, I think it’s 25 years. 
 
But the issue is not compensation from the province or from the 
federal government; it is a question of payment by the First 
Nation for the interest of the third party, in this case the grazing 
co-op. And if no solution is found, then we just wait till the end 
of the lease and see what happens then. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
regards to compensation for pasture patrons, in regards to the 
Bapaume pasture issue, the pasture patrons of the Bapaume 
pasture were compensated $10,000 per person for pasture rights 
to that pasture. In addition to that, then they signed a deal with 
regards to keeping the pasture for pasturing cattle for years to 
come. 
 
In regards to the Onion Lake situation regarding outfitters, that 
land was not occupied land; it was unoccupied land. It was 
provincial land. And at that time I believe the outfitters were 
paid compensation plus rights to outfit in that said area. 
 
This is what I’m asking you in regards to the Landis situation is 
in regards to compensation for the Landis patrons. Are they 
going to be paid in dollars and cents, plus a renegotiation of the 
deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well this is an issue for the First 
Nation and the pasture co-ops to negotiate. That is what this is 
about. The province provides a mediator to try to assist in that 
process. We’ve done that on a number of occasions and we 
have one in place at the present time, as I think the member 
knows. And a couple of meeting . . . a meeting is expected on 
July 16 and 17 where the mediator attempting to find a solution 
between the parties. 
 



2636 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

But at no time has the First Nation talked about dollar terms for 
the members of the housing . . . of the grazing co-op. But it has 
talked about extending the lease under the same conditions as 
presently exist for a longer period of time. 
 
In other instances, parties have negotiated solutions to suit 
themselves. And as I say, it is a question of trying to find a 
willing buyer and a willing seller and therefore a price to which 
both agree. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know there’s 
meetings supposed to be going on later in the year regarding 
that problem with that pasture, and I know the members from 
that pasture will keep me informed with what’s going on, and 
I’ll keep you informed. 
 
At that time, that’s all my questions. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I just want to 
take this opportunity to thank the minister and his officials for 
answering a large number of questions and much appreciated. 
 
The Chair: — Hon. members, this is subvote (GR05). To vote 
on subvote (GR05), leave is needed to consider this ahead of 
(GR01). Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Subvote (GR05) agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 
Vote 30 

 
Subvote (IA16) agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. I invite the Minister of Justice to 
introduce his officials when he’s ready. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m happy to 
introduce Department of Justice officials and ask members to 
welcome them. To my right, Doug Moen who’s the executive 
director of public law and community justice, who will be the 
new deputy minister from September 1. He drew the short straw 
I guess. 
 
Behind him, Betty . . . no not behind him, to his right, Betty 
Ann Pottruff, who’s the director of policy, planning and 
evaluation. And behind Doug is Elizabeth Smith, who’s the 
director of administration. Behind me is Colleen Matthews, 
who’s the executive assistant to the deputy minister — all of 
whom will be familiar to members of the Chamber. And behind 
Elizabeth is Rick Peach, who is director of law enforcement 
operations. And behind Colleen is Suzanne Bugeaud, who is the 

assistant director of family justice services. And we have a 
number of officials in the back if we need them. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and all his officials. And we won’t discuss July 1 
today. We’ll leave that for another time. 
 
Getting into some RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
policing questions . . . and we’re going to ramble all over the 
place today so it’s probably good that you have a lot of 
individuals there to help you. Am I correct in assuming that 
RCMP vehicles are not insured and that when damage occurs 
that’s just paid outright? Would you respond to that and sort of 
just clarify how that’s set up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well a more appropriate way to put it 
would be that the federal government self-insures the RCMP 
vehicles. So then the federal government would be responsible 
for any of the costs which might be incurred if they were 
insured in the normal way. So the federal government actually 
acts as the insurer. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. In a recent incident that occurred 
in the town of Langham, this was a couple of months ago, there 
was a murder and a stabbing — and I think you’re probably 
fairly aware of that; it was a pretty high-profile situation — one 
of the RCMP cars hit a house. And now this person is asking 
for that repair to be done and she’s being told that she’s 
supposed to go through her insurance — which, first of all, 
shouldn’t be her insurance’s problem — and if she does go 
through her insurance obviously her rates will go up, she 
becomes a higher risk and all those sorts of things. And I’m 
wondering why this isn’t just being paid out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — If I may, I’ll take this under 
advisement. I’ll look into it and get back to the member as 
quickly as possible. We’ll be able to check fairly quickly. Well 
not tonight, but first thing in the morning and get back to him. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And sort of working around that 
particular situation, I want to sort of move into the concept of 
the Victims’ Fund and would like for the minister to state how 
much money is presently in the Victims’ Fund, and under what 
situations individuals can access that, and what sorts of monies 
are paid out to victims through that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asked about the victims’ 
services budget. For 2002-2003 it’s $4.257 million. There’s a 
reserve of about $3.4 million as of April 1, 2002, and $3.4 
million supports direct services for victims of crime. And I’ll 
just indicate what is covered and I think the member’s main 
question was what is available actually to victims. 
 
There’s $1.8 million for crisis intervention, 20 programs 
covering about 80 per cent of the province which ensures that 
victims of crime receive the kind of information and support, 
assistance, and referral they need as soon as possible after the 
crime has been committed. 
 
(17:15) 
 
There are three court-based programs to prepare and support 
victims and witnesses during their involvement with the 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

 

criminal justice process to help them through the court process 
here — $257,000. 
 
In terms of compensation and restitution to victims, which I 
think is the member’s main point, $535,000 — 400,000 for 
financial compensation for victims of violent crime and 
$135,000 for the restitution program to cover what someone 
might have lost. There are $830,000 of Aboriginal initiatives: a 
family violence programs, urban Aboriginal crime prevention 
strategies, northern victims initiatives, for example. And 
829,000 is distributed to programs for children who witness 
domestic violence, some child action plan grants, public 
education, and then administration. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. At another time, we’ll probably 
go through that whole long list specifically and really try to 
address whether that is really a victims services, or are those 
just covering other bureaucratic functions that are probably 
valid but should come out of a different part of a different 
budget. 
 
However, under the victims’ compensation one, in that 
particular event that occurred in Langham where there was a 
murder and a stabbing of a young fellow — I believe he was 
about two years of age — became paralysed, a lot of medical 
expenses. His mother has a lot of expenses. He still can’t 
function physically properly. And there seems to be next to no 
funds, if any at all, for him. It would seem to me this would be a 
prime candidate for some victims’ fund support. 
 
And I would think the kinds of things that should be there for 
this young individual would be specific support at this time to 
sort of allow his mother to continue working, as she would 
prefer, take care of some of the expenses of taking care of the 
young fellow during this time, and also ensuring that as he 
grows up, as there are special supports initiatives and 
opportunities and training is needed, if in fact the difficulties 
that he has now of being partially paralysed continue, those 
should all be in place for him out of this fund because he is a 
victim if ever there was a victim. He didn’t do anything to get 
involved in this situation — like I said, just a two-year-old 
asleep in his crib. And yet there seems to be very little support 
for him and there should be a lot of support. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The fund itself is designed primarily 
to assist victims through the trauma and the challenges of the 
court process following it, rather than to compensate victims for 
their loss — or example, pain and suffering, or the injury they 
might have faced — or a range of other losses. 
 
I think the member can see that a fund of some $4 million 
would not be large enough if it was designed to respond in the 
way in which he is suggesting. We might be able to deal with 
maybe, you know, a dozen or so victims in that way. 
 
But the fund is not the only source available to the victim and 
his family in this case. The health care system is there and that 
is designed to provide for his health needs. There is Social 
Services available for a range of responses too. 
 
So the victim services fund is not designed to compensate the 
victim for all of the loss they suffer. There are other 
government programs and services available for that, in 

particular, as I mentioned, health care and social services. 
 
But I’m not sure if the person the member refers to has actually 
sought any compensation from the Victims’ Fund, but she 
should certainly do so. But she shouldn’t expect what is 
provided by the health care system or by social services or by 
other programs to be provided through the Victims’ Fund. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I think I need to give you a 
bit more background to show how badly the system, in general, 
has failed. And I’m glad to see the Minister of Social Services 
here because he probably needs to hear this as well. 
 
I believe there’s something to the extent of 3 or $400 available 
to take care of some of the living expenses of this young mother 
and this paralyzed child. Now because this child is paralyzed, 
needs to buy special food so that when he eats he doesn’t choke. 
Now at this point Social Services covers half of that. 
 
So the housing isn’t adequate, the caretaking if the mother 
wants to maintain a job isn’t adequate, needs special care and 
special food to keep from essentially choking when he eats and 
half of that is covered, and there’s a myriad of things that are 
happening in this young child’s life that shouldn’t be 
happening. And Social Services is dropping the ball on this one 
very seriously. 
 
And I appreciate the minister’s comment that I can’t comment 
at this point whether they have addressed this need through the 
Victims’ Fund. I can assure you they will but what will 
probably happen then is in Social Services will say well now 
you’re under the Victims’ Fund so then they will just let go of 
the ball altogether. 
 
But I’m glad that both ministers hear this so that when this 
comes across your table as it will before too long again, you can 
deal with this in a manner that I think is just and is caring. 
Because as I stated, you have a young mother that has very few 
means at her disposal, and so the other family is trying to cover 
this off, and that’s not an easy situation. 
 
And even that particular medication that I said the child needs 
to just maintain life is only partially covered, and so this is a 
true victim and needs the full support and the full sympathy. 
The family has gone the route once or twice with Social 
Services and I think we managed to get an extra $4 a month for 
them out of that, which was still very much short of where it 
should have been. 
 
So that will be addressed across both of your desks in the very 
near future. At this point the member from Swift Current I 
believe has one question. So we’ll let him end now . . . 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. And to 
the Minister and his officials, I understand from recent media 
reports that there is some assurance for municipalities in 
Saskatchewan that any of the costs related to their RCMP 
detachments serving at the recent G-8 Summit will not be borne 
by local taxpayers, will not be borne by the municipalities. 
 
And I just want to get the minister, if he would on the record in 
the legislature, that this also includes overtime. Now just very 
quickly in the case of Swift Current, the issue wasn’t the actual 



2638 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

costs of the officers, the issue was the overtime that . . . the 
attendant overtime costs that might be incurred by the city when 
they had to ensure that they had continuous shifting. 
 
This happened at a time in a run-up to something called Frontier 
Days in Swift Current, which is our exhibition, our annual 
exhibition, but also is a time that’s quite busy for our local 
detachment of the RCMP. 
 
And I guess I’d just ask the minister to confirm if indeed it’s his 
understanding or it’s been his undertaking that the federal 
government — some senior level of government — will be 
compensating municipalities for the overtime costs incurred to 
fill in the gaps left by officers working at the G-8 Summit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The expectation is that the overtime 
costs paid by Swift Current to the RCMP to cover off the gaps 
in service provided because a number of their officers were at 
the G-8 will be less than the monies they will save from not 
paying the salaries for those officers who have left. 
 
The rationale being that with vacation and leave being 
cancelled, the costs — the overtime costs — of providing the 
service that would have been provided by the officers who were 
at the G-8 will be less than the money the city will save on 
because it won’t have to pay the salaries for those officers who 
were at the G-8 for the time they were at the G-8. 
 
So the . . . I think it’s five officers went from Swift Current. Is 
that right? Seven, maybe? Five or seven went to the G-8. Leave 
and vacation cancelled filled the gap part of that. Whatever 
overtime costs are incurred by the city to pay other officers will 
be less than the money that they save on not paying the salaries. 
So there will be a net gain to the city of Swift Current as a result 
of providing those services to the federal government for 
security at the G-8. 
 
So if the member is asking, is somebody going to send a cheque 
to the city of Swift Current for the overtime costs incurred as a 
result of paying officers during the G-8, the answer to that 
question is no. But neither will they be . . . but they will be 
paying less on their regular salaries because seven officers will 
be off at the G-8, so they’ll get a net benefit. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chairman, through you, one very final question just so that it’s 
straight. And I may have the whole machinations of how cities 
pay for city detachments of RCMP, but my understanding is 
that it’s a contract that they work through the minister’s 
department that is calculated based on the number of members 
in their detachment and other costs. 
 
And so is it true that their amount that they will have to pay for 
their amount of policing is going to be decreased, their overall 
costs for this year, will be actually less because of the fact that 
seven officers’ costs weren’t incurred for that period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In fact in regards to the city of Swift 
Current, it has a separate contract with the RCMP and it doesn’t 
engage the province in that contract. But it’s a 70/30 split that 
the city has with the RCMP. What the RCMP . . . what the city 
of Swift Current will get is a credit to make up for the saving. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Two or three other quick questions, some of 
which are short. 
 
Across Canada when an individual declares personal 
bankruptcy, I believe the record stands for seven years. In 
Saskatchewan I believe the record stands for 14 years. Is that 
correct and what is the rationale behind having Saskatchewan, 
if that is correct, out of sync on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — As far as we’re aware, because the 
legislation is federal legislation, it’s unlikely that there would 
be a different rule for Saskatchewan over other provinces. But 
no doubt the member has some follow-up questions which 
suggest otherwise. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I’m sorry to disappoint the minister, but 
we’re not going to follow this one up because if it is federal 
then we will just follow it up on that particular area. 
 
A question under the Public Trustee and it is a situation that I’m 
sure your officials are somewhat aware of. It occurred in Lucky 
Lake where the Public Trustee had a client and they had made 
an arrangement with a particular business that this client could 
charge a certain amount per month and the Public Trustee 
would cover that. 
 
Now what happened is, the client passed away and the Public 
Trustee found out there wasn’t enough money to cover those 
bills. And now the particular business that had basically been 
doing this business on behalf of the Public Trustee on behalf of 
the client is now left out with, you know, a charge account that 
isn’t being covered. 
 
And I think the Public Trustee needs to be held responsible for 
this because it’s the Public Trustee that basically said here’s the 
amount that you can work with. If they saw the amount as 
coming to an end they should have said, okay, there’s another 5 
or 8 or $1,000 left and then there will be no more. But that 
information I believe was not sent through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I’m not familiar with the specifics of 
the question raised by the member but I will look into it and get 
back to him sometime early tomorrow. 
 
The issue of . . . I mean, I think if a person who is being 
represented by the Public Trustee, if that person’s resources run 
out, there is likely no other solution other than for the money 
not to be paid. But I don’t . . . let me look at the specifics and 
we’ll get back to you tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, I appreciate that. And the reason 
that I felt that the Public Trustee should be held responsible in 
this case is because they had not limited the amount that was 
there and they should have known what was left in that 
particular account. By sort of leaving it open-ended, they’re 
leaving the merchant to believe that this goes on indefinitely 
and that was incorrect information. 
 
One fairly quick question on an issue that you and I spoke about 
a little while ago, and we both talked to the individual, our 
offices have, and that’s with the gentleman that is walking 
around outside. And we won’t go into any details on that 
because that could take us into many different areas. 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

 

Is there any access that he could have to some legal aid counsel 
to tell him where his views are a sea and where they aren’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — My recollection is, and I think I’m the 
only one who has a recollection about this, is that he has been 
offered legal aid services and that he appears unsatisfied with 
that offer and wants someone from the private bar to represent 
him. 
 
We’ve had a number of discussions, not me personally but my 
staff and others have had numbers of discussions with the 
person outside. And indeed, the Sergeant-At-Arms has had 
many discussions with him too and in fact it might be best to 
direct the questions to him; he might know more about the 
particulars. But as he doesn’t get a chance to answer them, I 
guess you can’t do that. 
 
But other than that, I don’t know very much about the person. 
Well I know the details of the person’s concern and I do 
understand he’s been offered legal aid support. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, during the 
last set of questions that I posed to you in Committee of 
Finance . . . Thursday, April 11 was the last time that I talked to 
you. And I was asking you about whether or not, with the new 
Act, The Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual 
Abuse and Exploitation, whether or not parents were included 
in designated persons that were able to apply for an emergency 
intervention order against someone if they believed that 
someone, or if they have reasonable grounds to believe that 
someone would be a threat to their child as far as sexual abuse 
goes, or if further contact between their child and a particular 
person would result in that or have resulted in it. 
 
You have graciously written me a letter outlining who would be 
able to put forward emergency prevention orders — or apply 
for then rather — and you mentioned that the Act enabled 
police, child protection officers, and other designated persons to 
apply by telephone to a Justice of the Peace for emergency 
intervention orders. 
 
And so . . . And I think my question to you at that time on April 
11 was, are parents going to have the right to be included in 
those persons that may apply for an emergency intervention 
order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks about parents 
having the opportunity to seek orders over their . . . pertaining 
to their children. One of the challenges in providing for that 
provision directly is a kind of knowledge and training question. 
It’s not the easiest process to pursue. 
 
So what the legislation and the practice considers to be the best 
approach is for that parent to, through a police officer or a 
social worker, to have that application made. In other words, to 
have the officials mention — that the member mentioned — 
supporting the parent’s call for a special order. If that were not 
the case, it would be necessary to provide a whole bunch of 
support and training in order for that process to be appropriately 
pursued. 
 
So the idea is to support the adult or the parent and then, 
therefore, to encourage the parent to go to an appropriate 

official and then for that official to pursue the action. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that your 
explanation is certainly one that makes some good sense. I 
understand clearly that oftentimes we need to ensure that people 
have got the appropriate information and education in order to 
carry out such an initiative. 
 
But I think that, in my view, if parents do have reasonable 
validation or reasonable grounds or validation that their child 
has previously been subject to sexual abuse by whatever — and 
I’m thinking particularly right now of gang member activity and 
so on — then if that parent has got enough evidence of that, that 
they should possibly be included in those people that can apply 
for an emergency intervention order; of course with the 
presentation of that evidence. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I certainly respect your answer and I 
understand how complex this can be and how one has to ensure 
that it’s . . . all of these measures are carried out properly. But I 
think that it would be good for the Department of Justice to 
maybe consider it, that if there is a . . . if there’s adequate 
evidence presented by a parent, that they should be able to 
present that. 
 
What happens sometimes is that — at least it’s been brought to 
my attention — that sometimes Social Services basically are not 
listening to the evidence that parents put forward and so parents 
find that they’re hamstrung. They can’t move anywhere and go 
any further with their own evidence. So I think we have to find 
another, maybe another mechanism in order to have their 
evidence examined and considered. 
 
But I’d like to just move over to another question right now, 
Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I know and understand that Leanne 
Bellegarde Daniels is the Chairman of the Saskatoon Board of 
Police Commissioners and I know that she was recently 
appointed as assistant director of legal services for SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority). 
 
It’s my understanding that the board of commissioners was set 
up as a body and it was to be ensured that they were at 
arm’s-length to any municipal politicians or any politicians. In 
this case it seems to me that Ms. Bellegarde Daniels has a 
vested interest in SIGA and with ongoing SIGA investigations. 
Does this not concern you as Minister of Justice because, 
because of the reason that the board of commissioners was set 
up; it was set up to be at arm’s-length to any political body? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks about the Saskatoon 
Police Commission, and I think she would be aware that this 
commission was appointed by the city of Saskatoon, not by the 
province, presumably . . . and she was . . . Ms. Bellegarde was 
on the police commission before this recent appointment with 
SIGA. I imagine she discussed it with the police commission, 
and with those who appointed her. 
 
It’s in fact the case that municipal . . . members of municipal 
council are members of police commissions across the 
province. And I think too, if there ever was the appearance of 
any conflict, Ms. Bellegarde Daniels could step aside from it. 
 
It’s also worth remembering that it is the RCMP which is 



2640 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

conducting the inquiry into SIGA activities, not the Saskatoon 
Police Commission. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much for that answer. I put the 
question forward simply because public interest in regards to 
conflict of interest is certainly at hand and I think the public 
deserve to have an answer to that question. 
 
So I thank you for your answers, Mr. Minister, and I’ll just turn 
it back over to my colleague, the member from Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And to the minister: a fairly general question, 
but I think it’s of great interest to the people of this particular 
province. We are only a province of about 1 million people so 
when we take that into perspective — we have many cities in 
Canada that are many times our population — so when we look 
at the question as I’m going to relate it here in a minute or two, 
we need to keep that in mind that we don’t have a whole lot of 
people and we don’t look at it geographically and say, well we 
cover this big part of Canada and therefore this isn’t as big a 
concern. And that is, we have had unfortunately in 
Saskatchewan a number of high-profile cases that seem to have 
gone off the rails in different ways for whatever reasons. And I 
would list under those cases the Milgaard case, the Martensville 
case which isn’t concluded, the Klassen situation which . . . 
who knows where that one would go but it’s a fairly 
high-profile one. 
 
And the question I have in general is: what sorts of things is the 
Justice department doing to ensure that things don’t seem to go 
off the rails in such a major way as they have in these three 
cases? Because in a province of, in most cases less than 1 
million people, those are some very high-profile cases, very 
major cases, and that’s a lot of cases for that small number of 
people. And a lot of people in Saskatchewan say, how come is 
this happening? How can we ensure that it doesn’t happen? 
 
So basically it’s a bit of an open-ended question to where is the 
Justice department on these issues and how do we ensure that 
we don’t have this occurring again? 
 
(17:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises an important 
question in terms of the efficacy of prosecutions. And he I’m 
sure will be aware that the issues he . . . the specifics that he 
mentioned, some took place a very long time ago in the context 
of the many thousands and thousands of cases reviewed on an 
annual basis and also many, many thousands of cases which are 
actually prosecuted. But the specifics of the member’s question 
were: what has happened; what have we done to ensure that 
mistakes don’t occur today? 
 
First of all, there are significant changes to police investigation 
tools which have made a difference. There are protocols like the 
child abuse investigation protocol which makes clearer and 
more effective how to deal with children who are victims in 
child sexual abuse cases. 
 
There has been significant training of all participants in the 
justice system in its broadest sense to ensure that these cases are 
handled in an effective way. Relating again to children, the 
Regina Children’s Justice Centre also provides for better ways 

to deal with child witnesses in child sexual abuse cases. 
 
Not all of the cases mentioned by the member deal with 
children but certainly that has been an important focus. So 
within the general context of prosecutions a lot of work has 
been done to ensure that as much knowledge as possible is 
available to prosecutors. In addition to Regina, there is also a 
similar program in Saskatoon. 
 
And maybe while I’m on my feet I might just, before I forget, 
mention to the member that I will take up his, the concerns he 
raised with the person from Langham, with the Minister of 
Social Services and the Minister of Health in an effort to see 
whether or not all of the services available are in fact being 
accessed by that person. 
 
And I might say to the member from Humboldt that we will 
monitor the situation about access to child protection officers 
and police officers applying to a Justice of the Peace for 
protection orders for children. And if it does appear to be a 
problem, if there are issues then we will of course do our best to 
respond to them. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And the minister is correct when 
he says there were thousands and thousands of cases that are 
covered every year. And so on a percentage basis these may not 
be that many. However I think those of us who have lived in 
this province all of our life realize that out of those three cases 
that I mentioned, two of them had an immediate high profile. 
 
So they weren’t like it was just a small case that was just taken 
care of through the Justice department and moved on. These 
were immediately high profile which meant that the whole 
department should have at that point said, this is a big thing and 
we’re going to have to deal with this carefully and deal with it 
correctly. 
 
And those two high profile ones would have been the Milgaard 
one and the Martensville case. The Klassen case was one that 
didn’t gain any notoriety for a substantial length of time after it 
occurred. 
 
And I did appreciate the minister’s . . . part of his answer where 
he said we have made some other situations that are out there 
now in how we deal with children for those aspects that involve 
children, as two of these did, to ensure that those kinds of things 
don’t happen again. 
 
I would think that the profile this has created for Saskatchewan 
is unfortunate and that the steps that you mentioned would 
ensure that it doesn’t happen again, and possibly just to ensure 
that we stay vigilant in looking at how the system operates. 
Because I think it does a fair bit of damage to the reputation of 
the system by the public. When these things occur, they right 
away . . . there’s a tendency to go ahead and brush the whole 
system with that kind of a reputation. 
 
So I do appreciate the answer on that and, as I said, I hope the 
department stays vigilant ensuring that all cases are dealt with 
as effectively and correctly as possible. 
 
Having said that, that concludes my questions on this for this 
particular time, Mr. Chairman. 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2641 

 

And I would like to thank the minister and his officials for 
being here this afternoon and giving us the opportunity to ask 
those questions and bring some concerns to light. And 
hopefully those that the minister indicated that he would look 
into, together with some of the other departments, and be able 
to deal with those in a way that treats people as decently and 
with as much respect as we all in the province would like to see 
that happen. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (JU01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (JU02), (JU04), (JU03), (JU05), (JU07), (JU08) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvotes (JU06), (JU08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is Larry Spannier, the deputy minister of 
the department. To his right, Debbie Wilkie, executive director 
of corporate resources. To my left is Bryon Burnett, the 
assistant deputy minister of industry development. Behind me 
and to my left is Dan McFadyen, the assistant deputy minister 
of resource development. Behind me, Bruce Wilson, executive 
director of petroleum and natural gas. 
 
As well, with us today are Jim Marshall, who is the ADM 
(assistant deputy minister) of economic policy; Hal Sanders, 
director of mineral revenue and investment services; George 
Patterson, executive director of exploration and geological 
services; Gerry Adamson, the vice-president of Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership; Lori Usick, director of finance 
and administration for Tourism Saskatchewan; and Roy 
Anderson, president and CEO (chief executive officer) of 
Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome the 
minister’s officials. And I know that they will be a great help in 
aiding us in getting through this material this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m holding a photocopy of an article in the Deep 
South Star which is published in Radville, Saskatchewan, 
author Don Baron. The article among other things says: 
 

One thing . . . 
 

The headline is “Calvert Slashes Taxes.” 
 

It begins: 
 

One thing our cash-starved NDP government now wants 
badly is to have a real oil patch here. Premier Calvert is 
leaving no doubt he believes the geologists who tell him 
there is lots of gas and oil to be found. And his government 
is prepared to do what it takes to get it. For an oil patch 
would generate excitement and prosperity as well as lots of 
real money. 
 
That’s why he’s busy slashing taxes and cutting regulations 
that discourage junior oil and gas companies from 
venturing wholeheartedly into the province. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

Lower royalties are set on the first gas coming from new 
exploratory wells. 

 
Mr. Minister, could you tell us over the last year what tax and 
royalty changes have been made that would lure oil and gas 
companies to this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would want to 
say to the member opposite that the work didn’t begin a year 
ago. This work started in 1991 which has resulted in a doubling 
of the production in this province. 
 
I think the activity that’s taken place in Saskatchewan speaks 
for itself. We’ve done a number of things. We’ve dealt with 
high water cut. We’ve gone through reviews of horizontal 
drilling, royalties, and taxation. We’ve upgraded and updated 
on an ongoing basis and we continue to do that. Those 
discussions are ongoing. And we hopefully will ensure that 
Saskatchewan remains a positive place for the oil and gas sector 
to invest. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you 
could tell me more specifically, have any of these measures 
been taken during the last year since we had an opportunity to 
do estimates a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the 
member is well aware — he has discussions with CAPP 
(Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers) as we do — 
that we’re in the process of negotiating some updated fiscal 
arrangements with the industry right now. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Specifically, what items are being discussed 
now as far as tax and royalty changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the whole range 
from sales tax to corporate capital tax to royalties and taxation. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has there been any 
streamlining of procedures for oil and gas companies to get 
permits for drilling and so on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by the 
industry that our process as it relates to access to permitting and 
licensing is much superior to our neighbours in Alberta. There’s 
always room for improvement and we continue to work on that. 
 



2642 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You go on to say in 
that . . . you’re quoted in that article, that same article in the 
Deep South Star saying that: 
 

. . . the largest tax reduction for corporations in history 
begins in 2003. 

 
Could you outline that for the Assembly please, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think the member is well 
aware of the corporate tax system and how it’s been 
restructured. The Department of Finance is the department 
responsible for that. 
 
As you will know, there has been a very large personal and 
corporate tax reduction to the tune of $430 million a year or 
thereabouts, the largest tax reduction in the history of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But I’m wondering 
more specifically what corporate tax cut is going to begin in the 
year 2003 that you’re quoted as talking about in the article? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think that’s referring to the 
package of personal income tax and corporate income tax 
changes and small business taxes thresholds as it relates to taxes 
announced in this spring’s budget. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Kensington 
Resources and DeBeers as well as now some other, Geodex 
Minerals and I think Iciena Ventures Inc. are seriously involved 
in diamond exploration in the Fort a la Corne area. 
 
I’m wondering, can the minister give this Assembly an update 
of what information has been received as far as assay 
information and does it look positive for development? And if 
so, when can we expect the companies to be in a position to 
make a decision as to whether to go ahead or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would want 
to say to the member opposite that we have been in pretty close 
contact with the people who are investing the money in terms of 
the Fort a la Corne area as it relates to hopefully establishing 
the ability to put in place a diamond mine. 
 
Much of the information, as you will know, is proprietary and 
the companies will keep very close to their vests some of the 
information. Some of course is shared with the department; 
some is public and some is not. 
 
I can only say that we continue to work with the industries in 
terms of attempting to facilitate a diamond mine. But of course 
the exploration that is taking place will ultimately determine 
whether or not there is adequate resource to move a diamond 
mine forward. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess what I would 
like to know is if the industry has given a recent estimate of 
when they will have enough assay information available to 
make a decision on whether to go or not to go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I’d want to say that the results 
of the diamond exploration of the province have been 

encouraging. The companies are optimistic. 
 
They tell us that considerably more work is required in order to 
prove that the deposits are economic. So I’m assuming that the 
drilling program will remain in the millions of dollars and as 
they move forward and assay the results of that drilling, they’ll 
come closer to a decision. Every million dollars that they spend, 
in terms of exploration, hopefully brings us one step further to 
the announcement of a viable mine. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has any work been 
done to set up a tax and royalty regime for the diamond mining 
industry, supposing they go ahead? I know that likely the 
diamond industry would want to know this information well in 
advance of making any decision on whether or not to invest 
millions, hundreds of millions of dollars in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the department is 
currently looking at different royalty structures, taxation 
structures, in other areas of the world. They’re looking at 
different options, and I think we are taking a very proactive 
approach. If it should happen that a diamond mine becomes part 
of our development activity here in the province I can assure 
you that the department will be more than ready. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a letter in 
front of me from Mr. Ewaschuk, Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, addressed to the Hon. David Anderson and the 
Hon. Allan Rock, regarding the federal government’s, if not 
decision, at least they’ve been talking about declaring road salt 
a toxic substance. 
 
The potash industry is extremely concerned about this sort of 
thing as they’ve stored huge piles of the material on their 
premises, and of course they market it as well. Have you been 
in contact with these federal ministers or has your department 
taken any action to ensure that road salt is not declared a toxic 
substance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I can say that the department has been very 
proactive. The department has been made well aware of this 
issue by the potash producers, both Anderson and Dhaliwal 
have been contacted by the department. We will continue to 
pursue this issue to ensure that potash is exempted. And I think 
it’s fair to say that we’ve got a very positive working 
relationship with the Saskatchewan potash producers and we 
continue to represent their interests in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ve heard for 
sometime, several years now, about a proposed expansion to the 
Husky Oil upgrader in Lloydminster. I’m wondering, is this 
project still alive or has it been shelved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay, I can say to the member that 
the project, as we understand it, is still alive but they have made 
no specific proposals to the department. I would assume that it 
would be part of their overall corporate decision-making 
process. And if the expansion to the upgrader in Lloyd makes 
corporate sense to them, I’m sure that they’ll contact our 
department. 
 
I want to say that Husky has been very active in the province. 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

 

Their upgrader is functioning very well serving the province 
very well, and we continue to have a close working relationship 
with Husky. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What would the 
upgrading capacity of Husky Oil in Saskatchewan be if this 
expansion were to take place, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I wouldn’t want to speculate 
on, you know, on the impact. Clearly the more upgrader 
capacity, the more heavy oil would be pushed through our 
system. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that we would continue to support Husky. 
If they were to look for an expansion, we’ll work with them as 
we have in the past. Whatever is in the interests of the province 
of Saskatchewan is the area we would pursue. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m still a little in 
the dark as to . . . I’ve spoken with Husky officials and they’re 
very keen on doing this project. There’s certainly more than 
enough heavy oil in the area. I’m still a little in the dark as to 
what your opinion is of what’s holding this project up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I can tell you that from what I 
understand, the royalties and taxation that we put in place are 
competitive. The number of heavy oil wells that are producing 
in this province is . . . I think speaks for itself. The number of 
wells that have been drilled in the past decade are, I think, fairly 
positive. 
 
We use a regulator . . . can’t control Husky’s day-to-day 
corporate experiences, nor can we make decisions in terms of 
where their investment priorities would be, only to say that our 
department officials work very closely with the industry, Husky 
included, and if they bring forth proposals, we’re more than 
willing to work with them. And if there are impediments we’re 
willing to work with them to see if we can move those out of 
the way. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you’ve 
been informed by Husky officials, as I have, that this province’s 
labour laws and regulations are a major impediment to that 
expansion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I can tell you that I’ve been 
informed by a number of people in the oil and gas sector that 
Saskatchewan is a very good place to do business, and I think 
that’s evidenced by the number of companies working in the 
province. That’s also evidenced by the drilling activity. 
 
I can say we know clearly where members of the opposition 
stand as it relates to working people and labour legislation. But 
I’m not going to go there tonight, only to say that I think we’ve 
got a balanced department and we’ve got, you know, a balanced 
investment climate. It doesn’t serve the province well to have 
legislation that either favours only industry or only labour. We 
need a balance so we strive to find that balance. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — So then, Mr. Minister, you can tell this 
Assembly that Husky officials have definitely not told you that 
labour laws are not a problem and an impediment to this 
expansion? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can tell you that the discussions 
are ongoing with the different industries, and different 
industries and different components of industry will have 
different issues. And the discussions that we have are in the 
hopes of moving our province forward and moving our 
economy forward. We indicate to them in every meeting that 
we have that it’s our role — Department of Industry and 
Resources — to help to facilitate the positive climate here in 
this province. 
 
And sometimes there are disagreements between industry and 
government. I think that’s the nature of discussions, the nature 
of negotiations. And in negotiations we don’t always get what 
we attempt to achieve — either side of the discussions when 
they take place. I can only say that this department has been 
very proactive in working in a positive way with industry, 
Husky included. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — There may have been an answer in that 
somewhere to my question, but I’m sorry — if there was, I 
missed it. 
 
Has Husky informed you, Mr. Minister, that labour laws in this 
province are an impediment to that expansion in the Husky 
facility at Lloydminster? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think the industry has informed 
me in a general way that the negative attitude in this province is 
somewhat of an impediment in terms of attracting investment. I 
can tell you that we meet with Husky and the issues will change 
from day to day and from time to time, and I think Husky has 
found Saskatchewan a very good place to do business with. 
 
And I met with them just the other day as it relates to ethanol 
development; they’re very encouraged by what we’ve done in 
terms of the ethanol legislation. And as I said the issues change 
from day to day and we continue to work in a very positive way 
with Husky and other companies in the province. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Recently, I 
believe around March 1 — I don’t have an exact date on this — 
but the British Columbia Minister of Finance, Mr. Gary Collins, 
was speaking to a gathering of oil executives in Calgary. And 
one of the things he said was that BC wants to generate $20 
billion of investment in the oil and gas sector by the year 2008, 
doubling oil and gas production in the province by 2011. 
 
And among the ways British Columbia plans to do this are 
reductions in corporate taxes, some fuel taxes, and taxes on 
machinery and equipment, along with improvements to road 
infrastructure in the province’s north where the bulk of BC’s 
current oil and gas reserves lie. As well, BC is moving to 
streamline oil and gas permitting, reduce the province’s more 
than 400,000 business regulations by one-third within three 
years, and is developing a new comprehensive energy strategy. 
He also addressed a key issue for the oil patch which is 
uncertainly surrounding access to resources. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are the measures that British Columbia 
seems to feel that are necessary for them to double investment 
in the oil patch in 10 years roughly. I’m wondering, has any 
consideration been given to that sort of expansion in that 
industry in Saskatchewan? 



2644 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me just 
give the member a bit of an overview. Right now there are 
about 400 oil and gas companies operating in this province. 
They’ve invested about $1.4 billion in new exploration and 
development in 2001. There’s about 21,000 direct and indirect 
jobs associated with the upstream oil and gas sector in 2001. 
 
A third quarter financial report shows the industry will generate 
royalty production and land sale revenues of approximately 
$625 million for 2000-2001. Industry accomplishments in 2001 
included a new gas well drilling record of 1,395 wells, a new oil 
production record of approximately 155.7 barrels. It is notable 
as well that oil production, as I indicated earlier, has doubled 
between 1991 and between 2001. The province has reduced its 
. . . or introduced improvements to the oil and gas royalty 
taxation structures in ’94, ’98, and ’99. And as I’ve indicated 
we’re working on another package right now. 
 
We’ve introduced new initiatives to encourage long-term 
exploration and development. There’s a new generic EOR 
(enhanced oil recovery) recovery royalty tax structure for new 
CO2 production like the Weyburn project and the southern 
geoscience project developed. The province has made 
significant commitment to research and development at the 
petroleum research centre here in the campus in Regina. 
 
So I think we’ve done a lot. Certainly there’s much more we 
can do. But I find it interesting that the member would take us 
to the British Columbia experience because, from what I’ve 
read in the newspapers and what I’ve heard from people in 
British Columbia, the experience has not been totally positive. 
 
They’ve also introduced the largest deficit that I’ve seen — I 
don’t think we’ve ever had one in this province of that 
magnitude. They’ve slashed hundreds and thousands of civil 
service jobs and programs. And, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite is suggesting that we attempt the British Columbia 
model which is what his leader, the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party, was a proponent of a few weeks ago . . . and I’m 
surprised they’re raising it tonight because I haven’t heard 
anything about that for weeks now, ever since the British 
Columbia people put their budget together and made it public. 
But I would only want to say we’ve accomplished a lot. There’s 
a lot more to be done. 
 
Oil production has doubled in the last decade here in this 
province, and I think that speaks well for the way the oil and 
gas sectors work with this government. I’ve been the minister 
responsible for Energy and Mines for seven maybe, out of those 
years, six, seven years, and it was a very positive experience. 
And as I’ve said, I find the oil and gas sector to be a very 
sophisticated lot in terms of their ability to understand issues. 
They don’t, I believe, want to see deficit budgeting here in this 
province either. 
 
We could have made a bunch of commitments, and we could 
have made a commitment to perhaps instead of double the oil 
production to quadruple it. But what then would we have had to 
do in terms of forgone revenue in order to make that happen? 
Well I don’t know, but we just determined we would do a 
reduction to royalties and taxation as the province can afford it. 
 
We’re very serious about balancing our budgets, unlike the 

people from British Columbia. So you can compare us to them, 
and you can use those as the model, but they’re no role model 
for us here in the province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, I posed a couple of 
written questions to you during this session and asking you 
what the total compensation paid by SGGF (Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund Ltd.) to Gary Benson was in 2001, 
and the reply I got was zero. And I then posed another question 
asking what the total compensation paid by the Crown Capital 
Partners to Gary Benson was in 2001, and the answer was zero. 
 
I’m a bit puzzled by this because, Mr. Minister, in December of 
2001 I wrote a letter to your department asking questions 
surrounding SGGF’s involvement with Wolverine industries in 
Humboldt . . . Wolverine Resources. And that letter was 
referred to Gary Benson, under the SGGF fund. So I’m 
wondering who it was that does compensate Mr. Benson or who 
did compensate him in 2001 if it wasn’t compensation coming 
through the fund or through Crown Capital Partners, because I 
don’t believe Mr. Benson would have replied to my letter if he 
were not employed by someone. 
 
So I ask you today: who or what body would have been 
compensating Mr. Benson for his services at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can only tell the 
member that the answers she received were accurate and if she 
would like further information, I think it may be appropriate to 
call Mr. Benson’s office or have him respond to her directly. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my understanding that the 
provincial government took the responsibility for administering 
the SGGF fund, and therefore there should be some answers 
forthcoming on the people involved in that fund and that were 
helping to administer it, and Mr. Gary Benson was one of them. 
 
It seems to me that the minister should have knowledge of how 
this person was being compensated. From the answers that I 
have received from your department, there was . . . there’s, 
basically, there is no answer on where the compensation came 
from. There has to be an answer because he was obviously 
receiving some sort of fee or compensation for his services. 
 
I’m asking you a simple question and I think that you’re 
responsible for answering it. So can the minister indicate to me 
where the compensation did come from to pay Mr. Benson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the question was 
pretty straightforward, and it was asked about the compensation 
and the answer was pretty straightforward. I can’t change the 
answer because the member doesn’t like the answer. I can only 
give the answer that I am supplied with by my department and I 
have given that, given that answer. 
 
We have, I think, responded to in the neighbourhood in this 
session of 430, 440 questions, written questions. It’s been a 
fairly substantive workload, and we were very pleased to have 
those answers happen. But I can only say we will respond 
directly to the questions that are asked of us and, in this case, 
we’ve done that. 
 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2645 

 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, in view of the fact 
that I am not getting an answer, I find it hard to believe that the 
only other possible answer was that Mr. Benson would have 
been, would have been providing his services free of charge. If 
that’s the case, then that would be interesting to know. 
 
I just make that comment, Mr. Minister, and I find it 
disappointing that I can’t get an answer to this question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, perhaps I can 
be of some help. What I will do is I will have my department 
contact Mr. Benson and ask if he would respond directly to the 
member with respect to how his remuneration takes place, 
through what agencies. And I’m sure he would be even willing 
to supply the amount of his remuneration. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, in his Fall 2001 Report, the Provincial Auditor stated 
that the Department of Energy and Mines at that time must 
maintain a better mapping system to help the industry search for 
new mineral deposits. 
 
Can the minister please provide the House with an update as to 
where this situation is, currently stands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we have within the 
department hired three new geologists, and I know that branch 
of the department is very excited about that because we have 
been attempting to improve our geoscience information. I’m 
told that we’re expanding from the existing four areas to seven 
areas in the very near future. So I think this will be a very 
positive thing for industry. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The auditor also 
states that your department needs to update and improve access 
to Saskatchewan geosciences data. Can you, Mr. Minister, give 
the House a progress report on this matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve posted a lot 
of our information on the Web, and I’m told there are some 
technological advances that we are introducing to help expand 
access to the knowledge. I find it really interesting within the 
department, just the amount of paperwork and the amount of 
paper that’s been accumulated over the years in terms of 
mapping and, if you go to the other buildings, the amount of 
core samples that have been stored over a period of time. 
 
It really is an amazing arm of government. We’re very much 
trying to move into the new electronic age on all of these 
initiatives. Information that we can disseminate quickly and 
cheaply is where we intend to be and where we intend to go. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also in the Fall 
2001 Report, the Provincial Auditor states the department must 
have better rules and procedures in place so producers are aware 
of deadlines for submitting documents on time. This is in 
relation to mineral rights, taxes, and other fees. 
 
Has there been any progress made in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that both in 
the mineral sector and in the oil and gas sector, we have moved 
to ensure that that information is up to date and so there have 

been more resources put to that. 
 
We want to say Energy and Mines, former Department of 
Energy and Mines was a small department. They did a heck of a 
lot with few resources and we are . . . we’re now hopefully 
moving forward and I think it served industry very, very well. 
But as I said before, there’s always more that can be done and 
we’re certainly moving . . . moving ahead on the information 
flow and on processing of the kinds of things you raised here 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does the department 
currently or is the department currently conducting any special 
engineering projects relating to the oil and gas industry 
in-house? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I am told by the 
officials that they’re part of . . . they’re part of processing 
information that they gather and request that they gather on an 
ongoing basis. 
 
And I think if the member is asking, is there any new huge 
initiative, megaproject, I think the department officials are 
saying it’s pretty much business as usual. There are a lot of 
projects out there that are . . . that are good, positive projects, 
making some sense. And they’re continuing to work forward to 
try and gain some advantage for the province of Saskatchewan 
through their work. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. 
But I wasn’t really referring to any huge megaprojects. I was 
asking more specifically about in-house special engineering 
projects, particularly in oil and gas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, Mr. Chairman, we don’t do any 
of that kind of work internal to the department. That would 
probably be more a role of the partnership between the oil and 
gas companies, between industry and resources, the federal 
government, and the Research Council through the petroleum 
research centre. That’s really where that kind of work would 
take place. So whatever resources we have allocated to that kind 
of work would go to the petroleum research centre. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Minister, what . . . the current price per tonne of potash and 
projections to the end of this fiscal year, how is that likely to 
impact the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the prices are pretty 
stable. There’s not a lot of fluctuation and folks are telling us 
that if it proceeds the way it’s looking at this point, in all 
likelihood our revenue projection as it relates to potash royalties 
and taxation will be pretty much what we projected. So the 
price is pretty much what our folks were thinking it may be. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will potash 
revenues be pretty much on track with last year then? I guess 
that’s my question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we’re told that 
we’re pretty much on track. There’s been a bit of a fluctuation, 
as the member will know, in terms of price of natural gas and 
the potash companies were and are large consumers of natural 



2646 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

gas. But we think there might be a slight increase but for the 
most part it’ll be pretty much as what we forecasted for last 
year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then will potash 
revenues be sufficient to generate the extra $40 million that was 
projected in the recent budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We believe so. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the current 
price per pound of uranium or what is it doing, and what are 
projections for uranium to the end of the fiscal year? 
 
(18:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the price is in the 
range of 9 to $10, and it looks like it will be pretty stable 
throughout the rest of the year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is that roughly what 
was projected in the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Does the department have predictions for the 
price of oil for the balance of the fiscal year? And I guess my 
question is, how will that impact the budget and revenue to the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the budget figures 
were $20.50 a barrel. As the member will know, it’s been sort 
of fluctuating around 25, $26. But I mean we’re three months 
into the year and a lot can happen over, of course, of the 
balance of this year. So it would appear that we will be 
experiencing some incremental revenues over what we had 
budgeted for. Just how much that will be I guess we’ll have to 
wait to determine. 
 
We use a similar number to what Alberta and other oil 
producing provinces are using as they put their budgets 
together. And when we get a positive surprise, we do. But it’s 
not always positive. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess I’d ask 
a similar question about natural gas. How is the current price 
and the projected price to the end of the fiscal year likely to 
impact the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. The number we 
budgeted was about $3. It’s been somewhat above that, as you 
will know, so I guess you could make a similar argument for 
what we said on natural gas. I think one would rather have an 
surprise on the positive, on the upside than one would if we had 
budgeted, say, $6 and we find out that the year-end figure 
comes in at 5. That’s not where we want to be. 
 
But we try to use the best market analysis that we can and use 
the best judgment and the experience from within the 
department and experts outside of the department to help us 
formulate these figures. 
 
So right now, it’s up. Hopefully, over the course of the year, 

we’ll have a good positive experience from that as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have 
a document in my hand prepared by Cameco Corporation, and 
they talk about marginal tax breaks here in Saskatchewan and 
other jurisdictions where uranium is mined. They make the 
comparisons of three different prices, of $14.50 per pound. The 
marginal tax rate in Wyoming is 25 per cent, Nebraska 23 per 
cent, Kazakhstan 30 per cent, and Australia 33.9 per cent, and 
Saskatchewan is at 47.7 per cent. 
 
At $21.80 per pound, Wyoming is still 25 per cent; Nebraska’s 
still 23 per cent; Kazakhstan is 30.6 per cent; and Australia’s 
still 33.9 per cent. But here in Saskatchewan, we get up to 51.7 
per cent of that price. 
 
And at a price of $29 per pound — which is certainly not out of 
line, Mr. Minister, it’s been well over $30 a pound in the past 
— Wyoming’s still at 25 per cent; Nebraska’s still at 23 per 
cent; Kazakhstan’s 30.8 per cent now without the whole 
two-tenths of a per cent, and Australia’s still at 33.9 per cent. 
But at that price, Saskatchewan is at 56.7 per cent. And this 
only includes, Mr. Minister, a resource surcharge, additional 
royalties, and income tax — corporate income tax. There are 
other taxes of course. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, is any effort being made . . . and I know 
this impacts budget very considerably, but is any effort being 
made to get our marginal tax rate in line with other uranium 
producing jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would want to say 
to the member opposite, and I’m not familiar with the numbers 
and whether or not what the date of his letter is, but we did 
make some changes to the marginal tax rate last year. So this 
was not that long ago. 
 
But having said that I think what needs to be taken into account 
when you’re looking at royalties and when you’re looking at 
taxation and competitiveness, there’s a whole myriad of things. 
We have a very rich uranium resource here in the province. It’s 
not the kind of a deposit where you have to go through a lot of 
ore in order to get to the product. So I think it’s fair to say if 
you look at the expansion and the development that’s taken 
place in the province, we must be somewhat competitive. 
There’s always room, I would argue, for some improvement 
and we’re always looking at ways to make ourselves more 
competitive, you know. 
 
And I’ll just give you some examples. We’ve reduced potash 
taxes in this province from 50 per cent to 35 per cent; uranium 
royalties have been reduced from 50 to 15 per cent; gold-based 
metal royalties have been reduced from 12 to 10 per cent. So 
you know it’s part of the process that you begin but you don’t 
ever really complete. 
 
The oil and gas sector — we’re looking at what we might be 
able to do right now as it relates to do production, whether we 
can make Saskatchewan even more competitive than it is, you 
know. It’s just something you need to continue to work with 
industry which is why you have to have a good working 
relationship and it’s important that you have a good, close 
dialogue so that you can talk over some of these issues and have 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2647 

 

a look at your competitiveness as it relates to other jurisdictions 
in the overall. 
 
So we continue to do that and I think we’ve had some 
successes. There’s always more we can do. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Just for your 
information this document appears to be dated March 28, 2002. 
 
Mr. Minister, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, formerly a 
Crown corporation, now privately owned — in you and your 
department’s opinion, Mr. Minister, has PCS, (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) was it a bigger contributor 
to the economy as a Crown corporation or now privately 
owned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I don’t think that was the largest 
part of the debate. We had an asset that we wanted to achieve a 
good value for if we were to liquidate the asset. It was an asset 
that we didn’t feel had a strategic position and portfolio. 
Subsequently we sold shares and sold our shares. 
 
I think if the member is wanting to enter a philosophical debate 
as to whether or not a mining industry should be publicly or 
privately owned, we’d go there. We can do that with utilities as 
well. But I would only say that we had in terms of that asset 
received fair value for the shares. We’re no longer participants 
in the corporation. I think Cameco is satisfied with that and so 
are we. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There seems to be 
some confusion; I was talking about Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And I don’t want to enter into a philosophical 
debate. I’m just wondering if the minister has any numbers as to 
which was greater, the dividends that PCS paid to the province 
as a Crown or the taxes and royalties that they pay now as a 
private company. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told there is 
really no difference in terms of the taxes and royalties that they 
pay, you know, in terms of the profits to the Crown and what 
has happened as a result of the sale of the shares and how that’s 
been applied to different initiatives. You’d have to ask those 
questions in Crown Investments Corporation because those 
aren’t details that my department would have. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Welcome 
this evening, Mr. Minister, and to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the restructuring that your government did in 
March, two departments disappeared and certainly there was 
some combining of departments. There was some cross . . . 
combining of responsibilities. 
 
During that period of time, your government had a press release 
indicating that in the Department of Industry and Resources that 
you were going to take a role in regards to forestry. I’m 
wondering if you could explain to us this evening, Mr. Minister, 
how forestry is now fitting in with your department, how much 
of forestry is now fitting in with your department and how 
much further you have to go into completing this mixture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can say that, you 

know, we’ve always had a very collaborative approach with the 
Department of Environment as it relates to economic 
development and forestry initiatives. And I think the member 
will be able to understand the not limited success but the very 
positive success that’s happened as a result of that — a billion 
dollars in investment, a lot in our backyard over the last two and 
three years. 
 
And so I would want to say that we work on a project by project 
basis. We have people within the department who are working 
directly on forestry projects, forestry initiatives, as it should be. 
We need to work with the Department of Environment as it 
relates to environmental processes that may or may not be 
required, and we work on an ongoing basis with them. 
 
And I would want to say that although FTEs (full-time 
equivalents) don’t flow back and forth, the thoughts and the 
ideas and the ability to work together is very much there. And I 
want to say to the people who work in the Department of 
Environment as it relates to forestry development, we very 
much appreciate the co-operation that we receive from them. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, my understanding 
then is . . . on this side of the House, we’d like to clearly 
understand this from your department’s point of view . . . is that 
. . . is the responsibilities your department undertakes in regards 
to forestry remain strictly in the area of economic development 
only? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well in terms of what happens in 
harvesting and as it relates to forestry related matters, the 
reforestation, those types of things, the FMAs (forest 
management agreements) and the commitments under the 
FMAs, that’s very much the work that happens in the other 
department. 
 
Our role and our focus is very much on projects and economic 
development and ensuring that we continue to bring the kind of 
successes to the province that we have in the last two and three 
years: some new sawmills some new value added, some new 
manufacturing processing. Hopefully we can be fortunate 
enough to secure another pulp mill and maybe some newsprint 
production. You know, that’s really our focus. 
 
The licensing and the regulatory regime is not part of this 
department, nor will it be. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, in your press 
release, though, in March, it clearly indicated that forestry was 
going to be falling under the jurisdiction of Industry and 
Resources. What changed in the immediately following days 
after that announcement that could indicate to us why forestry 
remained with the Department of Environment and did not 
move into the Department of Industry and Resources as first 
indicated in the early press releases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, nothing has 
changed. If you look at the blue book, there is three FTEs that 
have changed; $243,000 has come to the department. That is 
there. We’re responsible. And if the member is watching, the 
response in terms of economic development as it relates to 
forestry comes from this department. We have other resources 
within the Department of Economic Development as it relates 



2648 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

to forestry, and I think it’s working very well. 
 
(18:45) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Obviously I didn’t 
get my question across as clearly as I would have hoped, and I 
apologize for that. So I’ll try that one more time. 
 
Certainly in areas of oil and gas, in areas of mining and energy, 
all sorts of energy in this province, that remains under the 
jurisdiction of Industry and Resource. And so I guess on this 
side of the House we’re not clear as that forestry we consider, 
on this side of the House, to be a resource and why it would 
remain under, why it would remain, Mr. Minister, under the 
auspices of Environment. 
 
We feel that, on this side of the House, there is huge 
opportunity, and you’ve indicated that there are some 
possibilities that are being looked at by your government. And 
we’re not wondering if maybe having all resource sectors under 
the auspices of Industry and Resource might streamline the 
system a little more. 
 
So we’re a little curious as to why forestry, as an economic 
development opportunity, did not transfer across the lines, as 
first indicated in the press releases, and why it has remained 
with the Department of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, no, I think it has transferred as 
it was announced and as we understood it. I think quite clearly 
we’ve got the economic development component of forestry 
under the purview of Industry and Resources. So I, you know, 
think we’re quite comfortable with it. 
 
There may be some positive suggestions that could be put forth 
by members of the opposition, and we would certainly welcome 
them. I think our system works quite good. 
 
The member will know there is a lot of environmental 
sensitivity to resource development on both the non-renewable 
and renewable resource side. It’s our goal to ensure that we’ve 
got some balance so that you have the appropriate 
environmental watchdog agencies doing what they need to do, 
that we ensure that we’re doing adequate reforestation and 
clean-up after there’s been an intrusion, whether it’s into the 
forest or whether it’s into an oil producing part of our 
environment. I think we’ve got a good mix right now as it 
relates to economic development in forestry. 
 
And you know, I think time will tell. But there’s always, as I 
say, ways to do things differently. But we’re very comfortable 
internal to the department and we think things are working 
fairly well. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. I have one further 
topic I wish to pursue this evening before I’m done. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister, in April I believe of 1999 it was the 
former premier at that time announced that he would like to 
bring into this province a research and development type of 
opportunity specifically attached to the forest industry. And 
certainly over a period of time we’ve seen some debate take 
place surrounding that facility and of course we know at one 

time on this side of the House we understood very clearly there 
was some friendly competition between the city of Saskatoon 
and the city of Prince Albert as to who should attain that 
opportunity for R&D (research and development). 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I guess on this side of the House we’d kind 
of like to have . . . where Industry and Resources is at on this 
issue in establishing research and development opportunities for 
Saskatchewan and what city you might be looking at at this 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
say to the member opposite that the decision as it relates to the 
Saskatchewan forestry centre has been made. I think you might 
have been at the announcement, if I’m right, at the Elks . . . on 
the riverbank on the beautiful North Saskatchewan River we 
announced the establishment of that, along with our federal 
partners. 
 
Since then we’ve established a board of directors, the centre has 
been established and I think the fact that we’ve had private 
sector partners come to the plate . . . private sector partners sit 
on the board of directors to move the forestry initiatives along, 
look for opportunities to value add, and to do things perhaps in 
a very positive way. 
 
That centre has been established. I think the people of Prince 
Albert are very happy that it’s there. I know the industry players 
certainly are. And so the decision has been made, and it’s been 
announced, and it’s up and running. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. The . . . certainly 
the people of Prince Albert are very proud that this centre is 
coming to Prince Albert to some degree. The original 
announcement by the former premier is that this centre would 
evolve around research and development. 
 
And certainly in other areas of the province, if we can take the 
city of Regina we have the oil research park here, the city of 
Saskatoon certainly has the synchrotron. It has the Innovation 
Place — all this built around research and development which, 
Mr. Minister, are attached to centres of learning. Is it still on the 
radar screen that this so-called forestry centre is going to be 
involved in research and development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I guess I’d like to be 
able to clarify, if I could, the forestry centre is not so-called. It’s 
functioning. It’s operational. It has a board of directors. It’s 
housed in a building in Prince Albert. 
 
With respect to research and development, Forintek, which is 
the largest research in terms of forestry in Canada, is very much 
part of the research centre. They’re there. They’re working. And 
in terms of research and development in forestry, that is 
happening. It is taking place, and it will into the future. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, you talk about 
R&D, research and development, is taking place. And certainly 
I think on this side of the House . . . I wonder if we could get a 
little clearer statement of what kind of research and 
development, and you mentioned the firm of Forintek, I believe, 
is involved in this now, and certainly I know some people 
involved in that. 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2649 

 

Just what kind of research and development is starting to take 
place so that we can start to further maximize economic 
development in forestry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You 
know I just want to remind the member opposite that the 
announcement for the forestry centre was made just a few short 
months ago, so it’s very much in its formative stages. 
 
The goals, as it relates to the research centre, are to determine 
the nature of Saskatchewan’s forest, what kinds of things we 
need to do here to maximize valued-added and economic 
development opportunities; what we need to do in terms of 
silviculture, what we can do in terms of genetics, what we can 
do in terms of reforestation and how we do things better. That’s 
the nature of the research and development. 
 
It’s to have a Saskatchewan application to improving the lot of 
our provincial forest and to securing a very secure and a 
sustainable forestry development and harvesting pattern, and 
that’s part of what this forestry research centre will be doing. 
 
So it’s research and development. But as well it’s value added 
— looking at what we can do to improve on the number of jobs 
that we achieve with every cubic metre of forest that we 
harvest. It’s new. It’s been a long time coming. And I think it 
was the right thing to do, and I think it will serve Saskatchewan, 
in particular northern Saskatchewan, very well in the upcoming 
years, and I think it will end up being something that we can all 
be very, very proud of. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Certainly research 
and development on forestry in central and northern 
Saskatchewan is going to be a much needed and much 
welcomed opportunity. I’m wondering if you could just further 
clarify for me, Mr. Minister, in your department there must be 
some sort of thinking going on now as to how some of this 
research and development — just some visioning, just some 
visioning, Mr. Minister — of how this research and 
development could take place. 
 
Is it just going to be to some degree a collation of information 
that is already available throughout the similar forests in North 
America, or do you see this as an opportunity to become more a 
Saskatchewan-specific and a specific type of forest that we have 
in Saskatchewan, the learning, the learning, Mr. Minister, that 
could take place specifically with Saskatchewan type of forest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the department does 
not give direction to the Board of Directors of the 
Saskatchewan forestry centre. That’s why that board is there, 
and it’s I think a very positive board. It’s a good board, and they 
will be developing the vision. 
 
But I . . . just let me use one positive example. In the area of 
agroforestry, as the member will note coming from the boreal 
forest area of Saskatchewan, there’s been a lot of, I guess, a lot 
of agriculture land right now that may in fact be better suited to 
agroforestry, and it might be that agroforestry is very much able 
to give a larger rate of return, to be more environmentally 
friendly, but also to provide more revenue for the province and 
the people that own the land. 
 

So the whole area of agroforestry is open for, I think, some very 
interesting discussion and probably some very interesting 
opportunities. The federal government is interested in seeing 
that kind of an initiative take place, so we’ve got an interim 
board of directors. It’s a non-profit corporation. There’s been 
funding agreements put in place between the federal and 
provincial governments to ensure that the funding is there for it 
to operate. 
 
So in terms of vision, what’s the vision? I think a similar vision 
would be for all of us — create more job opportunities, create 
more wealth, doing it in an environmentally sustainable way, so 
that generations and future generations can benefit from the 
investment that the private sector will make in terms of 
capitalizing some of the projects for development at the same 
time ensuring that we’ve got a healthy forest. That’s, I think, a 
pretty simplified approach to what is sustainable but a common 
sense vision in the forestry centre will help us determine how to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just a few 
questions on the ethanol developments to wind up our time here 
with Industry and Resources. Mr. Minister, was Broe industries 
ever offered an exclusive deal to build ethanol plants in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Don’t sit down. This could be quick. Mr. 
Minister, was exclusivity ever discussed with Broe industries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could enlighten 
us as to the context of those discussions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well Broe asked for exclusivity, 
and in turn, he would develop four plants; and our answer was 
no. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Do you know now, Mr. Minister, if Broe 
industries is interested still in developing and building any 
plants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I would say, pending a few more 
attacks in this Legislative Building, I’m really not sure. 
 
I can say the Crown Investments Corporation is still, is still in 
discussions with Broe. They are very much committed to an 
economic development opportunity here in the province. My 
answer would be that I think they’re still very much interested 
in investing in Saskatchewan and building some economic 
development opportunities here in our province. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Would the member for 
Regina South, the member for Saltcoats, the member for Swift 
Current please come to order. Order. 
 
(19:00) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, has CIC 



2650 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) offered to 
partner with other private sector partners, particularly in the 
four original Broe projections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — If the member’s asking if Crown 
Investments Corporation has offered to partner with any other 
private sector developers, the answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Is the minister aware that there are private 
sector developers that are aware or at least willing to build these 
plants without CIC involvement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — None to my knowledge. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Then the minister is not aware that 
Commercial Alcohols was interested, at least before the Broe 
deal was in the news. They were interested in building these 
plants without CIC help and they had letters from their 
financiers stating that they were in a position to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to leave 
the negotiations as it relates to Commercial Alcohols to Crown 
Investments Corporation, with Commercial Alcohols. 
 
I could tell the member, as I’ve told the member, that the only 
financiers’ proposals that I saw was the Broe group of 
companies. Now that’s not to say that there may not be others 
out there. But what I am not about to do, and what I’m not 
willing to do, is get into a discussion with the member as it 
relates to exempting Commercial Alcohols, or any other 
company, from investing in this province. 
 
Our position is, has been, and will be very clear. We are looking 
at a proponent of at least 60 per cent in equity for the 
development of an ethanol plant if Crown Investments 
Corporation is to take any role at all. Whether it be Commercial 
Alcohols, whether it be Broe group of companies, or whether it 
be company X, the offers will be made the same to each and the 
same to all. They will have to be based on a good sound 
business case. There will have to be local equity investment 
opportunities available. Those are the base of the criteria. 
 
There will be no company excluded; all are welcome. And if 
people, companies feel that they would like to develop an 
ethanol production capacity here in the province without Crown 
Investments Corporation involvement, that is very acceptable, 
very welcome to us, and from us and by us. And that’s the 
position we take. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, do you think that a private 
investor that may be willing to build a plant say in Shaunavon 
or Weyburn without CIC money would see Saskatchewan as a 
level playing field when their competition in other areas are 
going to be 40 per cent possibly financed by CIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Premier, I got to ask the 
member this because they’ve been on two sides of this issue. 
One of the members, the member from Swift Current, says that 
there should be absolutely no equity position taken by 
government. That’s his position. And the other member from 
Cypress Hills gets up and says that they should be a loan 
guarantor — the government should be a loan guarantor. And 
it’s in Hansard and I can read it back to the members. But one 

says absolutely no risk; the other guy says you should do loan 
guarantees. Which one is it? 
 
You see because, Mr. Chairman, no one from that side has 
articulated the Saskatchewan Party position. We have 
articulated ours and ours is that if it is required in order to create 
an ethanol industry, we’re willing to invest public funds. And I 
can say that we’ve been asked . . . Well the member’s the one 
here. 
 
Our position is clear. Our position is very clear and it hasn’t 
changed and it won’t change. And that’s all I can say to the 
member opposite. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — No, Mr. Minister, my question had nothing to 
do with the member from Cypress Hills. My question was, do 
you believe that private investment would feel comfortable 
competing with Crown Investments Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you see here’s 
where we differ. We differ in that I don’t believe that the 
private sector is being asked to compete with Crown 
Investments Corporation. What has happened is the private 
sector has asked Crown Investments Corporation to take an 
equity position so that they can protect the 15-cent-a-litre 
support that this government has committed to ethanol 
production because they take the position that if government 
has an equity portion, that the rules and the ground rules won’t 
change. 
 
Now that’s the private sector position. That’s the private sector 
position of a private sector invest men who comes to the 
province with millions of dollars of cash on the dash. With cash 
on the dash, sir. Not the commitment of sometime, somewhere 
cash on the dash, but now cash on the dash for which we have 
said we wouldn’t mind taking a small equity component if it 
satisfies that uncertainty as it relates to the 15-cent-a-litre 
support that we’re giving on ethanol production. And we’ve 
also said that there needs to be room for local private sector 
investors and that we’re willing to take up to a certain amount. 
And if the private sector local investment community can come 
together with the equity, we will back out as they will fill that 
component. That’s what we’ve been saying. 
 
So in terms of competition, Mr. Speaker, the answer is, no, 
we’re not competing. What we are doing is we are willing to 
put some capital to the production and to the potential for 
production in order to attract the investment. That’s all we’ve 
said. And the offer is open to everybody. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Supposing that CIC 
does partner with Broe industries or Commercial Alcohols or 
some other group or entity to build one or more of these plants, 
does the government have any exit strategy planned? Any way 
to get out of this thing even supposing it’s a success? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well look, Mr. Speaker, if you go 
into an investment, you’re going to find an exit strategy whether 
it’s your partner buying you or you sell your . . . you sell your 
assets to another partner, whether it be local business people. I 
mean, that’s how it is. 
 
Was there an exit strategy on the Cameco shares? The answer is 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2651 

 

yes. We sold them. We just up, took a notion and we sold them, 
by golly. We waited till the market conditions were right and 
there we were, gone. 
 
So what’s your exit strategy? We’ve already said if the local 
investment community will buy in, we will take a lesser 
component of the equity than the 40 per cent that it would take 
to make 100 per cent — 60 for the private sector proponent and 
then the 40 balance. We said we’d back out as the local people 
will put money in. That’s what we’ve said. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, can you 
tell us, has any pressure been put on private groups or entities 
that were prepared to build ethanol plants to partner with CIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can tell you that my department 
pressures no one. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you know 
if CIC has pressured anybody? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can’t speak for CIC. You should 
ask them during CIC estimates. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, are you or your staff or officials 
parties to the negotiations between the private entities that are 
interested in building ethanol plants and CIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the discussions have 
been ongoing between Crown Investments Corporation and, I 
think, some of the communities. 
 
Some of the communities have talked with my department. I’ve 
met with many of the communities as it relates to their 
proposals and where they would want to head. I can tell you 
some of the communities have talked with the former 
department of SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation), now with Crown Investments Corporation. 
There’s lots of discussions ongoing. 
 
All I can say to the member opposite here is we’re going to be 
consistent in terms of our position. We’re putting a policy 
position together. We’re putting . . . the legislation has already 
been put through; we’re going to proclaim it very shortly. 
We’re working with communities in terms of developing the 
regulations. That’s our role and that’s how we’re going to 
succeed in developing this industry. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I believe 
that’s all the questions we have in Industry and Resources 
estimates at this time. I’d like to thank the minister for his 
answers and particularly the officials for helping us out this 
evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to take the 
opportunity as well to thank my officials and members of the 
opposition for their most enlightened questions. 
 
Subvote (IR01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (IR02), (IR07), (IR04), (IR05), (IR06), (IR03), 
(IR13), (IR08), (IR09), (IR10), (IR11), (IR14), (IR12) agreed 
to. 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Industry and Resources 
Vote 171 

 
Subvote (IR01) agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Vote 154 

 
Vote 154 — Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Economic and Co-operative Development 
Vote 45 

 
Subvote (EC07) agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 
Vote 171 agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to 
 
(19:15) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, we have a 
whole pile of officials this morning. Right to my immediate left 
we have Dave Phillips, who’s the assistant deputy minister of 
operations. To my right is Terry Scott, the deputy minister. To 
my further right is Bob Ruggles, assistant deputy minister of 
programs. Directly behind our deputy minister is Donna 
Johnson, assistant executive director for corporate services. And 
further back we have Art Jones, communication services; Ron 
Zukowsky, executive director of policy and assessment; Don 
MacAulay, director of parks and special places; Ross Barclay, 
manager of the program development unit of sustainable land 
management; Sam Ferris, manager of drinking water quality, 
environmental protection; Kevin Callele, manager of the 
allocation units, fish and wildlife; and Tim Kealey, senior 
manager and strategic planning of fire management and forest 
protection services. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, 
Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that your department has 
commissioned a report on replacement of firefighting aircraft in 
the province. I understand that this report has been a while in 
the making and that you and your officials thought perhaps that 
it would be ready for your department or for yourself, I believe, 
to receive by the end of last month. Could you please indicate if 



2652 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

that is in fact accurate, and if not at what stage are you at with 
report, and when can we expect to see it finalized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What — as you probably are aware — we’re trying to do is 
we’re trying to recognize some of the hard work being done by 
the fire suppression crews in the province. And one of the 
things that they’ve often asked us, of course, is continual 
training — having more staff members and having more 
resources and certainly having more abilities to fight fire by 
having more modern equipment. 
 
So right now one of the things we’re looking at is not only a 
provincial plan but a national plan being led by the province of 
Saskatchewan to try and propose a scenario where we’re having 
all these aspects being looked at because every province 
grapples at forest fire challenges every year. And Saskatchewan 
is preparing some kind of response that would have us, of 
course, be a participant in the national plan but to also lead the 
national effort by doing our own part here in the province. 
 
So right now CIC has been doing most of the work. They have 
the report now. They’re the ones that hired the consultant, and 
they’re putting all the information together for proposal to the 
minister, I would assume first of all, and then certainly going to 
cabinet and Treasury Board and that process as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, could you indicate who it is that CIC contracted to do 
the consulting work in this particular instance? Do you have 
any idea of what the cost of this report will be and will it be 
released to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well first of all, I think it’s very 
important that we recognize that the CIC minister will answer 
those particular questions. We’re heavily involved, of course 
fighting fires, and we advise CIC as to what type of aircraft that 
would work very best, you know, for some of the conditions 
that Saskatchewan forest fires do present to us. So the specifics 
as to who the consultant is and what the costs are, that would be 
an answer that I would defer to the Minister of CIC. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
could you at least indicate what the terms of reference were for 
the consultant in terms of developing the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is no; I 
can’t. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
along with looking at proposals to replace some of the aging 
firefighting fleet, there are also a number of other alternatives 
out there that I know that your department has discussed with 
organizations such as the Saskatchewan Aerial Applicators 
Association and different options that could perhaps be 
implemented by the government. 
 
Along the lines of the SEAT program, the single engine air 
tanker program, I know that there were some discussions, I 
believe, right around the beginning of last month. Could you 
indicate where the department is at in terms of looking at the 
single engine air tanker program? 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — What I’d point out is that we did have 
the opportunity to meet with the Aerial Applicators Association, 
and they gave us a video, and they certainly showed us what 
they’re able to do and what their capabilities were. And 
certainly a lot of very valuable information was certainly shared 
at that meeting. And I would point out that, as part of the 
ongoing analysis in the proposal that we’re speaking about 
today, that their information and certainly their abilities are 
incorporated in the report, and the review of their role also will 
be evaluated as part of this report. And so they will be 
intimately involved with the process. And again I don’t have all 
those details yet in front of me, but certainly their aspirations 
and their wish to be part of the process will certainly be 
undertaken, and the respect will be afforded to their industry. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I believe all of the fire towers in the province last year 
were condemned. If that’s incorrect, you can correct me on that. 
But has this resulted in any increased aerial surveillance costs? 
Are there other costs now that we’re having to absorb because 
of the non-functional fire towers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, I can also concur today with your 
statement that most of the fire towers we had, 50 out of 51 were 
condemned. And so therefore what our plan is, is obviously we 
needed to be able to monitor the forests and surveillance from 
the aircraft was certainly one of the best options available. And 
what our plans are is to try, as part of this whole process of 
evaluating the best way in which to fight fires, is to try and see 
the balance between aerial surveillance of the forests, if you 
will, versus the tower option. 
 
So that’s we’re doing right now is to evaluate which is more 
effective. In fact we’re looking now at putting six towers back 
into commission next year and trying to have a mix and a blend 
of both aerial surveillance and also using the towers to see what 
is the more effective way of monitoring the forest for fires. 
 
I would point out that, you know, there is incremental cost to 
using aircraft as opposed to towers but then again the aircraft 
certainly is able to respond very quickly. So there’s all kinds of 
value in both of the options available to detect for forest fires. 
And because of the process we’re under now, we’re trying to 
see which is the best way to mix and match both avenues to be 
an effective team to make sure that fires are being fought 
properly, and certainly to get advance warning a fire has been 
started. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, why were the fire towers condemned in the first 
place? What would the cost of refurbishing them in their 
entirety be? And what is your expectation . . . what is happening 
with the personnel who staffed these towers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well first of all I can tell you that the 
towers were fairly old. They are 40 or 50 years old. They’re 
built to standards at that time. And of course as time moves 
forward the standards get better and the information gets better. 
 
And we did have a problem with one of the towers and we 
certainly wanted to find out what the shape of the other towers 
were. And it was basically through occupational health and 
safety that we wanted to make sure what the conditions of the 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

 

towers were. So those were some of the plans to do the 
evaluation of all the towers. 
 
And we hired two engineers, two engineering firms to do a 
thorough assessment of the towers. And we found that 50 of 
them had problems. One was fine. But all 50 of them, there was 
some problems with them. So we didn’t want to take any 
further chances and that’s one of the reasons why we 
decommissioned them. 
 
(19:30) 
 
I think it’s important to point out that the employees were all 
offered the retirement option. Many of them were offered 
further training for other employment within SERM. Some of 
them were involved with the air surveillance options. Others 
were a part of the initial attack teams that were put in place. 
 
So they have all either been given a retirement package, or they 
have been incorporated in SERM’s other aspects of forest 
firefighting. So they have been taken care of as well. 
 
And the cost for the replacement of some of these fire towers 
can vary a fairly significant amount because, as you know, 
some places, you know, they’re a long ways away from 
highways and a long ways away from communities, and the 
cost of transporting supplies to rebuild those towers does get 
expensive. So I would guesstimate about $5 million to replace 
the towers, and that’s a fairly rough guesstimate. Again, the 
costs are varied, and that’s one of the reasons why we’re trying 
to do the analysis of whether a tower surveillance system would 
work as opposed to surveillance from an aircraft. And these are 
some of the things that we’re experimenting with and certainly 
trying to figure out. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, one 
of the combinations that you refer to there, that a lot of other 
jurisdictions seem to have some luck with, is that of a certain 
amount of air surveillance with the single engine air tanker 
program. And I believe in other jurisdictions, including Spain, a 
lot of the ag aircraft are actually patrolling loaded. So not only 
have they got the surveillance capability, but they also have 
some initial suppression capability as well. 
 
Is that an option that you would be looking at . . . is perhaps 
folding something like the single engine air tanker program into 
what was formally all handled through tower surveillance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — As we mentioned earlier, certainly 
looking at all the different aspects of what the planes are able to 
offer us. 
 
The bottom line that we’re concerned about is to have an 
effective forest firefighting team. And certainly, the single 
engines airplanes that you’re speaking about, their aspiration to 
be a part of the team is certainly going to be incorporated in the 
final analysis by CIC. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just 
very quickly, I would like to clarify going back to our 
discussion of the report that you are anticipating receiving from 
CIC. What kind of input did your department have into the 
development of that report into suggesting what it is that your 

department would require, and when do you expect to yourself 
receive a copy of this report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things that . . . The primary 
focus that we undertook in this whole effort was to try and look 
at the aircraft needs. That’s where the consultant certainly sat 
down with us and we explained what exactly is required from 
the aircraft that we would need to be a very effective forest 
firefighting force. 
 
As well, the person that was doing the work also evaluated 
somewhat the proficiency of SERM in terms of how quick 
they’re able to respond to a fire situation and they’ve done the 
analysis of that as well. So, however, the primary focus really 
of the consultant was to see what kind of aircraft we needed for 
the fires that we’re fighting. And I anticipate that document to 
be received by me within the next two or three or four months. 
And there’s quite a bit of work going on now so we don’t 
anticipate that to be here for another three or four months at the 
earliest. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, this 
morning you may have heard on CBC an interview with a 
farmer in my area that was quite concerned about what he felt 
was perhaps a little heavy-handed treatment on the part of 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management in 
terms of his ability to be able to go out and do some initial 
attack on a fire that was threatening his property. Now I know 
your response to that is that, you know, we do need professional 
firefighters out there. We do need people who know what 
they’re doing in those kinds of situations and we certainly don’t 
need to be endangering anyone’s lives. 
 
However, in talking to a former department employee this 
morning, I understand that in 1992 there was actually — and 
this employee actually was the individual that made the 
proposal — a proposal to your department that perhaps what 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management should 
be doing is that they should be going out and perhaps helping 
farmers with controlled burns — okay? — thereby giving their 
firefighters some experience helping farmers do some of the 
things that they need done, but at the same time the farmers 
would get that necessary four days of training that you referred 
to. 
 
And therefore what you would have is a very cooperative kind 
of effort on the part of the department, the landowners, and for 
all intents and purposes, you’d have this huge pool of trained 
people that could then go out and do initial attack on a fire. 
 
Why was that suggestion, that proposal, why was that never 
followed up on? And why is the expertise of people, like the 
gentleman who was interviewed this morning, why is that being 
ignored? And why is that in his case being actually . . . I guess 
sort of refused to the point where he found it somewhat 
insulting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
That was a very good question in the sense that we often get the 
question that we . . . that how could we help. Obviously 
Saskatchewan people want to help you and be part of the 
solution, and we accept that. 
 



2654 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

But what I would point out is that there is a lot of people that 
have taken training over the years, and one of the reasons why 
we get people trained is so that they know that they’re going to 
get, if they’re in the bush, they recognize some of the — or in a 
fire situation — they recognize some of the danger signs and 
that they’re able to respond very quickly. 
 
I would point out one of the things that is very clear here is that 
any time you get people involved with a fire situation, you’ll 
find that there is a lot of times it seems there is a lot of 
confusion — there is people all over the place, there is aircraft, 
there is ground crews, there is helicopters or choppers all over 
the place. So there is a lot of confusion if you were to look at 
the fire scene as it is. 
 
However, behind that apparent or the perceived confusion is 
actually a game plan. And one of the things we want to make 
sure of in SERM is that we account for every man, that we 
account for the equipment, and that we take into account that 
we have to protect lives and communities and so on and so 
forth. So really, there is a coordination issue as well. 
 
So one of the reasons why we sometimes don’t take the offer of 
local people to help is purely for training purposes and also for 
the safety of their lives. Many times, as you can appreciate, 
people want to stay back and fight fires to save their homes. 
Well what they don’t know and what I don’t know is the 
behaviour of fires, and many professionals within SERM do. So 
when they make a decision, it is foremost in their mind is to 
stop somebody from being burned to death or losing a staff 
member. 
 
So if we don’t let our staff members fight fires under certain 
conditions, then why would we also allow volunteers to be in 
that predicament. So that’s one of the reasons why on occasion 
you’ll find out that SERM does say: look, listen, we appreciate 
your help, but really your life is in danger here. We can’t have 
you here, so we have to deny you access. It’s not anything else 
but the protection of life that we’re concerned about. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why I’m assuming at this time, 
without the particulars of the details of the individual they’re 
talking about, why he wasn’t asked to volunteer his services to 
fight fires. 
 
What we do is, as you know, is most of our activities in 
northern Saskatchewan . . . SERM takes a great amount of 
effort into training people to fight the fires of the North because 
that’s where the primary forest areas are. And they take a lot of 
training. So you know that obviously is very key to us, is to 
have trained individuals to fight fire. So that’s one of the 
reasons why volunteers, while very much appreciated, 
paramount to us is the protection of that individual — whether 
he’s one of our guys or one of the volunteers — to make sure 
that we don’t lose a life. And that’s all it purely, simply is. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And 
thank you very much to the members of the Assembly for 
giving me leave. 
 
I want to introduce some of my family here with us this evening 
in the Speaker’s gallery. By special request, I’ve not been given 
request to introduce the adults. You’ll recognize one of them as 
my wife, two of them are my sisters, and the other one is my 
brother-in-law. But by name, the children I’d like to introduce 
first of all are my son, Mayson, and our daughter, Meika. And 
also with them are their cousins this evening, John and Kira 
Paisley. And they’re down here visiting in Regina, and I’d ask 
all members to please join me in welcoming them here to the 
Assembly tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Minister, I think no one’s going to 
quarrel with you in terms of putting someone in harm’s way. 
 
But in talking to this former Environment Resource 
Management employee this morning — the person who actually 
submitted this proposal to your department in 1992 — he 
simply suggested that there was a way that you could provide 
training to landowners in some of these areas that are more 
prone to forest fire, and that in effect they would be qualified to 
go in and at least be able to do initial attack. 
 
Now that would, Mr. Minister, appear to me to be something 
that I think the department should be interested in doing. They 
would expand your firefighting force by a vast number of 
individuals fairly quickly, and it would provide that 
co-operative working relationship at the local level between the 
department and the landowner. And I guess the question just 
simply, Mr. Minister, is why was this proposal never given any 
serious attention, and what is to preclude you from looking at it 
now? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well first of all I would say that in 
terms of us training some of the landowners that wish to be 
trained, obviously the answer is yes, we would be prepared to 
do that. And of course if there’s a large scale training 
component that’s necessary that may take some time, certainly 
we’ll look at those options. 
 
However I’ll point out that while we can train them to be the 
initial front-line volunteer firefighter that is trained, they still 
have got to part of a team. They’ve still got to know what is 
required of other team members and that’s why the initial attack 
concept is very effective. It’s a team of people that go into an 
area and they know exactly what they have to do, their roles and 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

 

responsibilities, and so on and so forth. 
 
So it’s much similar to a fire department in a city or a town. 
Each of the people know what they’ve got to do, they each have 
a skill, they each have a background, and they each are trained 
in certain situations. So you want to get a guy off the street to 
be able to be trained as part of the fire department in your local 
community, then he has to know what other people are capable 
of doing, he has to know what the dangers are, he has to know 
what the processes are, and in this case he may . . . it may take 
him some time to understand all of that. 
 
So while we appreciate in the analogy of them using of a local 
fire department, we appreciate that same volunteerism out there 
in a forest fire situation. They can be well trained to fight fires 
but they’ve also got to be part of a team. So there’s always two 
ways to look at the forest fire situation. 
 
And often I’ve told people that we get hundreds of ideas that 
come our way. And I’m not familiar with the report that you 
speak about, but we get hundreds of ideas that people that tell 
us get some more fire towers in place, get some more aircraft in 
place, get some more of this, get some more of that, do this, do 
that. 
 
Like it’s very important that we incorporate some of those 
concepts into the way we are trying to make sure we are 
effective, but by the same token, a lot of that advice costs a 
significant amount of money. So we’ve got to balance that off 
with the resources we have and with the proven technology and 
with the safety aspects to have a comprehensive forest 
firefighting strategy that promotes the protection of life in 
communities as being the foremost concern. 
 
So that’s kind of what we’re working towards, and hopefully 
one of these days that the resources will be there that we’re able 
to have more aircraft, we’re able to have more forest 
firefighters, that we’re able to have more trained people on the 
ground and that volunteer core that you speak about being part 
of the solution. We always constantly strive to achieve that. But 
that takes time and it certainly takes money, and we’ll always 
again try and push for that but these things take time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. 
Well you and I both come from areas where I think we both 
realize that the people who have lived in the forested areas all 
their lives probably know it better than anyone else. And I think 
we would both be doing ourselves and everyone else a great 
disservice if we didn’t recognize their expertise and their ability 
to be able to assist in terms of protecting and preserving those 
forests and their communities. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I would like to move on just for a moment. 
We’ve discussed at length the situation with the cost sharing of 
the firefighting costs in communities across the province. Now 
once again, I think a lot of this discussion was initiated by the 
Premier when he suggested that there were some costs that 
could be shared in the community of Nipawin, and subsequent 
to that there were many other municipalities and ultimately the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities itself that, 
given the amount of money that some of these municipalities 
have had to spend on forest firefighting this year, were hoping 
that the province would be able to provide them with some 

assistance. 
 
You have on numerous occasions indicated that a committee 
will now be struck to determine a resolution to this entire issue. 
Could you please indicate, Mr. Minister, what the terms of 
reference will be for that committee, who the members of the 
committee will be, and what the committee’s reporting 
requirements will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
As you know, we have been subjected to a number of letters 
and correspondence from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) about this whole issue. The views of 
SARM are very well known in the sense of what they want 
from the province. 
 
And certainly when we’re evaluating what we want to do to 
help the RMs and some of the villages and towns that have had 
challenges, is we also want to make sure that we encourage the 
responsibility on their part as well. 
 
As the Premier has indicated, he’s made a commitment and 
there’s no question about that, that this government will meet 
that commitment. We are going to be proposing, as I mentioned 
to the media on Friday, various options for the cabinet to 
consider, and we hope that process would be wrapped up within 
the next several weeks. 
 
And I would point out that when we talk about responsibility on 
the RMs’ part, really it teaches us a lesson as to what we can 
expect because, first of all, they’re absolutely right. It’s been a 
very tough fire year, and we want to sympathize with the many 
people that lost cabins or properties, or many of the RMs and 
the villages that have been impacted and adversely affected. 
There’s quite a significant loss that many people felt. 
 
So I think it’s important that we sympathize with that first and 
to recognize that they’re going through some very tough times. 
 
And the second thing is to also recognize that in the case of a 
few RMs, which areas that I have toured or the Premier has 
went to, we were both pretty amazed at the level of co-operation 
different RMs and villages afforded each other. So that was also 
very indicative of the Saskatchewan spirit that we often speak 
about in this Assembly, and how communities are coming 
together to fight a common enemy. In this instance, it was the 
forest fire, or forest fires that threatened their communities. 
 
So in recognition of those facts, as I mentioned before, we also 
want to put forward a proposal that addresses some of the RM 
challenges. 
 
And when you mentioned you came from a forestry or northern 
Saskatchewan background, living in a community next to the 
forest, absolutely there are many things that the communities 
should do and many of the things that the RMs should do to 
help alleviate the potential of loss. And some of the things, like 
public awareness, educating the public, perhaps putting in or 
building a fireguard, perhaps training their fire department on a 
constant basis, perhaps buying better equipment to fight fires, 
perhaps looking at upgrading their EMO (Emergency Measures 
Organization) plans. But all these things that RMs and villages 
and towns, we constantly encourage them to continue doing 



2656 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

their work, and that’s what we mean when we talk about them 
doing their part and us doing our part. It’s always a two-way 
street to make sure that we again coordinate and collaborate to 
fight a common enemy. 
 
So these are some of the things that we’re working our way 
towards. The committee of course consists right now of various 
people within the government that’s making a proposal, based 
on the fact that the Premier made this commitment and the RMs 
have been mentioning that they wanted his help. 
 
And as I mentioned before, the first rule, we respond by 
fighting fires, we empathize with those people that had a lot of 
loss, and the third thing is to put a plan of action in place to 
alleviate and to assist these communities in some of the 
challenges that they face in rebuilding their communities and 
certainly protecting them in the future. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just 
a couple other things I’d like you to give some thought to 
because you still did not indicate the . . . who would be 
represented on that committee, what the terms of reference of 
that committee would be. 
 
If you could at least give an indication as to when you might be 
able to provide us with the terms of reference for the committee, 
when you might be able to indicate who will be represented on 
the committee, whether the committee will be strictly an 
internal exercise or whether there will be representation from 
outside groups and agencies such as SARM and SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), and if you 
could at least give us an indication as to when you might be 
able to provide us with those answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well I guess this would be a specific 
. . . the terms of reference is to determine, of this committee, is 
determining what we’re going to assist the different RMs and 
the villages and the towns that may be affected around the 
forestry areas, to try and find a way to assist them, and how 
we’re going to assist them financially in covering some of these 
firefighting costs that they incurred. So that’s the only term of 
reference we have for this committee. 
 
And government affairs, SERM, as well as Public Safety and 
Corrections are the three departments that are leading the 
consultation and are preparing a documentation for presentation 
to cabinet. And as I mentioned, once cabinet has had the 
opportunity to look at this — we’re fully aware of what SARM 
is anticipating and hoping for — and that proposal will be 
forwarded to cabinet, and we should have an answer within the 
next couple of weeks as to what the province is prepared to do 
to assist these communities in meeting some of these costs. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — I will be following up with a number of 
questions on tree stands and baiting very shortly, but in the 
interim I would like to relinquish the floor to my colleague, the 
hon. member from Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
your officials, Mr. Minister. A couple of issues I’d like to ask 
you some questions on tonight, Mr. Minister, and starting with 
the legal action that your department initiated and followed 
through with, took the RM of Churchbridge to court. Can you 

tell me, Mr. Minister, what the cost was to the taxpayers of the 
province to take that action now that that court case is over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
would point out that we don’t have the costs within SERM. 
Those costs would come under Justice and we’ll undertake to 
have that information to you as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because I 
think as you’re well aware, here we are we’re dealing with 
locally elected officials, elected by the people of, in this case, 
the RM of Churchbridge. I think what we’ve done by taking 
these people to court to start with has hurt the municipal 
election process dramatically because who in their right mind 
would want to run for elected office when we have the luxury 
of the present-day government taking us to court for decisions 
we made on behalf of our people? 
 
And from what I can see, it being in my constituency, majority 
of the people out there, a large majority of the people, were in 
favour of what these people were doing in cleaning out these 
ditches. 
 
Mr. Minister, you yourself, as a past mayor of a community, I 
think know how hard it is to get officials to run for these 
positions. And when the chance of this . . . In this case I believe 
you took the RM of Churchbridge to court but also the reeve of 
that RM was named and others and found guilty because the 
legislations in place that would do that. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, how can you possibly justify taking people 
that are elected by local people and overruling that and saying, 
we know better in here than the local officials who are front and 
centre out there answerable to the people every day of the week 
where we aren’t always that close to the people? How can you, 
your department, take them to court and say you don’t know 
what you’re doing, we know better, we’re going to overrule 
you? 
 
And in fact in this case I believe it cost the RM of Churchbridge 
— and this is an approximate figure — but I believe anywhere 
from about 150 to $200,000, something that also the local 
taxpayers now have to pick up, pay for when times are hard on 
the farm. 
 
How do you respond to those people out there, Mr. Minister? 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. I would 
first of all point out that it’s very important that we point . . . 
that I make the observation that as a government, and as a 
province, or as a provincial minister, and certainly as a former 
mayor, it doesn’t give anybody any pleasure having to charge a 
local citizen or a Saskatchewan citizen. There is no joy in doing 
any of that. 
 
It is often nice, you know, that we undertake to try and work 
with as many committees and different interest groups to 
resolve some of these issues before they get to courts and that’s 
always an option. 
 
And sometimes, I think, what we let slip by some of the good 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

 

work that was done in a number of other areas. For example, we 
talk about the newly created Watershed Authority where we 
begin to work with some of the watershed authorities or some 
of the watershed systems in the province and to begin to address 
the water needs. 
 
And certainly, all the water that flows into this particular 
watershed, some of those needs and some of those challenges 
would be incorporated with the planning area of some of these 
watershed authorities. And I think that’s going to have a 
dramatic positive effect in the manner in which we 
communicate with people. 
 
And secondly, we’re also working, as you probably may be 
aware, with a paid easement pilot project where we’d look at 
what the land would generate for the farmer and negotiate with 
him to have an easement on that property to protect the integrity 
of the . . . of the ecological system that’s in place there, so that 
we don’t have a negative effect on the environment as a whole. 
 
So you look at the watershed authority planning. You look at 
the fact that we may . . . this paid easement pilot project, the 
fact there’s never any joy in prosecuting fellow Saskatchewan 
people. You throw all that extra effort that we’re undertaken 
here and, at the end of the day, as tough as it may seem, 
legislatively, we do have the duty to make sure we protect the 
environment. 
 
It’s always a very tough job to do and there are times where we 
have to go down the road towards prosecution. And certainly 
the prosecutor determines, given all the evidence and the facts, 
as to whether some of these people would be charged. And 
unfortunately, in this world of governance, there is that 
occasion that we have to and it does not mean that there’s joy 
on this side. I just say it’s a very tough job to do and . . . but we 
have to do it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for your 
response. But, Mr. Minister, to take such action someone has to 
make that decision to proceed with this and go to the prosecutor 
and say, we think we have a case here; we’re going on. And I 
can’t see no one else but the department or SERM themselves 
that actually initiated this, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, my side of the province has had a problem with 
your government for a number of years now. We go back to the 
Langenburg east C&D and I think we got the Smith Creek one 
now. There was drainage set up on that side of the province, 
Mr. Minister, and it was well organized. We worked right along 
the side of the Assiniboia River, which runs partly through my 
constituency into Manitoba and then down through Manitoba. 
This was a very organized, well-planned drainage system that 
we had over there. 
 
Mr. Minister, I had the opportunity to see what that area looked 
like after 7 inches of rain in a couple of hours did to the farm 
land out there. And in most cases in the province of 
Saskatchewan, probably we could do very little about it. 
 
On my side of the province, we have an easy out. A 
well-organized drainage system that once again the powers to 
be came along and put a stop to it, and initiated the Assiniboia 
Valley study. And where are we today? We’re no further ahead 

then we were 10 years ago, 8 years ago, 6 years ago. And the 
farmers are still paying the price over there. 
 
You put all your inputs into that land in the spring and one big 
rain comes and wipes out . . . I saw sections of land that were 
probably 90 per cent under water. Had we have followed along 
with and assisted in these drainage systems into the Assiniboia 
River, well organized with gates so it wasn’t all one big splash 
— same in the spring of the year, Mr. Minister — we could 
have made most people out there happy. 
 
I understand, and you know as well as I do, there was a few that 
didn’t want this to happen. But the majority of the people — a 
large majority of the farmers out there — were well intentioned 
and put dollars into this, Mr. Minister. So, Mr. Minister, once 
again these same people have no trust in your government. 
 
We also go further. Ducks Unlimited right now have been out 
in my area and bought about 16,000 acres — idled that land. 
That does nothing to help our small communities out there. 
 
And I know that’s not under your jurisdiction, but I’m trying to 
explain to you why the people on the east side of the province 
are fed up with government intervention into their lives, and yet 
the farmer’s left out there to pay the tab. He pays taxes on this 
land, and part of the time a good part of it’s under water. And 
big father government comes along and said, oh you’re not 
draining that anywhere, it’s not going anywhere; it’s your 
responsibility because we’ve got to protect the environment. 
 
Mr. Minister, at some point somebody has to stand up and be 
counted here. If you’re going to set the rules, then you have to 
be there for these people. Someone has to pay and it shouldn’t 
always be the local farmer. 
 
Mr. Minister, you did the Assiniboia Valley basin study. Where 
are we with that, Mr. Minister? Nothing seems to have changed 
out there. I was told a couple of years ago the study was on so 
everything was in limbo. Well now that’s over, I believe. Where 
are we now? Are we going to be able to proceed with our 
drainage or are we still stuck in the same old mudhole that those 
farmers have been stuck in for the last 10 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I think one of the reasons we stand here today and talk about 
some of the challenges is to make sure that we afford awareness 
to both sides of the issues, and certainly we anticipate and we 
accept the roles that opposition and government must play. 
 
The riparian lands that we’re talking about here are wetlands 
that really purify the water for the Assiniboia watershed area. 
And one of the reasons why we have legislative Acts is to 
protect source water. That’s one of the reasons why we pass 
certain Acts and certain rules and regulations in SERM. 
 
And when you point out that, you know, we’ve been trying to 
do this and this is what you guys done and big, bad government 
is doing this to the poor people in our area, well my argument 
would be is, that I’ve said from day one, is that there is no joy 
in us charging people in the province of Saskatchewan. But 
you’re absolutely right in the sense that SERM collects all the 
data, SERM collects all the evidence, SERM has a legislative 
Act that they have to follow. And that’s where of course Justice 



2658 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

then takes all that information and proceeds to prosecute 
people. 
 
Now one of the reasons why we have a court system is to 
analyze what you have made reference to as the big, bad 
government or father government telling local communities 
what they can or can’t do. And it’s up to the provincial court 
system to determine who is correct and who isn’t correct, and 
it’s not up to us to set the court system in place. The court is a 
neutral entity and they will decide whether party A or party B is 
right, based on the evidence and based on the Act and based on 
the issue at hand. 
 
So I think one of the things that we want to point out is that this 
has nothing to do with politics. It has everything to do with 
environmental protection and has nothing to do with control. It 
has everything to do with the courts determining who is correct 
and who isn’t correct. It has nothing to do with joy of charging 
Saskatchewan people because we’ve said unequivocally time 
and time again, there is no joy in doing that. So I think clearly 
those are the three points I would make. 
 
And the final question you had about the upper Assiniboia 
study, I understand that Manitoba and Saskatchewan and the 
federal government will be bringing down a report this year as 
to their final conclusions and recommendations. And one of the 
primary focus of that document will really be to study the 
downstream effects of some of the activities of this particular 
area that is quite sensitive. That we’ll be looking at and 
certainly trying to determine the best and the fairest case that 
would be possible to incorporate what the local challenges are, 
but certainly as well, to look at the environmental protection 
that is needed of this very important area that really protects the 
water source as it drains into the Assiniboia system. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But Mr. Minister, 
I think if you’ll look back in the last few years, what courts deal 
with is legislation. Legislation is brought in by governments. 
This piece of legislation was brought in by your government. In 
fact, I think the former member from Rosetown, Mr. Wiens, 
brought this legislation in. And I would suggest that you stretch 
that legislation to the limit to even be able to take these people 
to court in the first place just to prove and push an agenda that 
you have. 
 
Mr. Minister, I agree with you; we have to look after the 
environment. But we also have to look after the people that are 
out there that live on that land. And I would suggest that these 
people have been looking after that environment. They’ve been 
looking after wildlife for years out there feeding them free for 
everyone in this province to enjoy. 
 
And when this, something like this happens, I think it turns 
everybody out there against departments such as SERM. I 
would suggest to your department, Mr. Minister, that when the 
next municipal elections come along, maybe we’ll call your 
department and you can come out and help us try and find local 
people to run for these offices because I’m sure after what 
you’ve done out there, it’s going to be really hard to find people 
that will put themselves in that position for the fear they make 
decisions for the good of their people and they’re taken to court. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll drop it at that point with that issue. 

(20:15) 
 
One other issue, Mr. Minister, and I know you know I’ve 
presented petitions most of the session on a problem we’ve had 
at Lake of the Prairies, and I see the minister smile and he 
knows what’s coming. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think you’re probably well aware of what had 
happened at Lake of the Prairies. There was net fishing this 
winter. And I give you a little history on Lake of the Prairies, 
Mr. Minister. For the last number of years, local people — 
Aboriginal and white people — have worked very hard to build 
up what they have in a man-made lake out there, to build stocks 
up. They’ve built cabins. They’ve got a great tourist area for 
both Manitoba and Saskatchewan. And a small group of people 
came in and net-fished a very large amount of fish out of there, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
My question to you is have you been contacted, or have you 
contacted — in this case, SERM — contacted the Manitoba 
Environment Department or the Manitoba government, for that 
point, because I think, Mr. Minister, it’s a problem that we have 
on both sides of the border. Even though that the Lake of the 
Prairies is in Manitoba, there is a large number of Saskatchewan 
residents who have a large amount of money invested in there, 
Mr. Minister, and I think it adds to tourism for Saskatchewan. 
That lake that’s there, it’s a beautiful spot, a lot of money sunk 
into there, and it may be ruined if we let things like this 
continue to happen, Mr. Minister. 
 
Have you had contact with Manitoba, and if you have, what 
kind of information can you give me tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I think one of the most important things that we have always 
maintained within SERM is that conservation is something that 
is key to the reason why we’re here. And many of the First 
Nations and the Métis communities and the non-Aboriginal 
communities as a whole, one of the common threads that bring 
us all together is the whole issue of conservation. And we’ve 
maintained that in order for us to all be part of the solution 
we’ve got to be part of the team that works on that solution. 
And without having an Aboriginal component in the partnership 
and a role to play in the conservation then would be doing each 
other injustice in the province of Saskatchewan, both from the 
First Nations or the Aboriginal community to the 
non-Aboriginal community if we don’t collaborate. 
 
Now, in this instance I did get a letter from the Manitoba 
minister indicating that — and he’s a First Nations’ minister — 
indicating that he appreciates the fact that conversation has to 
happen. We’ve collaborated on this whole Lake of the Prairies 
matter. I understand that it was Manitoba First Nations that 
were involved with this commercial fishing exercise. We’ve 
collaborated with FSIN, we’ve cooperated with some of the 
Indian bands in the area. And certainly I think a lot of people 
can appreciate out there that the resource and the sustenance of 
that resource is so very important as long as we’re all adding to 
the premise of conservation, all the while respecting things like 
treaty rights, respecting that there is some opportunity for 
tourism opportunities for people. 
 
And if we look at both those opportunities and we manage the 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2659 

 

resource well then you can see that this could be a 
well-developed partnership between the First Nations and the 
non-First Nations collectively working towards benefiting from 
the resource that is managed well. 
 
That is our primary position and function and role. And we 
continue elaborating that with many of the people that we deal 
with. And in this instance I think you’re finding that both the 
Manitoba and the Saskatchewan government, who have 
ministers that are Aboriginals, saying look this is not something 
that we want to encourage. Sustenance is important as well as 
conservation so let us continue working on a path of educating 
people and discharging this kind of activity. 
 
And that’s exactly what we’ve done in Lake of the Prairies and 
we often encourage people to bring in the Aboriginal 
communities to deal with some of the conservation challenges 
and to keep outside of the tent, if you will, the politics of the 
day because that doesn’t do anybody any good. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m glad to 
hear that answer. Mr. Minister, I think we are fully aware that 
this doesn’t just hurt the white population, it hurts the 
Aboriginal community because they fish there on a regular 
basis, they have cabins there, they are partners in, I think, when 
the man-made lake was built. So it actually hurts that 
community as well. 
 
And we talked, Mr. Minister . . . you talked about sustenance. I 
think if that had have been the case here, that that’s all they 
were talking out, I don’t think there was a problem; because the 
treaties we know have to be honoured, and they’re part of the 
treaties. 
 
But in this case I think the estimates were anywhere from 
50,000 to 90,000 pounds earlier in the winter and the net fishing 
continued, Mr. Minister. So I think you can understand why the 
concern was there. 
 
So I’m glad to hear that you have talked to the Manitoba 
government and are working or at least talking about the 
problem that we have out there. 
 
So thank you for your answers, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question deals 
with Last Mountain Lake. A month, or probably longer than 
that, there was fish taken out of there, dead fish that were to be 
sent to be tested to find out what had caused them to . . . were 
they diseased or whether it was chemical. Has them test results 
come back yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I can point out that the fish samples 
were dropped off at the College of Vet Medicine and that the 
results as of last Friday, we still have not received them, and we 
are patiently waiting for the results. But once they are here then 
we’ll, as I mentioned, then we’ll share the results. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Isn’t that an 
exceptionally long time, especially dealing with this? It’s been 
in the press for I think it’s been a number of months, in question 
period. You think you would want these tests. I’ve had people 
basically come to me accusing the government of hiding this 

just until session is done. 
 
It’s an issue that you should be bringing forward, with the 
amount . . . especially with what happened there with the 
fishing derby — only 277 fish caught this year when last year 
there was 1,500. You had a meeting there of over 300 people 
that were concerned. Every week there’s more dead fish 
showing up. 
 
And my question to you, what is taking so long? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well first of all, for political purposes, 
it may seem to take so long. You know, one of the things I think 
is very important that’s been unfair in this whole process is 
we’ve said we’ll get the fish that people have collected and 
we’ll sample the fish and we will share the results of those tests 
with the public when the time arrives for us to get the results 
back. And the reason why I told you where we dropped off the 
fish so that you could check with them on the date that they’re 
dropped off and you can personally check to see why they’re 
taking so long. Now on one sense we said we would share the 
information when we got the information. 
 
Now one of the things I think is very important when you talk 
about Last Mountain Lake water — that member, Mr. 
Chairman, in that opposition, had been on a constant basis 
attacking the city here and saying Regina is dumping raw 
sewage into Wascana Creek. They’ve used an untreated sewage 
and raw sewage wording on a constant basis and that’s 
absolutely not fair. And by way of these estimates I’m going to 
send a copy of these estimates over to Mayor Fiacco and I’ll get 
Mayor Fiacco to very clearly explain to you, sir, exactly what 
they do with their effluent, how they treat it. The city of Regina 
has very high standards. They have professional staff in their 
effluent treatment place that make sure that they follow the 
standards, very professionally done. 
 
Now to stand here — and again we don’t mind criticism, we 
don’t mind accountability, we don’t mind a challenge to the 
system. All that is very proper for government to expect that of 
opposition. But fearmongering and not using the correct 
information, and actually picking up on, picking on the city of 
Regina and saying, you’re dumping raw sewage, that has got to 
be the most unfair statement in the world to make without 
knowing all the facts. 
 
So my point today is that the fish . . . or what you’re trying to 
make a connection at of Regina’s sewer system is poisoning the 
fish in Last Mountain Lake, I would say two things to you. 
Number one is, I would ask you to contact the mayor — and I 
don’t think you have — to see if they can take you on a very 
thorough tour of their waste water facility and how they treat 
their water. They do not dump raw sewage into Wascana Creek, 
sir. That’s the bottom line. 
 
And the second thing is when you keep bringing up this issue, I 
don’t believe it’s out of concern; I believe you’re on a 
politicized process. And what I would say furthermore, Mr. 
Chairman, is he has to write to every cabin owner, every cottage 
owner, every business person in and around Last Mountain 
Lake saying, I’m bringing this thing up so you guys have a right 
to know. And all the impact, the negative effect you’re having 
on that community, despite the fact that we’ve sat here and told 



2660 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

you there is no dumping of raw sewage, despite the fact that we 
told you we’re going to put a stewardship committee together to 
make sure that they were aware of the information, despite the 
fact that we’ve told you time and time again how they treat the 
effluent, despite the fact that the Last Mountain Lake quality 
meets the objectives we talked about for contact, recreation 
purposes, despite all that information, that we stand here today 
and we persist on knocking down that information, knocking 
down that industry, knocking down the city of Regina. 
 
And what I can’t understand, Mr. Chairman, is why are we 
going down this path. What is the purpose of this path? Is it to 
discredit the city, their employees? Is it to divide rural and 
urban Saskatchewan? Is it to bring down the values of some of 
these cabins and some of these business communities? 
 
Like what is your objective here? Is it to create havoc amongst 
all the different community leaders in and around the city? Well 
if it is, I’ll say your work is very effective. 
 
Now if your work here is today is to challenge and to hold 
accountable some of the surface water quality standards that we 
have, fair enough. If your objective here is to work with the 
communities and alleviate some of these concerns, fair enough. 
 
But I would say this, I would say this: if you want to do that, 
then contact the mayor . . . and I’m not sure that that member 
has. Take a little tour of their effluent treatment centre. You see 
exactly what they’re doing, and you will find, you will find that 
they do not dump raw sewer into the river, Mr. Chairman. They 
do not dump raw sewage into the river. 
 
And all session long, that Tory opposition has been accusing 
this government of trying to portray a picture of this huge pipe 
of sewer going into Wascana Creek and then dumping off into 
Last Mountain Lake. That is what his objective was, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And again, we don’t mind accountability. We don’t mind 
challenges to standards. But what you don’t want from that 
Tory opposition, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, is you don’t 
want fearmongering, political games, and misinformation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. Minister, 
we’re not attacking the city of Regina. We’re attacking you, 
attacking this government, for them fish were in there months 
ago. 
 
You want to relieve some of this? I’m the one that’s getting 
calls, wanting to know why them fish died. There was over 300 
people at that meeting, 300 people at that meeting, all asking 
the same question. So when was the exact date that you took 
them fish into tested? You’d think that if this government 
wanted to quell rumours, you would put a priority on that test, 
and the priority of them people, because them people out there 
just want answers. That’s the only thing they’re asking — is for 
you and that government to be accountable. And that’s one 
thing that you haven’t been on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(20:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I 
would point out again to that member and to that Tory 
opposition, I’ve said it from day one and I’ll say it again, they 
have fearmongered, they have spread misinformation, and 
they’re really making the people of rural Saskatchewan and 
urban Saskatchewan more divisive than ever. 
 
And I’ll point it out — I don’t know what the objective is here 
— we are unrepentant in the sense that we said there’s been 
some political games being played which is unfair. It is 
absolutely unfair to the city. It is absolutely unfair to all the 
different people that own homes around Last Mountain Lake. It 
is unfair to the people that have businesses around Last 
Mountain Lake, Mr. Speaker. It is unfair to the sport fishing 
industry, Mr. Speaker. It is unfair to Saskatchewan and to her 
people. It is unfair in every sense of the word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The city of Regina does not dump raw sewage, or what that 
member has accused this government of allowing it to happen. 
They never have, Mr. Speaker, and they never will. Now if we 
can indeed show that there’s better systems in place, and they 
mentioned ultraviolet treatment, if that option is certainly 
available and the city is certainly going to look at that. They’re 
always willing in trying to improve the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the effluent — the effluent that we’re dealing with here 
clearly shows that it is being treated — it is being treated, Mr. 
Speaker, and there’s ways and means and techniques, that the 
technique that the people that operate these waste water plant 
are aware of and not that member or that party. They’re the 
ones that are aware of what needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, and 
they are the ones that work hand in hand with SERM to ensure 
that the quality objectives that we’ve set up nationally are being 
followed. 
 
And certainly I think we should owe those guys a huge apology 
— and stand here today and say I apologize to the city of 
Regina for accusing them of dumping raw sewage into Wascana 
Creek; I apologize to the cabin owners around Last Mountain 
Lake for devaluing their property; I apologize to the business 
community for taking away some of the tourism opportunity 
around Last Mountain Lake; I apologize to Saskatchewan and 
to her people for fearmongering and playing silly political 
games. 
 
He should stand up and he should say, Mr. Speaker, I apologize 
for all the harm that I have created. From now on I will simply 
— I will simply — ask for accountability and the standards. I 
will simply ask for testing. I will simply make an effort to go 
and see the city and to visit the mayor and take a tour of their 
waste water treatment plant. I will do all this to make sure that 
we correct the injustice that I have caused. That’s what that 
member should do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In that long speech I 
didn’t hear the answer to the question so I’ll ask it again. When 
was the date that you dropped them fish off to be tested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the exact 
date with me but we will find out the exact date and we’ll get 
that information as to when to expect the tests for that member 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

 

sometimes this week. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One more question 
on the sampling there. I remember the member for North 
Battleford in question period had said he’d dropped a sample 
off, and his sample . . . and the resident was concerned about 
oily substance in the water. Has that sample been tested and the 
results from it been brought back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I point out that what we found out when the minister of . . . or 
when the member for North Battleford brought in the sample, 
he brought it in in a container that wasn’t . . . we don’t know 
where the container came from. 
 
And secondly, we’re not sure where the source of the water that 
he, that he took his sample from. And there’s a lot of factors 
that we weren’t sure where the sample come from. So as 
opposed to us again allowing a politician to dictate how we do 
our water testing, we undertook to test the water on our own 
and what we told that member is we would do an assessment of 
what we thought the water sample that he brought in had. And 
we done an initial assessment of that, and based on that initial 
assessment, there was algae, some suspended sediment, and 
some pollen. And as a result of the fact that how he collected 
the sample, we didn’t want to go any further than that, saying 
that we will collect our samples, and we will certainly do the 
sampling our way to make sure we get a good analysis and a 
good sample to work with. 
 
And that again goes back to my earlier point, is that we don’t 
know where the sample was taken from. The container that the 
member took the sample in may have been contaminated. 
There’s all kinds of potential challenges that we have in the 
manner in which he collected the sample. 
 
But what did that member do, Mr. Chairman? He bought the 
sample in and he took it to the media and showed it to the 
media, and said this is lake . . . water from Last Mountain Lake. 
And the last person to see a sample of that water was the 
Minister of the Environment — I was the last person to see it. 
 
So I go back to my earlier statement. What was the objective 
there? Was the objective to make the whole system 
accountable? Was it to empower the people of Last Mountain 
Lake area to make sure that their water quality was there, and to 
make sure it was there for many years? Was the objective there 
to make sure they’re engaged in a process, a fair process, to 
make sure sampling was done properly? Was the objective there 
to find some solutions to many of these challenges? Absolutely 
not. The only objective at that time was pure, petty politics. 
 
And that’s my exact point to this day. If you want to have a 
very thorough analysis in the manner in which we operate waste 
water treatment plants, in which we collect water samples from 
some of the lakes, then so be it. We accept that and we certainly 
want to see that challenge. 
 
What we don’t want, as we mentioned time and time again, is 
some of the petty political games that cost a tremendous amount 
out there in Last Mountain Lake area and many of the other 
lakes, many of the other rivers and streams, that may be 
impacted by many of the other communities as well. 

So I would point out again, Mr. Speaker, is that we take the 
work very seriously. We’re going to work with the 
communities; we’re going to work with the people that are 
engaged in this; we’re going to deal with the professionals; 
we’re going to do our water samples as professionally as 
possible; we’re going to share that information; we’re going to 
be accountable. 
 
And all we would ask — all that we would ask, Mr. Chairman 
— is that we would ask the opposition and the member of the 
Tory opposition to be responsible and effective in their 
questioning of the government and not being . . . and stop being 
politicians. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Getting back to his 
sample, I mean, and it may not be brought in in the right 
container. But did you . . . I take it from that ramble, which I’m 
not sure, did you go out right away and retest? And what was 
the sampling there? Did you test for chemicals there? 
 
Getting back to the fish, them fish are taken in over 60 days 
ago. Now if there was a disease in that lake . . . and I’m not 
saying it comes from Regina. The people don’t know. All they 
want is answers. So you’d think within . . . you would rush 
them tests before — if there is a disease in that lake coming and 
spreading through it — before the whole fish population dies. 
Or are you going to wait till they all wash up and then you’re 
going to make it a priority? 
 
You want to talk about us making a political about it. It’s not. 
This is just trying to find out the facts and that’s what the 
people want. They want to know what the test results were. 
They expected them test results to be done in two weeks, three 
weeks at the max — not over 60 days, and still maybe not even 
till the lake freezes up before you might even get an answer 
back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, on terms of the water 
sampling, we’ve tested five different sites in some of the beach 
areas, the south end as well. Some of these sites were agreed 
upon at the public meetings. We agreed to test the water or do 
some water sampling every three weeks, and there has been no 
unexpected result as a result of some of the tests. 
 
And I would point out that the reason why I shared with you 
earlier the information as to where we drop the fish off for 
sampling is . . . I invite you to call them and to find out what 
exact day we can expect them and we’ll certainly share them as 
soon as we get them. 
 
And I think the most important thing is that we have always 
since . . . or established a sense of urgency when dealing with 
some of these matters. So again, the fish sampling, when we get 
the information, we’ll share it. 
 
And what I’ll point out as so very important is that the 
communities that we’re engaged with right now, Last Mountain 
Lake area, they’ve asked to be part of the information sharing. 
So one of the things that’s very important is we deal with them 
as well and that’s one of the most important things. 
 
So if we sit down here today and talk about politics all night, 
we can certainly do that. However, if we decide to put some 



2662 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

solution to this whole challenge, then let us incorporate our 
partners. And as you went to the public meeting, you sat there 
and you listened, as I sat there and listened, and we allowed the 
public to air their concerns. And they come forward with the 
resolution; that’s fair enough. They want testing results. They 
want it done constantly and they want to be able to have that 
information. 
 
Well let’s take the politics out of it. Let’s have the pragmatic 
approach be installed and have the different groups and 
different people involved to find out the information, to share 
the information, and to give us advice. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as 
you are probably aware, there is a relatively large intensive 
livestock operation being planned for the Weekes, Porcupine 
Plain, and Bjorkdale areas. And I’ve received a number of 
pieces of correspondence from a gentleman by the name of Mr. 
Joe Homeniuk. 
 
Mr. Homeniuk seems inclined to believe that the various 
guidelines with respect to ILO (intensive livestock operations) 
development weren’t followed in this particular instance. He 
has some concerns about lack of appropriate consultation with 
some of the plans for the area to be . . . on which the waste is to 
be spread. He has some concerns associated with supply of 
water and is also concerned that there are instances where 
construction actually begins prior to approval. I think Mr. 
Homeniuk believes in some ways that perhaps the approval 
process is just simply a rubber stamp. 
 
Perhaps what I could do, Mr. Minister, is I could actually have a 
Page take this over to you. 
 
But if you could just respond and give some indication as to 
how your department has in fact monitored the project in the 
Weekes/Porcupine Plain area. And at what stage are all of the 
necessary permitting and approvals at? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I’m not familiar 
with the particular case that you have made comments on. So 
what I’ll do is I’ll undertake to proceed to have all that 
information be sent to the personnel and they’ll get back to you 
as to the particulars of the Weekes/Porcupine Plain project. 
 
But overall, I would explain to you that what we normally do is 
when an ILO is being proposed, they will take — the 
proponents of the ILO — will take to Ag and Food their 
proposal. And Ag and Food will certainly, you know, they 
certainly have rules and regulations and processes that they’ll 
have in place. And they’ll certainly review what the proponent 
wishes to do. And I believe — and I could be corrected on this, 
you’ll check with Ag and Food — but there is a component of 
public consultation that is afforded to the Ag and Food aspect of 
having this ILO proceed. 
 
Now what we do from the environmental assessment branch is 
Ag and Food will then turn the proposal over to SERM to see 
from the environmental assessment process whether there are 
any concerns. And we’ll certainly do that, our own independent 
analysis of this. 

And we also incorporate some of the public concerns as well. 
Now if we’re finding out that there’s a whole pile of concerns 
being expressed in one particular project, and it’s in the media, 
it’s in the radio, and there’s all kinds of . . . (inaudible) . . . 
information to that, of course we also take that into account to 
make sure that there’s a very thorough process. 
 
Next of course we also involve Sask Water because Sask Water 
themselves, I think, would be somewhat involved with the 
supply of water to this proposed ILO. 
 
And of course, we forward all our opinions under Ag and Food 
. . . or sorry, under SERM and under Sask Water, we forward 
all our opinions over to Ag and Food and that’s, of course, the 
final process that we’d be undertaken to determine whether the 
ILO would proceed or not. 
 
And again, I think there’s a mixture between the proponent 
having a public consultation phase on their own, and certainly I 
think Ag and Food may have some component of public 
consultation incorporated in their process, but I could be 
corrected on that, and that’s basically how their process works. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I 
think that Mr. Homeniuk would be very appreciative of you 
looking into all the material that I presented to you on his 
behalf. And if you could perhaps keep myself and the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena apprised of any responses that you 
will be making to Mr. Homeniuk, we would certainly appreciate 
that as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I could briefly turn to the outfitting industry. 
Could you bring me up to speed at this point in terms of what 
the department’s current policy on tree stands is? And could 
you explain how it is that the outfitting industry seems to 
believe that they are, for all intents and purposes, under attack 
here with the department insisting that all tree stands be 
removed over the course of the next couple of years? 
 
So perhaps, Mr. Minister, if you could just sort of detail the 
policy and make it clear in terms of what the expectations are of 
those in the outfitting industry with respect to tree stands. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
In reference to the tree stands, we have advised the outfitting 
association and the outfitting industry as a whole, as of 
December, 2001, that we would encourage and we would be 
enforcing the removal of all permanent tree stands by 
2003-2004. By way of the outfitting newsletter, we’ve also 
advised them of these changes. And we’re encouraging portable 
tree stands. 
 
And certainly there’s been a lot of advance notice, there’s been 
good co-operation by the outfitting industry, and there’s a good 
kind of collaborative effort in this regard. So I can point out last 
year, December, 2001, we gave notice that in the 2003-2004 
season that we would be discouraging . . . or we would be 
encouraging portable tree stands and would be enforcing the 
fact that we don’t want to see permanent tree stands as part of 
our natural forests. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
think that you are underestimating the volatility of this issue. I 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

 

have been getting a large number of letters and calls from 
people who are really angry about having to remove the 
permanent tree stands. 
 
And I guess, if you could, I would like you to provide me with a 
little more logic around that request. If you are going to be 
asking outfitters to remove permanent tree stands without any 
compensation, just on an arbitrary basis, how can you do that 
and not ask snowmobile clubs to remove their permanent 
signage, ask them to remove their permanent shelters? How can 
you ask one sector, one group, to remove something like a tree 
stand and yet, you know, you’ve got all sorts of other users of 
the forest, Mr. Minister, who have all sorts of permanent 
arrangements, if you will, in that same forest and they aren’t 
being asked to do the same thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I think it was . . . Understandably the outfitting industry was 
upset with the notion that we are going to be discouraging 
permanent tree stands. And the logic behind that is that 
permanent tree stands will begin to establish a sense of 
ownership of a territory. And there is many resident hunters and 
trappers and different users of the forest that see that permanent 
structure as a territorial marker, if you will. And what we want 
to do is discourage that because obviously Saskatchewan’s 
forests and Saskatchewan’s resources and wildlife are owned by 
all Saskatchewan people. 
 
So we can appreciate the fact that they’re upset with this, and 
the reason why is because, as I mentioned before, it kind of 
creates this mood amongst the other users that it sets up a 
territorial marker for the outfitting industry. And while they 
were upset with it we gave the outfitting industry a lot of time 
to prepare for this. And again, we are strongly, strongly 
encouraging portable tree stands and will be again discouraging 
permanent tree stands. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. 
Well I appreciate somewhat the argument that you make, but I 
think that you have to appreciate the inherent unfairness in it, in 
that you talk about a tree stand being a territorial marker. Well I 
mean there are all sorts of other fixtures that everyone from 
snowmobile clubs to you name it have in the forest that could 
be looked at as territorial markers as well. 
 
And I guess the feeling that the outfitters have here is that 
between this and a number of other issues is that there appears 
to be almost this systematic attack on their industry. And, Mr. 
Minister, they don’t feel very supported. And I think this is 
perhaps more symptomatic than anything but it is one area that 
really has gotten their attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well, as I’ve indicated, you know we 
can appreciate that they’re upset with the notion of us 
encouraging portable tree stands. But what I would point out is 
that the outfitting industry itself is an exciting industry. They 
generate a lot of good economic wealth for the province. They 
generate jobs. They certainly promote Saskatchewan and its 
beauty and all the resources and the wildlife that we enjoy as a 
province. 
 
So there’s no question that we appreciate and we certainly agree 
with you that the merits of the outfitting industry is something 

that we want to constantly encourage. And there’s other 
concessions I think, that you’re probably aware of and we often 
tout as well as our effort to assist the outfitting industry. They 
certainly have their lodges, you know, which in many cases are 
huge, beautiful lodges which is a credit to their industry. They 
have base camps that we work with them and to make sure that 
they have a good solid base camp in which they can provide 
their service. 
 
So there’s been a lot of good progress made to date and all 
we’re just a bit concerned about is the permanent tree stands. 
It’s, in our opinion, territorial markers. And we just feel that a 
lot of trappers and hunters and different interests out there 
really don’t want to see any kind of territorial placement of 
northern or forest or provincial lands by any particular group, 
and that’s one of the reasons why we’ve asked this concession 
back from the outfitting industry. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. 
Well I don’t think that’s the last that we’re going to hear on that 
particular issue. I’m sure that the phone calls will keep coming 
and the letters will continue arriving. 
 
Another policy of your department that appears to have the 
outfitting industry just a little upset is your new baiting policy. 
Could you give me an indication as to what the expectations of 
the department are now of the outfitting industry when it comes 
to baiting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I just want to, 
just before we get off the tree stands issue, I would point out 
that this is not just for the outfitting folks. It’s also for the 
hunters, that we’re encouraging them not to have permanent 
tree stands. And I guess I would ask for clarification from the 
member if he does indeed support the construction of 
permanent tree stands for hunters and for the outfitting 
industries, if he would clarify that on both those fronts? 
 
(21:00) 
 
In reference to the baiting regulations, a lot of people in the 
province didn’t like the whole notion of baiting. As a minister, 
we found that baiting wasn’t something that we should be 
overly concerned about. It’s the position that we took in support 
and in concert with the outfitting industry. And about the only 
two things that we’ve asked that they not do, for that member’s 
information, is — and these are the new rules — number one, is 
no person shall use as bait any noxious weeds or noxious weed 
seed as described in The Noxious Weeds Act, 1984 or any 
exotic plant as described in The Forest Resources Management 
Regulations, you know, as part of their bait; and furthermore, 
they should not use any carcass or part of a domestic animal 
other than domestic animal trimmings received from a butcher 
shop or licensed abattoir. As well the other regulation was that 
no persons shall feed wild ungulates between January 1 and 
July 31 in any year on land in the provincial forests, unoccupied 
Crown land, or land in provincial park or recreation site unless 
authorized by the director. 
 
Now the purpose of those particular three provisions in the Act 
is to . . . first of all, what was happening is the outfitting 
industry and many other hunters as well, they were using seed 
to attract animals to a certain spot, and sometimes it introduces 



2664 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

noxious weeds to a new ecosystem in the forest land and that 
wasn’t very good for the ecosystem as a whole. 
 
And sometimes they’d use animal parts from, you know, from 
other . . . from game farming or perhaps from some of the cattle 
operators or from some pig farm. They may use some of the 
parts of that as bait. And we’re saying you can’t use any of that 
because we don’t know where the meat is coming from, or 
whether the meat is diseased or not, so instead of getting 
ourselves into a whole pile of trouble, let’s make a rule or 
regulation that you should get your . . . any scraps you use 
should be from a licensed butcher shop that monitors this kind 
of activity. 
 
As well, one of the reasons why you’re not going to allow . . . 
we’re not going to allow feeding of some of the deer population 
between January 1 and July 31 is you don’t want to have 
unnatural congregation of deer, because obviously, as an 
outfitter, you want to make sure you have deer in your area and 
so you feed them and they’ll obviously come, you know, to 
where the food is. So that’s what we’re trying to discourage as 
well, is to have the natural migration of deer happen as it 
should. 
 
And those are one of the rules and regulations that we worked 
alongside of the outfitting industry on to make sure that baiting 
occurred but baiting occurred to minimize the introduction of 
noxious weeds, you know, to minimize some of the domestic 
animal parts that might be used to make sure they don’t spread 
disease, and of course not feed deer in a certain time frame to 
encourage congregation which is unnatural in many ways. 
 
And so those are one of the reasons why we’ve had these rules 
and regulations around baiting. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, it 
appears that we’re getting the signal here that our time is 
quickly coming to an end, so just very, very quickly I would 
like to ask two wrap-up questions, and then I believe my 
colleague from Last Mountain-Touchwood has a couple of 
questions as well. 
 
Could you just quickly give us an update on the chronic wasting 
disease situation in the province, and specifically how did the 
sample collection program that the department started last year, 
how successful was that program, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And again trying to be the thorough minister as possible I do 
have that letter that I sent to the . . . or the minister of SERM 
. . . Manitoba sent . . . or I sent to Minister Lathlin in reference 
to the Lake of the Prairies and that document is here. So I’ll 
send that over to you. 
 
In reference to the chronic wasting disease as I can . . . as you 
know, we’ve had three deer that tested positive and these are all 
mule deer in the Manitou Sand Hills. And we got 3 out of 5,300 
heads that came back positive and this fall we have three 
specific areas that we will be working on to try and do more 
sampling. And of course one of the areas is the Manitou Sand 
Hills and some of the other areas are the Paradise Hill/Hillmond 
area as well as the Pierceland area. 
 

So we’re going to do a little bit more sampling. But the bad 
news of course is we did find it in the wild. The good news is 
that there’s 3 out of 5,300 heads that tested positive. So our 
effort is to try and thin the herd out, to reduce the herd, and 
hopefully eradicate the disease and that’s always a tough work 
in progress. 
 
So that’s probably a best, shortest brief that I can afford on this 
whole issue of chronic wasting. And I’ll send that letter I sent 
over to Mr. Kaminski in reference to overfishing on the Lake of 
the Prairies to the member from Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, 
my last question for the evening. Recently there was a study 
conducted by a University of Calgary biologist, and I believe 
the gentleman’s name is Dr. John Post, and there was some 
rather alarming findings in this study, Mr. Minister, and his 
conclusion was that for all intents and purposes the sports 
fishery is in danger of collapsing. Now his study seemed to 
focus on British Columbia, Alberta, and I notice on some of the 
maps here, it did encroach into Saskatchewan to a degree. 
 
But the question, Mr. Minister, is have we undertaken any kind 
of a similar study in this province? Do we know what our fish 
stocks are? Do we have any idea as to how the fish will survive 
into the future, what numbers we will be dealing with into the 
future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
We believe, based on all of the information we got, that our 
game fish are healthy. 
 
We do a number of analyses of different lakes where we sample 
and test different lakes to kind of get a representative sample of 
how the lakes look. And these of course lakes are called legacy 
lakes. And so we find out how these lakes operate and we use 
them as a model for other lakes and . . . you know, if they have 
similar characteristics. And we can do a lot of good 
guesstimates as to what the fish population is like and how we 
can enhance and support the fish population. We also monitor 
the harvest. 
 
So these are some of the things that we do to make sure that the 
fish stocks stay healthy. And one of the most significant 
contributions I think over the last couple of years that, you 
know, if I may put a personal touch on this, is the fact that — 
well I haven’t gone out fishing — but more so I think the 
commercial fishermen and the sport fishing industries are 
collaborating much better. 
 
And as an example in Buffalo Narrows where the lake itself had 
some very tough challenges with the fish populations, well the 
commercial fishermen decided to go to winter fish only and 
now we’re seeing that the population of that lake is coming 
back really good. So the commercial fishing folks are working 
alongside of the sport fishing industry, and as a result of that, 
sustenance and, certainly, opportunity and conservation are 
their themes. And it’s working out wonderfully well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to the minister, 
I would just like to revisit very briefly the whole issue of Last 
Mountain Lake and the reason I’m asking these questions is 
because constituents have brought these questions forward. 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2665 

 

And basically your department has said that the water going 
into Last Mountain Lake is 14 per cent Regina-treated effluent 
— and I certainly agree, Mr. Minister, that Regina has a gold 
standard and I’m not criticizing the city of Regina — and 86 per 
cent of . . . the remaining 86 per cent is water from Lake 
Diefenbaker, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I’m asking over . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now if the 
member from Regina South will allow me to put my question, 
perhaps we can finish . . . conclude this very quickly. I’m 
asking over what timeframe is that ratio established? Like 
certainly I would imagine it would be impossible to control that 
ratio on a daily basis. Is it on a weekly, monthly, six months, or 
a yearly basis? Is that the time period when that ratio was 
established, Mr. Minister? The 14 per cent and the 86 per cent, 
is that over a year or is it six months, a month, or a week, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I can certainly report that’s the worst 
case scenario, the 14 per cent. As the flows are better, of course 
the dilution is greater. So that is certainly at the worst, and it’s 
during the winter months as well when the flow is lessened. So 
that is the worst-case scenario. 
 
Mr. Hart: — One final question then. So, Mr. Minister, it’s 
entirely possible during the winter months that the ratio was 
actually . . . of sewage treated effluent was considerably higher 
than 14 per cent because of the flow in the river system being 
down. And secondly, a second part to that question: did the city 
of Regina discharge more treated effluent earlier in the season, 
in the winter season as compared to other years, and more of it, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — You might want to clarify that this is 
treated effluent, and the effluent at a worst-case scenario made 
up 14 per cent of the flows. And again, I point out that’s the 
worst-case scenario. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to take this opportunity to thank you and thank all of 
your department officials. They’ve been most helpful, and as I 
indicated the other day, have demonstrated a high degree of 
patience with us as well. So thank you very much to them. And 
at this point, Mr. Chair, we have no further questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I’d like to thank 
the opposition members for their questions and certainly 
encourage them to continue keeping accountable the processes 
we have in place, and to thank the member from Carrot River 
for his timely questions and his good questions, and to also 
thank the officials for being here this evening. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Subvote (ER01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (ER02), (ER08), (ER09), (ER10), (ER03), (ER11), 
(ER04), (ER15), (ER05), (ER07), (ER14) agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 
Vote 26 

Subvotes (ER07), (ER10) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment - Forest Fire Contingency Fund 

Vote 72 
 
The Chair: — This is not an amount to be voted but if there are 
any questions at the time that would be now to be put. Seeing 
none we’ll move forward. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 
(21:15) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Learning to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Directly to my right is Mr. Ken Horsman, the associate deputy 
minister of Learning. To my left is Wayne McElree, assistant 
deputy minister of Learning. And further to my right is Mr. Don 
Sangster, executive director of school finance. And to my left 
and behind Wayne is Cal Kirby, executive director of facilities 
planning. Directly behind me is Mrs. Frances Bast, director, 
research and development, school finance; and behind me and 
to my right is Dr. John Biss, executive director, university 
services. 
 
And behind the bar we’ve got Dr. Margaret Lipp, executive 
director, curriculum and instruction; Mr. Brady Salloum, 
executive director, student financial assistance; Ms. Joy 
Campbell, the Provincial Librarian, provincial library system; 
Ms. Shirley Robertson, manager of pension benefits; Ms. Anne 
Bellinger, benefits manager, teachers’ superannuation 
commission; and Mr. Gord Sisson, director, financial policy and 
program support, corporate services. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, those are the officials from the Department of 
Learning this evening. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and to all your officials. We should be able to answer 
all the questions that I have tonight. We have lots of help, so I 
do appreciate the attendance. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a number of questions on a lot of different 
issues, and I’m going to start by talking about pensions, not that 
I have a lot of questions but I do think that I’d like to know 
about the costs in the next few years. I see that this year the cost 
of teachers’ pensions has gone from ninety-three thousand three 
hundred or . . . ninety-three three eighty to one zero five three 
ninety-eight. Can you give me an idea what they’re going to be 
in the next couple of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, for that 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

excellent question. When we talk about teachers’ pension and 
the current projections, we’re looking at over the next four to 
five years roughly the same amount of teachers that will be 
retiring, and the demands on the GRF (general revenue fund) 
will be roughly the same over the next short term. 
 
Where we find that the demands on the GRF will accelerate is 
when we get into the out years around 2015. At that time, the 
amount that the GRF will be required to contribute to provide 
its contributions to the teachers’ pension plans will accelerate 
quite substantially. 
 
So what has been discussed for some time, and certainly a 
recommendation from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
that we look at providing additional dollars at some point in 
time into the base which would then grow and also level out 
some of that curve in the out-years. We’re not at the point at 
this particular budget where we’ve dealt with that particular 
problem. We do have some breathing room over the next few 
years as the projections in the short-term are pretty much for 
where we’re at with the GRF at this point in time. Thank you, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. Can you 
tell me what will be the highest amount that you’re projecting 
by the year 2000 and I think you said 11 to 14? What will be the 
amount that will come out of the GRF at that time, if there isn’t 
anything put in during this time period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, if we work with constant 
1999 dollars, it will peak in the year 2023 with the GRF 
requirement of 138.7 million. Of course in nominal dollars that 
would be higher, but in constant 1999 dollars it would be 
equivalent to 138.7 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Just for the record, can you tell me what the 
nominal dollars will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — In actual dollars for the year 2025, 
that would be 297.5 million. In nominal dollars for 2023 the 
actuarial analysis would put that at 138.7. So those are the exact 
numbers as determined by our actuaryist. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I had an opportunity to attend 
Public Accounts a while ago and I’m sorry I don’t have the 
graph that you had at that time. Perhaps if you have the 
opportunity you can send me a copy of it. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was a number of issues that affect the 
people of the province and when we talk about education or the 
learning, probably the one on everybody’s mind right now 
when it comes to K to 12 education is the teachers’ contract, 
and we discussed it at the last estimates. But I think that with 
the summer bit of a break on right now there’s people that are 
saying, okay what is really going to be happening and how 
quickly are we going to be able to get the contract settled. 
 
The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and the 
STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) are talking about not 
just the dollars but the new matters that are on the table, and the 
concern that they have is paying for it. 
 

Mr. Minister, when we discussed a while ago the opportunity or 
the responsibility of the government to pay for this additional 
funding, because it can’t be looked at in this year’s budget, it 
has been a question that your department has managed to put 
off. Can you tell me right now if your department has been . . . 
is going to commit to the additional dollars that it’s going to 
take to cover the teachers’ contract for this year until the 
budgets can be figured out next year with the new dollars that 
will be required to fulfill the contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well certainly, Mr. Chair, this is 
something that we’re taking very seriously. When we look at 
teacher bargaining, the current teachers’ contract will be up at 
the end of August of this year. This year there was a 2 per cent 
increase on January 1 for teachers, and we budgeted for an 
additional 1 per cent on top of that for September 1. 
 
We have also stated that the meetings have been going well, 
and they have been. A number of issues have been discussed at 
the table. Certainly issues with regard to numbers in terms of 
how that would be applied to a grid of course have not been 
substantiated to this point in time. 
 
Subsequently the Teachers’ Federation has asked for 
conciliation and this has been granted, and I understand that 
conciliation meetings will be beginning around mid-August in 
anticipation of a conciliation report by probably late August. 
The decision . . . once of course the bargaining has finished at 
the table and there is a tentative agreement, once that agreement 
is ratified, what we have committed to is to look very seriously 
at that agreement and crunch the numbers. We certainly haven’t 
ruled out anything. 
 
When we look at the history of provincial bargaining with 
teachers, there has only been one occasion in the past 30 years 
where the provincial government did not meet the entire cost of 
that teacher salary obligation. So what I can say today is that in 
the past there are numerous precedents for covering that, and 
what we have said is that we will look at that very seriously 
once we have the numbers before us. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, sounds to me like you . . . 
(inaudible) . . . going to come out and commit that you’re going 
to cover the funding. 
 
But I do think, as we go into the holiday season and the fact that 
the trustees and the boards across this province need to have 
some sort of feeling to go back on, knowing that their 
department is going to be behind them. 
 
We know that the negotiating team is set out with five 
government members and four trustees, which means that the 
government is going to be basically making the decision and 
going to the school boards to ask for the payment. We have a 
number of school boards that have zero grab positions and we 
have a large number of them that are paying by far the biggest 
percentage of the teachers’ salary cost. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, is there any kind of statement you can make 
to the, to the school boards across the province to let them know 
that you’re accepting your responsibility for these contract 
negotiations? 
 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

 

And I know you talked about covering 100 per cent of the 
salary cost, but that’s only for school boards that are, that are 
actually going to be getting the benefit of a full grant from the 
government. There’s many school boards that do not receive 
that benefit. And besides that, there are additional benefits in 
support staff that are going to require funding as well. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what kind of a statement can we give to the 
school boards across this province to let them know that your 
government feels they are responsible for the negotiations that 
are going on at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, when we, when we look 
at the amount of dollars that have gone into the foundation 
operating grant since 1999 on a calendar year basis, in 1999, 
there were three . . . there was $397.5 million that was included 
in the foundation operating grant. This year, we’re a little over 
477 million. That’s an $80 million increase in three short 
budget years that is very much, very much exceeds the rate of 
inflation and is more in the 20 per cent range. 
 
When you look at the amount of dollars that we have put into 
the foundation operating grant, this provincial government has 
increased significantly the dollars that we are providing to 
school boards across the province. When we talk about the 
number of dollars that are going in, we recognize that with 
reassessment and the new assessment numbers that came out in 
2001, that there has been some substantive increases in the 
value of some commercial enterprises, but in farm land in 
particular, to the point where some of the school divisions now 
with a very large assessment base receive no grant because it is 
an equalization formula. 
 
(21:30) 
 
So we’re looking at somewhere in the range, I think, of 12 to 14 
school divisions that will receive no grant. And we’re looking at 
probably more school divisions next year. 
 
So that is an equity issue. If we even put the dollars into our 
foundation operating grant on an increased basis that exceeded 
the rate of inflation, those school boards would likely not get 
any dollars. But we also recognize that with declining 
enrolment in rural Saskatchewan that some of these school 
divisions now are approaching a million dollars of assessment 
per student and running mill rates that are substantially lower 
than their neighbours. So this really is an equity issue, and what 
we would like to do is have an equalization formula that 
provides grant dollars to every school division so that we could 
all benefit from this at some point in time. 
 
So the point that I’d like to make to the member opposite is that 
even if we agreed to cover all of the costs of the teachers’ salary 
increase, that would be provided on the same basis as the 
foundation operating grant has always provided through special 
warrant. And these school divisions that are high-assessment 
school divisions would probably not receive any grant. 
 
Now I’m aware that the School Trustees Association would like 
to see that done differently, but the reality of the day is that this 
is a long-standing recommendation from the external reference 
committee which has membership from SASBO (Saskatchewan 
Association of School Business Officials), from the SSTA, 

from the STF, and from the department, and from LEADS 
(League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents). 
 
So all I can say at this point in time is that we are committed to 
look at the numbers, and how we apply those numbers we 
haven’t determined at this point in time. So we are open to it. 
So to just assure the member opposite that we haven’t locked in 
any pre-conditions at this point in time. We have basically said 
that we will look at those numbers. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
and welcome to your officials. 
 
Just following that line a little bit, and I want to refer to an 
experience that I’m becoming aware of in the Lloydminster area 
with the Battle River School Division and the Lloydminster 
School Division. As you are aware, the Battle River School 
Division is one of those school divisions you referred to that has 
an assessment, although they don’t like it, but the assessment 
results in a zero grant for the operation of those schools. 
 
And this may not be different than other cities . . . or cities in 
the province that have students going into the schools from the 
rural areas around them. But in the Battle River School Division 
there is quite a substantial number of students that have 
traditionally gone into Lloydminster and when there was grants 
it kind of evened out and it worked very well. Now the Battle 
River School Division doesn’t have the grants and so the 
students aren’t eligible to go into Lloyd unless tuition is being 
paid. 
 
Having said all that, that’s a bit of a preamble to the real 
problem. The problem that the Battle River School Division and 
Lloydminster School Division have identified is the assessment 
within the region just around the city. And they have come up 
with a solution to the problem that if the assessment area of the 
Battle River School Division could absorb some of the 
industrial sites around Lloydminster, the increased assessment 
would help them offset the costs of the tuition and they would 
continue then to allow the students to come in. 
 
The city itself . . . the city public school division agrees with 
that and the Battle River School Division feels that that is a 
solution, and on that basis they’ve made a submission to 
yourself and your department to recognize a change of 
boundary. Can you tell me if that is being considered, where it’s 
at at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, I am aware of 
the situation in Battle River and Lloydminster with regard to the 
upgrader. Now the upgrader is a commercial enterprise that has 
a significant value and of course a very high assessment. 
 
The problem we have in terms of how we would apply the 
foundation operating grant in that scenario is that we have 99 
school divisions. And if we were to shift the assessment from 
the upgrader from the city of Lloydminster to the surrounding 
rural community of Battle River, then what that would 
essentially do is take dollars away from those other 97 school 
divisions and preferentially put them into that area. 
 
And that’s the problem when we talk about equity because that 



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

would mean, if we’ve got a big pipeline distribution just outside 
of Weyburn, would the city of Weyburn rather have that or 
would the rural Weyburn, central? And one of the things that 
the external reference committee is looking is ways that we can 
provide a more equitable distribution in terms of how we look 
at assessment in the province of Saskatchewan without actually 
changing . . . like making it fair. 
 
We haven’t come up with any solutions at this point in time, but 
we are working on it. And what I have said is that I wouldn’t 
approve the transfer of the assessment of the upgrader from the 
city of Lloydminster to Battle River. But the whole question of 
assessment within the province of Saskatchewan is an issue that 
we will need to deal with. 
 
Certainly some of the incentives we’re doing now with school 
division amalgamations will provide some of that buffering, but 
the reality of the day is that as we go on, we’re going to find 
that areas of development tend to occur in areas of development 
and that those assessment areas are going to increase, and the 
number of zero grant boards will eventually get to the point 
where they may be half of the school divisions. 
 
And at that point in time of course the equalization formula just 
doesn’t work. So what we’re trying to do is sort out a way 
where we would . . . every school board would get some grant, 
and that way then the foundation operating grant principles of 
equity and opportunity — no matter where you are in 
Saskatchewan that you will have an equitable opportunity to a 
quality education — would apply. 
 
And we certainly would like to renew some of these objectives, 
and we don’t have a solution at this point in time. But that’s 
part of the reason why I think that that would start a precedent 
that perhaps we would see snowball in quite a few other 
jurisdictions, and it wouldn’t really solve the global problem 
that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In Alberta of course when they were faced with a series of 
developments on one side of the province with much less 
development in terms of the lack of acceleration, the provincial 
government in Alberta said, we will look at the assessment of 
the province on a global basis and basically then provide all of 
the dollars in a grant process to school boards, except for the 
small proviso that the Catholic boards in Alberta were still 
allowed an opportunity to access the local tax base. 
 
But I’m not looking at any of these particular solutions. There’s 
a range of them at this point in time, but there has been no 
recommendation come forward on how we might deal with this 
equity issue. 
 
And that does lead more even into the global discussion of how 
we fund K to 12 education and the 60/40 split and what’s the 
right number, but certainly I know that the members opposite 
may have more questions related to that. 
 
But specifically with regard to Battle River and Lloydminster, I 
think I have sent the letter out to both of those school boards 
now indicating that I would not support the movement of the 
upgrader from Lloydminster to Battle River. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, just a follow-up. The solution 

that they arrived at there is really a solution in a unique, rather a 
unique situation. Wherever there’s administrations from both 
provinces trying to be implemented in one area, it always 
causes some rather unique situations. 
 
So in this case a unique solution was arrived at by both the city 
of Lloydminster . . . or the public school division of 
Lloydminster and the Battle River School Division. And they of 
course applied for an attendance area adjustment. And it was 
my understanding — I may be wrong — but it’s my 
understanding that whenever there is that kind of an application 
and both parties agree, it has in the past always been granted. 
 
In this case if it’s not granted for some extraneous reason of 
equitability across the province that really doesn’t apply to this 
unique situation, then I think you’re jeopardizing the ability of 
some of these students that have been going to school in 
Lloydminster from the rural area to continue going on there 
without having to pay a very large tuition. And I can’t think that 
that is a very equitable situation for them as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly when we looked 
at the provincial perspective, this is not an extraneous issue 
from the provincial context. If we were to transfer that large, 
huge piece of assessment from a board that already receives 
grant and we transfer it over to a zero grant board that receives 
no grant, what we’ve done, in essence, then has increased the 
grant pool going to Lloydminster to the detriment of 97 other 
school divisions. 
 
So the reality is that you can’t look at these in isolation from the 
rest of the provincial context, and what we’re looking at is a 
provincial solution that would address some of the unique 
circumstances in the Lloydminster/Battle River area. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, this is going to cause great concern in the 
Lloydminster area, and I know that with meeting with them, 
they did look at the issue as something that’s working in their 
area. I know that part of your policy and part of the Role of the 
School issue is to talk about how communities can work . . . can 
coincide, and recognition that a community is important based 
on not just the school system, but all the other facets of the 
community. 
 
And I would think that the department making a decision like 
this when the local people are really in favour of it on both sides 
of it is really taking the control out of the hands of the local 
people, which is something that your government and your 
SchoolPLUS report is saying that you shouldn’t be doing. So I 
know that your department says the big picture issue is what 
your area is, but you’re putting a really unfair burden on the 
local people. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would be wondering if these local people are 
going to be able to have a chance to come and talk to you and 
say, hey, I think you made a decision here that’s going to be 
detrimental to our students. And will you meet with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, again, we have 
to look at the provincial perspective. But when we talk about 
local issues and we talk about communities, I just wanted to let 
the members opposite know that we have received 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

 

representation via letter from the rural municipality, who is 
strongly opposed to the movement of that assessment from 
Lloydminster to Battle River. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, my question is, will you meet 
with these school divisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, I don’t have 
any problem meeting with the school divisions, and hopefully, 
we can — because this is an issue in many other school 
divisions — that we can come up with a final solution at some 
point in time. 
 
But I’m more than willing to hear their concerns and discuss 
some of the issues and provide the rationale from the 
department in terms of the global perspective that we’re looking 
at with regard to assessment and equalization in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, our questions here this evening 
seem kind of scattered because when the answers that I receive 
from you actually lead into other questions and seem to be 
getting me off track . . . And I should warn you that I have a 
whole array of questions so we are going to be extending our 
time period here by some of the responses that you’ve given. 
 
But there was two issues that I have to address and one of them 
was you talked about the increase in the value of farm land and 
thus making the school divisions higher assessed, and meaning 
that there’d be more money locally to pay for education. Mr. 
Minister, you’ve been sitting in the House all session and 
hearing us talk about the number of areas of this province that 
are really depressed with the drought, and even some areas of 
the province that have too much rain, but most of the area, most 
of the province has a drought situation. 
 
And the value of the farm land is set by SAMA, by some board 
that’s decided this is what the actual value is. That’s not the 
cash value, that’s not the kind of input, that’s not the 
opportunity that people have for cash from that land. So telling 
them that you have highly assessed farm land, which means you 
can pay for 60 per cent or more of education, is not something 
that farmers are wanting to hear right now when they know very 
well that their opportunity for income off that land this year is 
very, very low. 
 
So to sit here and say that this is something that farmers can 
afford to do because of the value of their land isn’t something 
that makes any sense, and I’m sure that the minister is well 
aware that this is going to be causing a big concern. We have to 
have some assurance that we’re not just going to plunk 
additional costs on to people who cannot afford to pay 1 cent 
more in taxes by saying, this is the way it’s always been done. 
 
Mr. Minister, I had an opportunity to talk with the SSTA and 
they said that in years where the budget or where the teacher 
negotiations take place during the year, and extra budget 
requirements are required during the year, we should be . . . 
have some assurance that the government is going to carry the 
costs of that salary increase and the benefits and the support 
staff until we have an opportunity to go back to our people and 

decide how we’re going to deal with this area. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, is there anything that you are thinking that 
your department is considering to actually alleviate some of the 
problems that we know are going to be coming by the end of 
August when it comes to fulfilling the requirements of paying 
for this teachers’ contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you to the member 
opposite, Mr. Chair. Certainly this is the issue when we talk 
about the increases on the assessment values of farm land. 
 
One of the things to consider — and I think that certainly the 
members opposite would be aware of this — is that with the 
reassessment in 2001, the values of farm land did increase 
substantially. But they were also adjusted through local market 
indices that it is my understanding that SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) has now made a 
recommendation that these will be moved out of the picture and 
that there will be more revenue-sensitive instruments used in 
assessing farm land for the 2005 assessment. 
 
I also — and I’m sure members opposite are aware of this as 
well — is that with the 2002 assessment that the percentage of 
value that the provincial government has applied to cultivated 
land has dropped from 70 to 55 per cent. And if we look at that 
drop of 70 to 55 per cent in terms of the percentage of value 
that is looked at for assessment and compare that to all other tax 
categories, commercial/industrial is taxed at 100 per cent; a 
residence in Saskatoon or Regina or P.A. (Prince Albert) or 
Moose Jaw is taxed at 70 per cent; cultivated land is taxed at 55 
per cent; pasture is taxed at 50 per cent; and all of the building 
improvements, farm buildings are not taxed because of 
331(i)(q). 
 
If we would not have dropped the 70 to the 55 per cent on farm 
land, that would have been over 20 to $25 million of 
assessment. So in essence, when we eliminated the . . . well we 
basically kept our commitment for the two-year 25 million 
rebate. That’s almost equivalent to the 70 to 55, except that is 
now built into the base. That’s an ongoing factor and certainly 
is a benefit that everyone receives. Even though the assessment 
increased the number of dollars that was coming from ag land, 
the actual amount that would have come from 70 per cent 
would have been considerably higher. 
 
It’s a little bit . . . I know it’s quite complicated, but the member 
opposite did ask with regard to that. 
 
Now she asked again about the specific requests with regard to 
covering the teachers’ contract. And what I’m prepared to say 
of course is that I am willing to look at those numbers and I’m 
willing to move those numbers forward to Treasury Board and 
cabinet for their consideration. And certainly at this point in 
time I can’t commit to anything more than saying that I will be 
prepared to move those numbers forward so that the 
government can decide on whether we’re going to cover that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, as the minister responsible for 
education and the one that the school boards and the parents and 
the teachers of this province are looking to to ensure that 
education is a real priority, I really would prefer it . . . I’m sure 
they’d prefer to hear you say, yes we’re going to . . . we’re 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

going forward with this. And I’m going to really hope that this 
government . . . I’m going to do my utmost to make sure this 
government is going to pay for these costs. To say that we’re 
going to bring it forward to cabinet and see what they say isn’t 
going to give anybody much reason to sleep well at night. 
 
Mr. Minister, you also discussed the property tax rebate that 
was eliminated, and somehow or another you got this idea that 
this is a good thing, that people are benefiting now because of 
the reassessment and playing with the numbers. I’m well aware 
that you have all these statistics at your fingertips and you can 
. . . and you believe them. 
 
But at the end of the day the people that are paying the bill are 
saying no, this is not a big help for me. I’m paying 60 per cent 
of the costs of education and the government is making the 
decisions. So I think the minister and his department are pretty 
well alone in their decision and their belief that everything is 
going quite well. 
 
The one area that we . . . that you touched on that I didn’t have 
an opportunity to talk about was the Alberta model where every 
school division . . . the school divisions get their money from 
the province. And it’s one issue that we brought up not too long 
ago and I think you commented on it in the media. And it’s 
something that both the SSTA and I believe the STF are saying 
this is a whole new system. This would be one of the biggest 
changes in education that we’ve seen forever to have the 
autonomy taken away from the school boards. 
 
You’re saying that it’s just one option that you’re looking at, 
but it’s something that I’ve heard the minister speak about a 
number of times and it sends shivers down the back of many 
people. So is this something that is . . . one of the options that 
you’re playing with quite openly? I know that we talked about 
commercial pooling of assessments, we talked about an 
assessment right across the board of 4 or 5 mills to probably 
take some of the money from the negative grant boards. 
 
But this is really a huge issue, Mr. Minister, and something that 
again would complicate the lives of many people. So where are 
you standing on this issue? Is it something that you see as 
something that you would prefer in a model of funding schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, no I wouldn’t prefer that 
model, but just to give a bit of background. There are four 
provinces that rely to some extent more or less on property tax 
for public finance for K to 12 education purposes. The other six 
provinces and territories rely almost exclusively on general 
revenues. The next closest province to Saskatchewan would be 
Manitoba in the amount of education tax that comes from 
property. 
 
But the school trustees did an analysis about a year or so ago 
where they looked at the reliance of provincial governments on 
property taxes with regard to own-source revenue and what they 
found is that Saskatchewan really is just above the provincial 
average in terms of its own-source reliance on property taxes. 
And that’s because other provinces will have social services or 
health care that comes from that property tax base that is paid 
for in Saskatchewan through the General Revenue Fund. 
 
So the simple, short answer to the member opposite is that I’m 

not in favour of the Alberta model, but we do need to look at 
how we’re going to find the solutions for how we fund our K to 
12 education system. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Through the 
chairman to the minister, I was listening with some interest to 
the discussion of assessment and equity and the combinations 
thereof as a result of our current assessment system and our 
grant system and what might . . . might arise in the future. And 
as you know, for inequities, I don’t think that there’s any 
greater burden, inequitable burden suffered in any area of the 
province than that by the school districts in the Southwest. 
 
I had the good fortune earlier this spring of being one of several 
MLAs who met with representatives from each of the southwest 
school districts and they put forward some of their concerns to 
us. And just for the record, Mr. Minister, I’d like to read into 
tonight’s proceedings just a short part of the document that we 
were presented with. I think it deals with the issues of equitable 
distribution of financing and funding in a little different 
perspective. If I may and I’ll quote now: 
 

We think you should know that, in general, Southwest 
boards have continued to receive a net reduction in our 
foundation operating grant and are rapidly moving to a 
position, if we’re not already there, where 100 per cent of 
education funding is coming from the property tax base. In 
reality, we receive no additional money even though the 
government increases education spending. The reason for 
this is that we are also experiencing declining enrolments. 
As our student numbers fall, so does our grant; this together 
with inflationary pressures from utilities and wages paid to 
ancillary staff have forced boards to make tough choices. 
We have responded by rationalization, cutting spending, 
and increasing our mill rates. 
 
Our ratepayers understand this and we are being held 
increasingly accountable by them. We have a situation 
where 75 per cent of the budget allocations are dictated by 
the government and 90 to 100 per cent of the cost are borne 
and raised locally. We believe that the government sees the 
solution to be, in part, amalgamation. 

 
Whether or not amalgamation is the response of the government 
to that scenario, Mr. Minister, is something you might want to 
debate with me. I understand though in previous discussions 
with the critic and other individuals that you have said you’re 
not interested in forcing amalgamations, so I’ll take the 
assumption that you don’t think amalgamation is necessarily the 
way to achieve the best case scenarios for these boards. 
 
But nevertheless, I guess the question remains if you’re talking 
about inequities, here you have virtually all of the education 
funding coming from the local tax base with very little control 
over the decisions being made as to how that money is going to 
be spent. I think there is something clearly inequitable about 
that type of situation. It’s almost akin to taxation without 
representation and I think that if we want to talk about inequity, 
this is a classic example. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, are we going to have to wait for some 
fairness, some proper treatment of the school boards that face 
this kind of downloading on a continuous basis until SAMA 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

 

comes up with some possible solution in terms of how they’re 
going to do assessments or do you have some other solution that 
might work in the meantime to address this inequity? 
 
(22:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly I would agree with many of the things that have been 
stated in the letter because we’ve seen similar letters for several 
years now from other jurisdictions that have, have been or had 
been moving into a zero grant position. And what that means is, 
of course is, that yes assessment has been going up and 
enrolments have been going down; and when you look at the 
most sensitive items in the foundation operating grant they are 
most sensitive to the number of students in that school division 
and basically . . . and also the recognized revenues for that 
school division which is based on the assessment. 
 
So what you really are highlighting are the issues that we’ve 
been talking about is how do we get a system that is fair in 
terms of equity, that is fair in terms of the equalization 
component and the principles of the foundation operating grant, 
and how do we apply that province-wide? 
 
Now we don’t have . . . I don’t have a solution for that at this 
point in time. And there have been various scenarios played out, 
none of which have received a consensus. So I certainly would 
agree with what has been stated that it is a concern and is very 
much a concern for myself. And I have indicated to school 
trustees that the equity issue is one that we are very concerned 
about, and that is getting worse, and that certainly we would 
like to see a solution in the near future. 
 
When they say though that 75 per cent is dictated by the 
government, that’s not correct. The number of dollars that are 
applied through our foundation operating grant, when we 
compared them to other jurisdictions of course, we provide 
probably the most unconditional dollars of any jurisdiction. And 
in the zero grant board, even though there might be recognized 
expenditure items for special-needs children for example, there 
isn’t a whole lot as a provincial government that we can do if all 
of their dollars come from their local tax base. I mean, really, 
they are unconditional dollars. And you know there is an 
expectation that they will cover special needs and other things 
with regards to transportation but it’s not something that we 
have a way of controlling. 
 
So even though we provide that information in terms of 
recognized expenditures, recognized revenues, and their net 
grant to each school division on an annual basis, a zero grant 
board or a board that gets very little grant dollars, really the 
amount of dollars that it gets from its tax base is really 
unconditional. 
 
So the point is that equity is the issue that needs to be 
addressed. And when you have access to a local tax base the 
foundation operating grant operates on recognized revenues and 
recognized expenditures, and actual revenues and actual 
expenditures would depend on the mill rate applied by that 
school division on its assessment and the actual amount of 
dollars that are spent. 
 
And we don’t know those numbers until we actually see the 

audited financial statements for each school division the 
subsequent year. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Chair to 
the minister, whether or not the 75 per cent figure is accurate, 
I’m not in a position to dispute. I have to take the board’s 
say-so at face value. They’re the ones that are looking after their 
books and accounting for the dollars that they’re spending, and 
I’m assuming that at 75 per cent, they know their budget better 
than I do, and I think that I would have to go with their 
assertion that that’s a realistic figure. 
 
Part of the problem, as you can well appreciate, is that school 
boards are quite substantially caught in the middle. They have a 
squeeze applied to them that makes it very difficult for them to 
operate. There are standards and expectations placed on them 
by the Department of Education, and there are expectations 
placed on them by the taxpayers, the people who are actually 
footing, virtually, 100 per cent of the bill. 
 
And to accomplish the purposes of the Department of Education 
to qualify for a foundation grant, if it’s at all possible, they have 
to have more students. And in the case of the large and widely 
dispersed districts of the Southwest, obtaining more students so 
that they can qualify for these grantings make it impractical or 
impossible to achieve. The fact is that to bring more students 
into a school district, even if you wanted to go through 
amalgamation for whatever reason, you would make the 
distances so large that any benefits achieved through 
amalgamation would be lost through added travel expenditures. 
 
I was provided with a graph earlier by some of the members of 
the southwest, and in fact I noticed that, you know, the 
kilometres travelled just in the Swift Current School District 
and some of the staff people in that district from last year to, 
I’m not sure what year exactly they’re comparing it, but we’re 
talking about 84,000 kilometres travelled by people who 
provide educational services in the Swift Current and district 
ECIP (Early Childhood Intervention Program). 
 
And, you know, when you get those kinds of kilometres 
travelled that provide services, any savings that might be 
accomplished on one hand are certainly eaten up awfully soon 
by that type of an example. And that’s just one person. Who 
knows how many other individuals might also be adding that 
kind of mileage. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we’ve got a situation where boards now have 
become increasingly sensitive to their taxpayers’ needs as 
opposed to what they see as governmental requirements or 
orders. And as local taxation pays the major share of education, 
the influence of local taxpayers is going to increase on the 
decisions of the boards. 
 
And I think what you’re going to find, Mr. Minister, is a 
resistance, a resentment, frankly, at the local level. The people 
feel they’ve got their backs up against the wall from a taxation 
point of view. They’re being taxed at a higher rate because of 
an assessment system that does not take into consideration the 
realities of the marketplace, and they’re being asked to carry a 
greater share of the load. 
 
And if you want people to resent the governance model that’s 



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

being placed upon them, all you have to do is ask them to pay 
more for less, and I think that that’s not a situation that the 
provincial government or the Department of Education wants. I 
think you want, you want an effort, a joint effort, to achieve the 
best in terms of education for students no matter how populous 
or underpopulated the area may be. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, we really need the department to look 
quickly and more thoroughly at these issues of inequity as they 
affect especially the rural Southwest part of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
would agree with what the member opposite has stated here. I 
think we do need to look at more revenue-sensitive 
methodologies for assessment. And I think that the school 
divisions in the Southwest or the members of those school 
boards have to make some of the most difficult decisions 
because they are covering a large geographic area with 
declining student enrolments. And the numbers in terms of 
travel, the arrangements that we see happening within these 
school divisions in the Southwest with regard to shared 
services, sharing say a speech pathologist or a director of 
education, they’ve been forced to do for some time. 
 
So I don’t think we’re disagreeing with the member and I would 
agree that we need to look at the issue as quickly as possible in 
terms of dealing with that inequity we’re seeing across 
Saskatchewan and also providing more revenue-sensitive 
instrumentation for assessment so that we’re not looking at it in 
terms of a wealth context but the ability to generate revenue. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like 
to change the subject somewhat at this point in the evening. As 
you will recall, in the early part of April . . . I’m sorry, the early 
part of May, there was a situation that developed in the school 
district of Leader. It concerned the mutual termination 
agreement that was struck between the school board in the 
Leader School Division and one of its principals. And after the 
situation had developed, we came to estimates and asked some 
questions of the minister at that time and asked what he was 
considering doing if anything, what some of the alternatives and 
options might be. And we have had two months pass in the 
interim in which there has been a continued silence imposed on 
the negotiations. 
 
I understand there has been a process in place. The aggrieved 
parties and some additional parties of interest to that particular 
situation have been participating in an ongoing negotiation. But 
with the passage of time the people of the community are 
becoming increasingly frustrated. I think the minister is well 
aware of that. He’s probably received as many phone calls, 
faxes, and letters as I have on that particular topic. 
 
And I’d like to ask the minister tonight, can he indicate for the 
House and for the people of the Leader school district what is 
the current status of the dispute resolution efforts that are being 
undertaken by the board, the local teachers, the STF, and the 
SSTA. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
It’s my understanding that conciliation continues with regard to 
the local teachers’ association, the affected boards of education, 
and representatives from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation and SSTA. There also has been an agreement that 
there would be no public statements with regard to this 
conciliation until it . . . until there is a resolution. 
 
Where they’re at, I don’t know. In terms of the process I 
understand conciliation has been going on, that they have not 
yet come to a conclusion or a resolution of the particular 
problem, and that the in dispute designation is still in effect 
with regard to the Leader School Division. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I brought with me to 
the House tonight a copy of a fax that was sent to your office 
from a concerned parent in which she included the registration 
for her daughter in the Medicine Hat school district and a copy 
of letters to the editor that appeared in The Leader News on the 
26th of June. 
 
This individual called my office and indicated that her daughter 
was not the only student from the school in Leader that was 
being registered in Medicine Hat. She named five other students 
that were being registered out of province. The reality as I 
understand it is that there are other students being registered in 
communities surrounding Leader, in Kindersley, and so forth. 
And there’s a great deal of anxiety associated with the decision 
of these parents. When they took this action it was a desperate, 
last-ditch attempt to salvage what they see as an education for 
their children as far as their grade 12 year is concerned. 
 
And I know that there is expectation on the part of the minister 
and maybe other people in the Department of Education that 
such efforts will be for naught because there will be a 
resolution. But that might not happen; there may not be a 
resolution. And I think the parents are looking at a situation 
where they don’t feel confident that the process has served them 
or their students very well. 
 
And in fact, being an in-dispute school board, there is no 
provision made now for the hiring of several high school 
teachers for the community of Leader. And without math and 
science 30 teachers, and some of the other very important 
subjects being covered — at least it looks at this point that 
that’s going to be impossible — the entire school year is in 
jeopardy for a number of these students. Many grade 11 
students are equally concerned about their future. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in view of that and in view of the tensions in 
the community and the uncertainties and concerns, I guess the 
question that’s been posed to me and which I would like to ask 
you is, can the minister, has the department, contemplated the 
development of a process that would include earlier mediation 
— by possibly an independent, outside party of some sort — 
that will keep the taxpaying public, the parents, and the students 
apprised of developments? 
 
As it stands right now, we have the current process in which 
everything is confidential and virtually no information gets out. 
And it creates such a vacuum of knowledge that all sorts of 
innuendo and insinuations rush in to fill that vacuum. 
 
Outside of that, all we’ve got is a situation where the 
department can go in and revoke the privileges and the standing 
of the existing board and take control of the processes there. 
There’s got to be some alternative, some type of process, some 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2673 

 

mechanism by which these very critical disputes can be 
resolved before they reach the state this particular situation has 
reached. 
 
And I’m wondering if the minister has contemplated that at all 
and whether or not his officials would consider bringing 
changes to The Education Act that would address these kinds of 
desperate situations. 
 
(22:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair 
and thank you to the member opposite. I certainly don’t agree 
that the process has broken down. I think that the process is 
working. 
 
We’re very concerned, and we’re watching it very closely in 
terms of . . . and we’re hopeful that a resolution will be 
forthcoming soon. When we look at the power that’s provided 
to the minister under the Act, really there has only been one 
situation . . . and I think in probably 20 years, maybe longer that 
I’ve been told of, anyway, where that provision of the Act has 
been utilized, where the department has gone in and actually 
provided governance, management of a school division, and 
that was because an entire board resigned on the spot. So it was 
a very unusual circumstance. 
 
I’ve received letters from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation as well as the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, and certainly the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation have indicated to me that this is something that I 
should keep in the back of mind and be prepared to do if things 
don’t go well. And I’ve been asked by the School Trustees 
Association to let the mediation, conciliation process work and 
not be too aggressive with regard to moving in to take over the 
governance, management of that school division. 
 
And so we’re aware of the time lines. We know we’re into July. 
We know that the school will be starting up in September, and 
that there will be a resolution, and it is hopeful that that 
resolution can be negotiated through that conciliation process. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, there are two 
big issues in K to 12 that we haven’t discussed. One of them is 
amalgamation, and the other one is the schools of choice, the 
SchoolPLUS and formerly known as community schools. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the amalgamation issue is one that the school 
boards are, many of them are considering right now and looking 
into because of the release and the department’s decision in 
November to ask the school boards to consider amalgamation. 
There was two press releases put out, quite quickly, one after 
the other, about the amount of money that was going to be spent 
or allowed for school divisions. So to start with, can you tell me 
how much money your department feels will be spent on 
amalgamation in this . . . in this school year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
It’s my understanding that we’ve allocated $1 million in 
incentives for this current year. 
 
The direction that was provided to school divisions is that we 
would like to see a roughly 25 per cent reduction before the 

elections, the local elections in October, November of 2003. It’s 
my understanding that there are currently roughly 40 school 
divisions that are engaged in discussions. Several school 
divisions have passed motions of intent to amalgamate, that 
they are aware of the incentives. 
 
We have received inquiries in terms of elaboration of some of 
the incentive packages that will be provided based on the 
number of schools that would be enrolled, for example, in the 
amalgamated division. There’s a . . . there’s a per student grant. 
There are dollars available once the motion of intent has been 
passed and also when the formal motion is completed. 
 
The availability of department staff to assist with amalgamation 
and also school divisions that have amalgamated; such as in the 
Prince Albert area and the Cupar, Indian Head, Buffalo Plains 
situation where they are actually accelerated their process from 
the initial timeline so that they are even closer to amalgamating 
than they were because they have found that the process is 
working so well for them. 
 
So we’ve allocated $1 million this current fiscal year as part of 
the incentive package, but I would expect that the bigger dollars 
associated with amalgamation would be applied as we get 
closer to the . . . probably more into the next fiscal year because 
that’s when the amalgamations would be completed and that’s 
when the majority of the dollars would be provided. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you talked 
about the number of school divisions that have passed motions 
of intent, I believe you said that number was 40? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — No. They’re having discussions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, $1 million isn’t going to go very 
far when we talk about the . . . I think it was $7,500 that . . . for 
some of the incentives? 
 
Can you tell me how much money you have budgeted for this 
amalgamation process? I believe there’s two more years in your 
agreement or your discussion process. What do you think it’s 
going to cost the Department of Learning for this amalgamation 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we’ve also 
allocated an additional $3 million in the subsequent year, which 
would be the out year. So there’s 1 million and 3 million. 
 
In the . . . for consideration of support, there would be $7,500 
provided to a school division. Amalgamation restructuring 
transition assistance, the maximum amount available would be 
450,000, but that would be a very large amalgamation where 
there would be a very large school enrolment and it would 
probably involve a large urban board. And then the early 
commitment support of 15,000 per school division. 
 
So when we’re looking at the projections provided by the 
department to meet the demands of transition and the actual 
costs of transition that we’ve been able to analyze from 
amalgamating boards, we believe that the 1 million and 3 
million actually comes fairly close to covering the cost that 
would be required for a 25 per cent reduction of school 
divisions. 



2674 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I know that there’s been a 
number of school divisions have amalgamated already and there 
must be some work done on assessing the benefits to 
amalgamation. We have talked about the voluntary 
amalgamation and a number of school divisions are looking at 
this. 
 
But can you give me the department’s perspective on why this 
amalgamation process is something that you are considering, or 
you’re asking the school boards across the province to 
consider? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The member opposite may be aware 
that I actually, when I talked to the Teachers’ Federation spring 
council, I talked to them about this very issue. 
 
And what we found is that when the department surveyed 
boards that had amalgamated and the positive experiences that 
they itemized from the amalgamation, some of the things that 
were commented on and rated highly was the ability to redirect 
dollars to the classroom, that there was an expansion of 
programs available including practical and applied arts, band, 
and also the opportunities for professional development for 
teaching staff were just three of the key areas that they honed in 
on. 
 
But really what amalgamation is really all about is providing 
opportunity — greater opportunity — for educational 
experiences in these school divisions. And what we’ve found is 
that the amalgamated boards — for example, in Prince Albert 
— say that that has improved the opportunities for the children 
within their school division. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the member from Cypress Hills 
brought up the issue a minute ago about distance travelled and 
the fact that amalgamation or some of the restructuring that has 
. . . it could happen in other areas . . . maybe not benefit some 
areas of the province when you talk about the money that would 
be spent on sharing staff and the travel time that would be 
required. 
 
And we also . . . I’ve been waiting to hear from some of the 
school divisions to tell me about the direct benefits to the 
children. I think that if the school boards have decided that it’s a 
benefit for them, then I respect their opinion and they are the 
ones that make the decision, but we haven’t had this . . . it 
hasn’t been in the system long enough to actually be able to 
prove what the direct benefit is to children. 
 
And some of the other areas that we’re hearing about is the fact 
that some schools feel that the closures that are talked about 
right now, when it comes to individual and local schools, could 
be based on school divisions’ intent to amalgamate which they 
feel is something that the department is pushing. So we all feel 
and know well the value of the school to a community and the 
fact that without the school, you lose the heart of the 
community and you lose the growth potential for a community. 
 
So can you tell me what your department feels . . . what your 
issue is around this area of amalgamation and how you feel this 
is affecting things like school closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, when 

we look at school division amalgamation and school closures, 
the amalgamation of school divisions in terms of providing 
improvements to opportunities in the classroom do not 
necessarily mean school closures. In fact, what we’ve found is 
that in boards where they have amalgamated, that the ability to 
share resources and also to redirect administrative costs to the 
classroom have actually improved the opportunities for smaller 
schools and more remote schools to the point where they 
weren’t closed. 
 
So school closures is a different topic. It’s a decision made by a 
school division and a school board. There is a process in rural 
Saskatchewan where, if there is an indication that there would 
be a school closure or a grade reduction, that there has to be 
approval from the local school board. If the local board does not 
approve, then there has to be a wide based public consultation. 
 
But the reality is that in fact school division amalgamations will 
actually perhaps decelerate school closures in some school 
divisions where some of those smaller schools might be at risk. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister. I 
have a few questions, Mr. Minister, pertaining to a school 
closure in my constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. And I 
started questioning you about this some time ago in estimates 
work before, and we did not have time to complete it. And I 
found it interesting, your last comments about amalgamation 
and how it should not have any impact on closure of schools; in 
fact it should be an enhancement and possibly stop the closure 
of schools. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could comment on 
a comment that was made regarding school closure in Pangman 
by a local member of the board, who said that the government is 
encouraging division boards to tidy up their divisions prior to 
amalgamation. If you would like to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, that is not the 
direction of the department. And any of the circulars that have 
been provided to school division and school board chairs do not 
include that language, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, thank you very 
much. I’m encouraged to hear that. 
 
My next question is, as Minister of Learning, is it your belief — 
and I believe that maybe you have already expressed this in 
some ways — but is it your belief that a school is vital to the 
survival of a community and that it is of utmost important to not 
only sustaining rural Saskatchewan but in revitalizing it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, I think 
that everyone believes that schools are important for that 
community. We also recognize that the reality of Saskatchewan 
is that we are seeing declining enrolments, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan. We’ve talked about the numbers of school 
closures that occur on an average basis and on an annual basis. 
 
When we look at, for example, in the 1980s, we had as many as 
20 or 22 or 23 school closures in a given year. 
 
In recent history we’ve been looking at more like six or seven 
school closures across the province of Saskatchewan, most of 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2675 

 

these in rural Saskatchewan. We look at the projections for next 
year. We’re in that same sort of six or seven range with another 
three or four applications for grade reductions. So I don’t know 
if we’re at the point where the numbers of school closures are in 
this five, six, seven range. 
 
And perhaps we’ll be seeing less of these, but I think the most 
difficult decision for any school board or any school division is 
looking at a school closure in a town and, or a village, and those 
are local decisions. 
 
The Education Act does provide for a process where if it is a 
rural school division and there is a motion of intent for school 
closure that if the local school board agrees with that then that’s 
a done deal. If they don’t agree with it, then there has to be a 
wide-based public consultation where the decision and why that 
decision was made can be available to the community. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you 
tell me what this wide-based process that the community that is 
opposed to it, how they go about making their views known and 
have a voice in the final outcome. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
In a case where the closure of a rural school does not have the 
consent of the local board, then section 87 of the Act proscribes 
the process. And what that process says is that following a 
motion of intent to close or discontinue grades, the board of 
education must convene a meeting of electors at least six 
months in advance of closure and at least three months prior to 
a final decision. So that’s a two-step process and the purpose of 
this meeting is to advise the electors of what is under 
consideration. 
 
Following a decision to close a school or discontinue grades 
and at least three months prior to the effective date, the board of 
education must notify the board of trustees or local school 
advisory committee of the decision; and following notification 
of the decision, the board of education must consult with the 
board of trustees or local school advisory committee with 
respect to the educational services to be provided for the 
students affected. 
 
So there’s a two-stage consultation, and then there’s a process 
afterwards in terms of how they’re going to deal with the 
children that may be disaffected by that decision. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to the minister, that is 
indeed the concern is that there is a process, but all it is is 
consultation and then a decision as to where the children are 
going to be dispersed to. 
 
And in the situation with Pangman School, we already have 
children coming there from Parry School that was closed and 
Ceylon School that was closed, and now if these children have 
to go elsewhere, they’ll be split in probably four ways. Some 
will go to Radville. Some will go to Bengough. Some will go to 
Milestone, and even some might go to Avonlea. And what 
we’re going to have is a community that is split and splintered 
and will be destroyed. 
 
And I would like to ask the minister if he, because of his 
concern for rural Saskatchewan and keeping Saskatchewan 

viable, is there any way that he would work with the district 
board and the local community to find a solution for this? The 
local community has spent many, many hours and many, many 
dollars researching the reasons why their school should stay 
open. They have taken this to the district board. The district 
board has yet to justify their reasons for closing the school, and 
I’m wondering if the minister would be interested or would he 
help in finding a solution to this problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, over 
the almost three years that I’ve been Minister of Education, I 
have received letters from citizens who were concerned about 
their local school. 
 
When we look at the reality with regard to the local autonomy 
and our recognition of local autonomy and the right of elected 
members and elected trustees to make decisions on service 
delivery, that we really have to respect that autonomy. We 
believe that school divisions and school board members, that 
probably the most difficult decision they have to make is the 
closure of a school, but they are the group of people, men and 
women, individuals who have been given the authority under 
the Act to have that local autonomy to make those decisions. So 
I think it would be very unwise and I don’t know of any 
minister of Education in the past 20 years or longer in the 
province of Saskatchewan who has ventured into such a local 
issue and the decisions are made by the local board. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one last 
question. In light of the fact that the minister will not intervene 
. . . I guess intervene isn’t the right word. I was asking for a 
consultation in trying to come to a solution. If the local board 
wishes to have a mediator to come to resolve to an issue with 
the district board, is that something that the district board would 
have to grant the local board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve 
been informed by my officials that two members — two senior 
officials will be meeting with the local committee to discuss 
and perhaps address some of their concerns. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
on the issue of amalgamation I’m wondering if your department 
has been contacted by any school divisions who are saying that 
to amalgamate an entire school division isn’t something that is 
. . . maybe a wise move on behalf of the people in the area 
because of the trading patterns or what may happen to the 
students who may have to go to various schools. 
 
School division boundaries were set a number of years ago and 
even with amalgamation I’m sure there are some areas where it 
would make more sense for part of the school division to go to 
another area. I’m thinking of this when it comes to the bigger 
issue of schools choice . . . schools of choice or Role of the 
School and SchoolPLUS where we have interagency co-operation 
required between departments to ensure that health care and 
Social Services and Justice can be . . . the issues can looked at 
in a bigger perspective. 
 
So I know that we’ve looked at all these boundaries and from 
various departments and agencies and commissions and boards 
across the province. And with the amalgamation of the school 
divisions the way they are I’m sure that there is some people 



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

that are shaking their heads and saying is this really going to 
getting us a step closer to organization or to making the 
SchoolPLUS issue really work. 
 
So my question to you is, have you been approached by any 
school divisions to have part of the school division go with one 
area and part of the school division go to another division? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m not aware of 
any current situations where they’re . . . we’ve had a request to 
alter the boundaries of an existing school division, but when we 
talked about the initiative that we entertained beginning in 
1995-96 where we’ve seen a decrease of school divisions from 
120 some down to 99, that the concept that we’ve expressed has 
been restructuring. 
 
So the general rules are that for separate school divisions there 
is no need to have a contiguous boundary; for public school 
divisions that wish to restructure that there would be some 
contiguous boundary; but also it opens up the opportunity to 
discuss whether there would be restructuring of a partial 
division or all of the division or a piece of another division — 
all of those possibilities are options that can be entertained. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I recently 
was contacted by a family in my constituency who have a 
cerebral palsy child. Their daughter is in the . . . attending one 
of the schools in the constituency, she’s an elementary school 
aged child. And as you can well imagine, the school certainly 
isn’t meeting her needs. The parents are very concerned about 
her development and so on, and they’ve actually done a fair bit 
of research into looking at alternative programming and seeing 
what’s being done in other parts of the country and in the world. 
 
And they tell me that there’s a program that was developed that 
meets the needs of cerebral palsy children. It’s called the 
conductive education program developed in Hungary. And I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, has your department . . . is your 
department aware of this program; and if your department is 
aware of it, is there any consideration in developing a program 
in a number of areas in the province to meet the needs of these 
special needs children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
conductive education program is something that the department 
is aware of, and in fact we have had teachers go on site and 
assess where conductive education programs are currently being 
engaged, and the department is continuing to evaluate that 
particular program. It hasn’t been implemented in terms of a 
recommendation by the department to school divisions who are 
empowered with of course providing service delivery options. 
But it is something we are aware of, and we are continuing to 
evaluate before we make a recommendation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m told that there a number 
of provinces in Canada that currently offer the program — 
British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario to name a 
few. I’m also told that this program, it offers . . . there’s an 
education component to the program plus a physical activities 
component to the program. And according to the information 
that I was given, that an astounding 80 per cent of the children 
that enter this particular special program are able to function in 
society and in fact many of them are able to achieve a level of 

improvement over their current situation so that they can live 
independently, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m also have been told that your department back in ’99 ran a 
three-month pilot project in Saskatoon. And if that in fact is the 
case, I would wonder why it was discontinued. I guess the other 
question is . . . and these constituents of mine felt that three 
months really wasn’t a long enough time if in fact their 
information was correct. They feel that probably two years 
would be a more appropriate time, and they really have asked 
me to urge you to look very seriously into this because there are 
a number of children that could really benefit from this 
particular program. And they would like a commitment from 
you, Mr. Minister, to give this some very serious consideration 
and perhaps have something in place in the near future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, when 
we look at the diagnosis of cerebral palsy and the impact that 
there’s a variable impact in terms of the deficit or need. 
 
When you have a particular programme . . . and I think I should 
mention to the member that there is some controversy around 
this particular educative consultative program that requires for 
us to do due diligence in terms of the assessment. Now we 
haven’t had sort of a final recommendation with regard to it, but 
there are other programs that are also being evaluated in terms 
of continuous improvement, quality improvement with regard 
to our special needs. 
 
So at this point in time I would wish to assure the member that 
we are aware of the program, that we continue to evaluate the 
program. But at this point in time we have not yet made a 
recommendation to school divisions. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give me an 
indication as to a time frame in which you will make this 
decision. I know my constituents, and I’m sure many other 
parents across the province, are looking for a decision from 
your department on this program. And as I’d indicated earlier 
there certainly is a need for some special programming for these 
special young people that we have in our schools. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, what I’ve been 
told is that, from my officials, is that we’re not against this 
program. We would probably never say no to it, but in terms of 
a endorsement, we would need to do more evaluation from the 
pilot projects to say that this is something recommended by the 
department. 
 
But just to remind the member that school divisions in the 
province of Saskatchewan that are currently using the 
conductive education program of course will continue to use 
that program, and other school divisions can make that decision 
at any time to utilize this program. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to turn our 
discussion to another area. The Punnichy school in my 
constituency has been designated as a community school, and 
that in itself is, I think . . . speaking to the residents of that 
community, they feel that it certainly is a positive step. 
 
However, as in many things, there is also a downside to that. 
And I recently met with a group of concerned parents who feel 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2677 

 

that in the effort to help those children at risk, that the average 
and above-average students are being neglected, in fact to the 
point where there is . . . 20 families are busing 36 students to 
the neighbouring school in Raymore, and these parents are 
paying the cost of busing their children to Raymore. 
 
Now the parents . . . and the reason the parents took this drastic 
step . . . This, Mr. Minister, has been going on for at least two 
or three years now, and it’s creating a number of problems for 
the students and the parents and, I believe, the community. The 
reason that the parents took this step is that they felt, as I’d 
indicated, in an effort to help the children at risk that their 
children were being neglected and, at best, they were only being 
offered the bare minimum as far as curriculum and 
programming within the school. And they felt that in today’s 
competitive environment, and education being such an 
important part of their children’s future, that they had no 
alternative but to take the drastic action and have their children 
attend the school in Raymore. 
 
Now I should mention that both communities are within the 
same school division, but as you are . . . I’m sure you’re aware 
when students start leaving the one attendance area to attend a 
school in another attendance area, school boards are already 
providing busing to Punnichy and therefore they just felt that 
they couldn’t provide the additional busing to Raymore. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this is a very difficult situation for these 
people. They don’t want to be accused of forsaking their 
community. The only thing that these parents have is the best 
interests of their children and their children’s education. And at 
the meeting that I attended with some 20 parents, we tried to 
search for solutions and really we couldn’t come up with any 
real solutions, and that group of parents has asked me to bring 
this to your attention and for you to use the resources of your 
department to address this problem. 
 
And I would make a suggestion, Mr. Minister, that perhaps may 
be of some value. When we’re looking at designating schools in 
rural Saskatchewan as community schools, perhaps we have to 
look at a larger area, encompassing maybe perhaps two or three 
schools. There’s a number of schools in urban Saskatchewan 
now that have a larger student body and have more flexibility in 
programming and all those sorts of things, where in a rural 
school you don’t have the student numbers to warrant the 
flexibility. It’s impossible to offer all of the alternatives. So 
what happens is that all students kind of sink to the lowest 
denominator and that sort of thing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, as I said, I would . . . I’ve been asked to bring 
this to your attention and I would like a commitment from you 
just to look into this very serious problem and see if there is 
some very practical solutions that can be . . . that you can come 
up with to address this problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think that that’s 
an excellent idea in terms of a regional basis with regard to 
community schools and I’m going to ask my officials to look 
into that. 
 
Certainly when we talked about SchoolPLUS and we talked about 
community schools, the reality is that, generally speaking, 
community school designation provides additional resources to 

that school, meaning there’s additional dollars allocated and 
that there’s also the ability to interact with other departments in 
terms of support. And you’re right; those support structures 
may possibly work better on a regional basis in rural 
Saskatchewan than with an individual community school 
designation. So I will be asking my officials to look into that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I certainly thank you for that reply 
and I guess the only question that I would have is, is there a . . . 
could we have a commitment as far as a time frame as to when 
you will come up with some workable solutions for this 
particular situation? 
 
And I would imagine, Mr. Minister, that this situation probably 
exists in other parts of the province or will arise in other parts of 
the province as the move to community school . . . more 
community schools occurs in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, the time frame would be 
as we get into the budget development process leading up to 
next year’s budget. 
 
But just to let the member opposite know that we already look 
at our community school designation on a more regional basis 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And because the application of the community school 
designation to rural Saskatchewan and to the high school 
system is relatively new — we’re talking about an experience 
of only a year and a little bit — that this is an evolving process 
and, as we’ve discussed with our SchoolPLUS model, that this is 
an ongoing project with an evolution that will depend on, you 
know, the unique circumstances of those communities. 
 
So the answer is yes, we will look at it for rural Saskatchewan 
and we will do it over the course of the next 7 to 10 months. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, I was waiting to hear you say that the 
term community school has really changed to SchoolPLUS 
because what they have then is the opportunity to have not just 
schools that have some of the requirements . . . or that are based 
on the requirements of the community school right now — that 
being lower income, single parents, that type of thing — 
whereas SchoolPLUS means that every school in an area will be 
treated differently or have some opportunities because of where 
they’re sitting. And that means that gifted children or the 
average child will be given the same opportunities. 
 
And really this is what . . . the reason why I have been trying 
for the last seven weeks to have a discussion about the Role of 
the School in private members’ day is because I believe that this 
is a good issue. We wouldn’t be bringing schools down to a 
lower common denominator; we would be giving every school 
the opportunity to be the best they could be for the students in 
their community. 
 
But the one issue that I’m very concerned about in your . . . the 
budget this year, and in your response to the role of the school 
is the fact that what’s going to be required is the dollars. 
Securing Saskatchewan Future was signed by Social Services, 
Education, Intergovernmental Affairs, Health, and Youth and 
Recreation, and they’re all making a commitment to making 



2678 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

this project work. But what they’re not doing is committing the 
funding. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have . . . In order to make this issue really 
work, we’re going to have to have a commitment, not just by 
the department to say yes, we want to have this work, but we’re 
going to have to have a commitment that the funding is going to 
follow the responsibilities. 
 
When I’ve talked to the school boards across the province about 
the Role of the School they say, hey, it’s a great idea, but don’t 
ask me to carry on more responsibility than I have right now 
with the same dollars. And that’s the huge issue, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I think that what we have to discuss, being that we don’t 
have an opportunity to have a long debate about SchoolPLUS, is I 
have to have an assurance from your department that the 
recognition is going to mean dollars from various departments 
or from some part of your government to make sure that this 
whole report can be carried forward and that’s going to mean 
dollars. 
 
So what type of commitment are you considering making? Are 
you recognizing that health care, Justice, Social Services, 
Intergovernmental Affairs, all the rest of them — the work that 
the schools are doing right now more or less, because they’re 
forced into it — if they’re going to be given the recognition for 
doing it, they have to have the dollars? And what are you going 
to be doing to ensure this can happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly the member opposite asks a very good question and 
makes a very good point. 
 
We’re very proud of the interdepartmental initiatives on 
SchoolPLUS. We have had six ministries sign the government 
response to the Role of the School report that we have a 
paradigm shift. And the Government of Saskatchewan has 
endorsed the two . . . dual role of schools now where they will 
be required to educate children and youth in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but also that they will serve as service centres 
for integrated schooling services that will involve these 
ministries. 
 
(23:00) 
 
Now to implement this, we have adopted and changed the 
mandate of the Saskatchewan Council of Children and Youth 
which will be the overseer body to see how the implementation 
of SchoolPLUS is occurring. But we also have created a forum of 
associate deputy ministers of all of these six departments that 
will be looking at how their particular departments can adopt 
within their core budgetary allotments funding for SchoolPLUS 
initiatives. So these will all be incorporated into the strategic 
plans of these departments. There will be core dollars assigned 
to these departments as we roll out the complete 
implementation. 
 
This is something that won’t happen overnight, of course. This 
is something that we’ll be involved in many, many years, and 
that evaluation will be on an ongoing basis, and this is about 
building capacity in our school systems to meet the needs as 
identified by the Tymchak report. 

So in essence it’s a threefold plan but it really does mean that 
various departments will be adopting the Role of the School 
philosophy in their core budget allocation. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, last time we 
discussed estimates of Learning, I’d asked you if the 
negotiations were completed as far as the Saskatchewan 
university funding mechanism and you’d indicated at that time 
that you were very close. 
 
I wonder if you’re any closer tonight than you were some two 
weeks ago or more, Mr. Minister. Have the negotiations been 
completed and if so could you provide the details of the 
additional funding to each university? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s a 
very timely question because we were just discussing this 
earlier today. I would say that we’re getting close; I would 
suspect that we’re within a week or so. And I would like to say 
that we were able to say that we finally have agreement 
between the universities and the federated colleges on a 
permanent funding mechanism. 
 
As the member opposite is aware, we had the MacKay report, 
we’ve had DesRosiers, we’ve had give and take from the 
university sector, there’s been an implementation cycle, and 
now we’re at the point where we’re . . . we’ve got most of the 
package together but there’s a few more bits of fine tuning that 
needs to be done. But we’re really close. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I hope that you are 
getting close. We are moving along in the fiscal year, and it 
would be . . . I’m sure all the post-secondary education 
institutions would be happy to see this process come to a 
conclusion, hopefully before the end of the fiscal year, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I’ll just turn my brief question . . . I was contacted by the 
Saskatchewan Trucking Association and their concern was that 
they have the capacity to provide the instruction for 1A driving 
training and that sort of thing, and they feel that they can offer 
that service at a considerably less cost than what SIAST is 
offering it for, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I’m wondering if your department is looking at perhaps 
partnering with the industry to provide the additional training in 
lieu of the fact that there is an ongoing and increasing need for 
that type of training service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — When we look at the private training 
available for the trucking industry, we have noticed an 
expansion of the number of private training opportunities 
available and a corresponding reduction in terms of the SIAST 
training programs. So we really do have a mix of SIAST 
training, with regard to the trucking industry, but also private 
trainers. And I think that the member opposite may want to ask 
a follow-up question with regard to that specific example. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t quite . . . I didn’t quite 
hear your entire response, so I’m going to have to pass on your 
offer to ask that extra question. The hour is getting late, and we 
have a number of topics to cover yet before we conclude our 
estimates, and so I think I’ll just move on very quickly to 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2679 

 

another area, and that is student loans. 
 
I’ve been hearing from various . . . from the student unions of 
both campuses at our universities that with the increasing 
tuition costs and the ever-increasing costs of education that 
there really needs to be a . . . the cap on the maximum student 
loan needs to be increased, Mr. Minister. The information that I 
have is currently the maximum assistance on a per week of 
study is . . . ranges from $275 to $400 per week. Is your 
department looking at increasing that level, and if so, to what 
level would you increase it, and what kind of additional cost 
would you be looking at if increases, in fact, were put into 
effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. When 
we look at the student loans in the province of Saskatchewan, I 
think the member opposite recognizes that this is a fully 
integrated Canada-Saskatchewan Student Loan Program. And 
the funding formula for student loans is 60/40, so it’s a 60 per 
cent federal contribution and a 40 per cent provincial 
contribution. So for a single student who qualifies for the 
maximum debt and also debt reduction — of course that’s 
factored in — it’s $275, and for an individual with dependants, 
it would be 400. 
 
Because of the integration of our program, this is an issue that 
the forum of associate deputy ministers across Canada is 
currently working on in terms of increasing the cap, and we do 
have . . . I’ve received some questions from both student 
unions. We do have a committee that has representation from 
the student union that this is an issue that they have also 
discussed, and having met recently with that particular group, 
this was a request that we looked at increasing the cap, and we 
are working on it on a national basis, and when we come to a 
resolution, then we’ll make that announcement. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, what time frame do you anticipate 
these discussions to take place? Will the students be looking at 
some increases in the student loans within the next calendar 
year or do you anticipate that it may take longer than that? 
 
As I’d indicated, we’ve seen some pretty significant increases 
in tuition fees in the last couple of years and it really is placing 
quite a burden on students. And it’s certainly . . . it is a loan and 
students are certainly willing, reluctantly willing to accept more 
student debt in pursuit of higher education, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I guess the students would like to know what sort of time 
frame they may be looking at before they can access additional 
funds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s a national 
ADM forum meeting that will occur in August, late August of 
this year. And because of the usual sort of timelines in terms of 
budget development, I would expect that any announcements 
with regard to changes to the Canada-Saskatchewan student 
loan program would be announced in next year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to approach a different subject with the minister now, if we 
could, for a short while. Contrary to the assertions made by the 
Minister of Industry and Resources earlier in this session, we 
don’t all on the opposition side take opportunities to chase 

young people out of the province. 
 
In fact, what I have done the last couple of years is write letters 
of congratulations to each of the graduating grade 12 students in 
my constituency. And after complimenting them on their 
stick-to-it-iveness and their willingness to work towards good 
grades, I’ve said when you are looking at advancing your 
education, please consider Saskatchewan. Look at the 
opportunities for education that we provide here, and if for 
some reason you can’t find the program you want, remember 
Saskatchewan is the place where you were educated and where 
you can contribute in a substantial way in the future. This 
province needs young people. I don’t think anybody would 
disagree with that. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, in response to those letters that I have sent 
out to the graduating students, I’ve had a number of responses 
from both students and parents alike. And I believe that one of 
these letters actually went to your office and I want to thank 
you for responding as quickly as you did. But the parent writes 
me and says: 
 

Last year, you sent a letter to our daughter congratulating 
her on her graduation. You also encouraged her to consider 
taking her education in Saskatchewan and to consider 
remaining here to work. Well our daughter wanted to be a 
dental hygienist, but she was put on a five-year waiting list 
at SIAST in Regina. 

 
And she goes on to explain some of the problems with that. And 
as you can understand, no graduate is going to hang around five 
years waiting to get into a program with SIAST. 
 
And we have another situation here where a young lady was 
responding to my letter and she said that: 
 

I’m glad you concluded your letter with an appeal to 
remember Saskatchewan. I would’ve liked to continue my 
education in Saskatchewan, however, when I applied in the 
course of dental assisting it was only offered in Regina. 
 

She goes on to say that she applied also in Manitoba and 
Alberta and was immediately accepted in the province of 
Alberta, and as was the earlier individual that I referred to. 
 
So here we have a situation where young people want to stay in 
this province; they want to continue their advanced education in 
this province. And I’m assuming from the contents of these two 
letters that these young people were prepared to stay in the 
province as professional practitioners and contribute to our 
economy and to the very basic health requirements of the 
people of this province as professional practitioners. I guess 
having looked at your response where you say that SIAST has 
changed some of the way it informs applicants now, and they 
won’t any longer be told that the waiting lists are going to be 
five years as a minimum, you were saying that you recognize 
this as a problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I see it, the problem here if we’re only going to 
train 24 people in this program per year, we would rather send 
young people out of the province uneducated than to train them 
here and have them leave as educated professionals. Neither of 
those options, frankly, is very appealing to the young people of 



2680 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

this province and to anybody in a position of responsibility. 
 
Will you undertake, Mr. Minister, to make sure that young 
people who want to get their education here will have the 
opportunity to do so as quickly as possible to try and stem the 
outflow of young people leaving this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, when we look at SIAST 
and the provincial board that is responsible for the four camp 
. . . (inaudible) . . . that in reality decisions made on the types of 
courses offered are made in the global context of the province 
of Saskatchewan. And when they look at the labour market 
demands for a dental hygienist, for example, they are providing 
the number of spots that would meet the demand of the labour 
market of Saskatchewan. They look at their courses on an 
annual basis. They’re incorporated into their five-year business 
plans and also their annual operating plans, and if they see that 
there’s an increased need based on the labour markets that 
they’re providing training opportunities for, then they would 
correspondingly increase the number of positions available. 
 
For the current year it’s my understanding that the class of 24, 
even though the number of applications are large and that dental 
hygienist is a sought after career, the provincial marketplace 
just would not support more than 24 graduates at this point in 
time. 
 
And I’m quite pleased that the ministry of Industry and 
Resources didn’t take the member opposite up on his little jaunt 
at the start there. Perhaps he’s learned his lessons from the other 
day. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I recently 
received a letter from Miss Sandra Flood, the Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Craft Council expressing some concerns with the 
closure of the ceramics program at the Woodland campus of 
SIAST. The council is very concerned that this program was 
closed in, as I said, a very short notice, a one-week period. 
 
Apparently the council was a part of the initiation and provided 
advisory services in setting up the program and they feel it’s a 
very worthwhile program. It’s a unique program that according 
to the letter may not be offered elsewhere. I would like to read 
to you the last paragraph of the letter: 
 

The Saskatchewan Craft Council would like to know the 
reasons behind the decision to close the Woodland ceramic 
program and why it was done at such speed and with such 
lack of transparency. It would also encourage a 
reassessment of the decision. 

 
And I would like you to respond to that, Mr. Minister, and also 
I would add a question of my own in that is there an opportunity 
for those students who are . . . were enrolled in the program to 
complete at least their academic year? I understand from the 
information I’ve been given that this program was cancelled, as 
I had said, on very short notice. And I am not quite clear 
whether the students that were enrolled in this academic year in 
the programs will be . . . have an opportunity to at least 
complete this academic year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, first off, the program in 
ceramics at SIAST was under subscribed and enrolments were 

dropping, so the decision by the SIAST board to discontinue 
that program was based on the reality that the number of 
students that were looking for that course content was dropping, 
and dropping rapidly. 
 
I certainly have asked my officials and they have indicated to 
me that with regard to the program itself, which was a two-year 
program, that if there are students who might be 
disenfranchised with regard to that second year, that I will have 
my officials discuss this with SIAST to make sure that they are 
taken care of. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, again 
I’m pleased that you brought the representative along that can 
talk to us about libraries because in the budget I was quite 
interested to see that libraries had been moved from Municipal 
Government to Learning and I thought that this was something 
that would be really beneficial and a good use of dollars and 
less duplication when it came to the library system. 
 
So I brought the discussion up when the minister of Municipal 
Affairs was here and he told me that I’d have to ask my 
questions to you, but he did tell me that really there is just a 
movement of the dollars and that libraries are still sitting by 
itself, and really there is no integration into the school system. I 
think we’ve missed a huge opportunity here to do some dollar 
savings and make a better use of the library system itself. 
 
So can you tell me, is your department considering any way to 
actually integrate the library system into the school system or is 
it still going to be just a stand-alone project that’s just funded 
through your department instead of through municipal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly we’re not 
opposed to the concept of integration. In fact, there is a process 
outlined in the regional libraries Act that allows for exactly that. 
And what we require is that they are willing partners and that 
there is a signed agreement and, for example, Tisdale has 
already undergone this process, but I would encourage other 
jurisdictions to look at integrating their services. This is new in 
terms of the Department of Learning to have responsibility for 
the provincial libraries and I would look forward to seeing 
enhancements as we move into next budget cycle. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another issue that’s 
of the concern to a number of school boards, especially in the 
cities, is the number of high-school dropouts and the number of 
hidden children in the system. And doing some of the estimates 
and some of the documentation I’ve received, your department 
has been considering looking at a PIN (personal identification 
number) number or student identification number so we can 
track these students. 
 
Can you tell me what . . . where you are in this process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, we are implementing a 
student tracking system. This was one of the recommendations 
of the Role of the School’s final report. This is something that 
the government has endorsed. We have very good co-operation 
from the FSIN and the target for full implementation is 
September 2003. 
 



July 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2681 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the other 
issues that I noticed in the budget is the fact that we now have 
Early Childhood Development under Learning, and there’s $73 
million coming from the federal government over the next five 
years for this initiative. Can you tell me what the Department of 
Learning will be spending their $15 million a year on when it 
comes to dealing with children that are in Early Childhood 
Development, or is part of the money going into the Department 
of Health as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the Early Childhood 
Development initiative is an interdepartmental initiative 
involving Health, Social Services, and Education. K to 12 
Education is previously stand alone. With the new Department 
of Learning, we have the early childhood development or Kids 
First initiative. We have the K to 12 system. We have the 
post-secondary and skills training initiative, and the regional 
libraries minus the career and employment centres which have 
been transferred out to Social Services. 
 
So early childhood development, interdepartmental initiatives 
spread over three departments, I think, the allocation for all 
three departments was a little over $9 million this year. The 
phase-in time of the federal dollars of the 73 million is more 
likely going to be spread out over six years because of the lag 
time in terms of the community development model initiative. 
 
The areas that are targeted are core neighbourhoods, high-risk 
areas. And the primary support within the Department of 
Learning in terms of the dollars allocated would be going into 
things like early learning centres, expansion of 
pre-kindergarten, and things like that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate this answer. The last 
question I have is on the graduation rate for our native students, 
and we’ve been reading a lot of reports lately on the fact that 
there’s a way to . . . few Aboriginal students are actually 
graduating, and I know that there are a number of schools on 
the reserves now, and so we’re hopeful that this will encourage 
students to stay in school. But we also have a large Aboriginal 
population that are attending public school systems. And I 
know that the numbers of . . . the drop-out numbers in that 
system is high. 
 
What are you doing, what initiatives is your department 
working on to ensure that we have a graduation, higher 
graduation numbers of all students in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, Aboriginal education is 
one of the major strategic initiatives undertaken within the 
department’s strategic plan. 
 
Currently with regard to curriculum development, we are 
working with the Treaty Commissioner. We are accessing all 
curriculum. We are looking at language curriculum with the 
P.A. (Prince Albert) Grand Council. We are also working with 
the WCNP Aboriginal languages, and also English as a second 
language in the North, we’re providing additional funding. 
 
We’re also looking at alternate programs at several . . . in 
collaboration with several First Nations, including Flying Dust, 
the North Battleford Aboriginal school, and the Regina Public 
partnership, just to name a few. And within our Community 

Schools, we have our elders program, our pre-kindergarten, and 
our northern and rural initiatives. 
 
With regard to the high school dropout rates, I think the 
member opposite is aware of the StatsCanada report that came 
out in January that shows Saskatchewan with the lowest high 
school dropout rates in Canada, and a decrease from the 1991 
census, which has the high school dropout rates in 
Saskatchewan at 16 per cent, we’re down to 9 per cent. And 
that is the lowest high school dropout rate in Canada. 
 
And that is I think in part to the initiatives that we have been 
incorporating with regard to Community Schools, but also the 
number of initiatives that we’re continuing to engage. And with 
the tracking system that will be fully implemented in September 
2003, I think we’re going to have a very good handle in the 
hidden youth problem that was identified by Michael Tymchak 
in the Role of the School final report. 
 
But I agree with the member opposite that a high school 
dropout is a concern to all of us and that we’ll do whatever we 
can in our initiatives to make sure that we provide the 
opportunity and the resources to support our secondary students 
so that they can complete their high school education. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I am sure 
the minister is aware that the lowest high school dropout rate 
that he is discussing, the report in January, didn’t include the 
dropout rate on reserves, and that was something that was a 
concern to a number of people, so it really wasn’t giving 
accurate numbers, Mr. Minister. 
 
I am sure that before we . . . if we have an opportunity to ask 
questions again before an election is called, I’m going to be 
interested to see what your department has done with the 
SchoolPLUS initiative and the initiative of interagency co-
operation. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Minister, I would like to thank your 
officials for their help tonight, and for yourself as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I too would like to thank 
the members opposite for the quality of their questions this 
evening, and the diversity of the questions. And to my officials, 
who provided the answers and all I had to do was relay them to 
the members opposite, I’d like to thank all of them this evening 
as well. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (LR01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (LR02), (LR03), (LR08), (LR11), (LR12), (LR13), 
(LR15), (LR04) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Learning 
Vote 169 

 
Subvote (SA01) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation 



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 2002 

 

Vote 170 
 
Subvote (ED01) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
Vote 169 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 159 

 
Subvote (SL01) — Statutory. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 23:35. 
 


