















































Hansard: December 18, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3035 
 December 18, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
more petitions from citizens of Hudson Bay and area. This is in 
addition to the many petitions and the hundreds of names that I 
have submitted to date, Mr. Speaker. These are individuals who 
are concerned about the shortage of long-term care beds in 
Hudson Bay. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary changes that would allow for an expansion of 
at least five long-term care beds in the community of 
Hudson Bay to meet the needs of the citizens of Hudson 
Bay and the surrounding area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Hudson 
Bay, Prairie River, Preeceville, Mistatim, Weekes, and Erwood. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Shamrock. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on the Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
And the prayer is signed by residents of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again on behalf of residents of all of the southwest corner of the 
province who are concerned with the state of the hospital in 

Swift Current. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current and the communities of Shaunavon, Stewart 
Valley, and Maple Creek. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens in my constituency that 
are concerned about the rising costs of drugs. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Kincaid, Meyronne, Gravelbourg, and Hazenmore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reductions in services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctor 
services available, as well as lab services, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Girvin, Davidson, Smiley, 
Rosetown, Bladworth, and Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I continue to receive 
petitions from citizens concerned about the Kyoto accord and 
the implications on the Saskatchewan economy. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary action to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 



3036 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the citizens of Biggar, Cando, Landis, and Perdue. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
petitions to present on behalf of constituents. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
Regional Health Authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Bulyea and Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 22, 129, 165, 169, 174, 437, 438, and 442. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
welcome to your gallery today two individuals who work 
closely with me on a daily basis, that being Mr. Rob 
Cunningham and Mr. Benn Greer. And I would invite all 
members to give them a very warm welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Shortage of Long-term Care Beds in Hudson Bay 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this week I have been presenting petitions from Hudson Bay 
and district residents concerned with the insufficient number of 
long-term care beds in Hudson Bay. 
 
Currently Hudson Bay is equipped with only 15 long-term care 
beds to serve both a large geographic area and a large 
population. As you can imagine, this shortage is resulting in an 
increasingly large waiting list for people requiring long-term 
care. According to the town of Hudson Bay, complications have 
also occurred when acute care beds have had to be used by 
long-term care patients. 
 
In the last several years, due to the shortage, many patients have 
been required to look to other centres for their long-term care 
needs. The closest facility from Hudson Bay is Tisdale which is 
100 kilometres away. 
 
One letter I received was from Elvina Rumak, whose mother 

has been forced to go to Tisdale. I will read from her letter. I 
quote: 
 

I have been making two trips a week to Tisdale for . . . 
visitations with my mother being the only child in this 
family — this costs approximately $40 . . . (to) $80 . . . (a 
trip and it) becomes quite costly and I do not know how 
long I can financially continue these frequent visitations. 

 
Many citizens and organizations have devoted a great deal of 
time towards urging this government to assist their community 
with the changes necessary to allow for a minimum five 
long-term care bed expansion. They have written letters, 
compiled information, and distributed petitions and held 
meetings. This is something that is a great concern to many 
people and they feel that this issue needs to be addressed 
immediately. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Christmas Message 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we prepare to 
leave this place, as we prepare to spend the balance of the 
season of peace and expectation with friends and family, I 
would like to refer to a Christmas radio message from 1975. 
Just as the first Christmas message long ago, what was said is 
particularly relevant today. 
 
It was noted that while we yearn for peace, the world is 
constantly beset by war, terrorism, and violence. And yet 
Tommy Douglas said, and I quote: 
 

The shepherds who heard the message of ‘Peace on Earth’ 
did not consider that to be a description of things as they 
were, but a vision of what they might be if we could learn 
to live together in a spirit of mutual goodwill and better 
understanding . . . Peace on Earth is not something we 
have achieved but something for which we must strive. If 
Christmas means anything, it should mean that, like the 
shepherds of old, we catch a vision of the world as it ought 
to be and not (just) as it is. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our world today is beset by wars and rumours of 
wars. All the more reason then to gather together with loved 
ones, to reaffirm within ourselves that which inspires hope and 
trust, to observe the season in whatever manner is our custom, 
and to renew the seasonal pledge of goodwill to all. 
 
As Tommy said: 
 

If we and our children are going to live in a world at peace 
then the Spirit of Christmas must be part of our everyday 
living and permeate our national life. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Merry Christmas to all; and to all members, peace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1A and 2A Provincial Volleyball Champions 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) we often wear a 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3037 

 

different hat. Today I’m wearing two. One is the MLA for 
Rosetown-Biggar and the other is a proud parent. 
 
The Beechy Blazers 1A senior girls volleyball windup party 
occurred at our house last night. The Blazers experienced a 
great season culminating in winning the 1A provincial 
volleyball championship in Imperial last month after a season of 
43 wins and 0 losses against other 1A teams. In fact they were 
first or second in every tournament this year playing against 
even 2A, 3A, and 4A teams. 
 
However there was one team that gave them a great deal of 
competition. That competition came from a 2A school, the 
Lucky Lake senior girls team who won the divisions. And 
congratulations also go out to the Lucky Lake 2A girls squad, 
who not only beat the Blazers on occasion but also went on to 
win a provincial championship of their own — the 2A 
provincial banner held in Allan. 
 
Congratulations to the Beechy and Lucky Lake senior girls 
volleyball teams, their coaches, and proud parents on great 
seasons accompanied by great attitudes and great 
sportsmanship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Dress-A-Champion 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday I 
had the great pleasure of attending the 10th annual 
Dress-A-Champion. The event is sponsored by SaskPower and 
supported by many other community groups. But the main drive 
behind this wonderful endeavour is Ehrlo Community Services 
Sport Venture, and they and their main organizer, Russ 
Matthews, do wonderful work. 
 
Dress-A-Champion keeps up the claim of its name. It provides 
for the distribution of free hockey equipment to Regina and 
inner-city children — to kids that otherwise might not be able to 
afford the expensive essentials that go with hockey. 
 
The event got its start in a classroom at Ranch Ehrlo in 1992 
when Russ Matthews and his students set about working to 
remove the pricey barriers that otherwise might block kids 
without the money from the joy of hockey. Their efforts met 
with an enthusiastic response and in 1993 Russ and the gang set 
up the Outdoor Hockey League. The OHL has gone on to 
become a civic treasure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The value of the OHL and Dress-A-Champ was borne out this 
Saturday when over 100 volunteers worked with groups like 
SaskPower and Regina’s Optimists to distribute 400 hockey 
sticks and 350 pairs of new and used skates. 
 
What does the OHL and Dress-A-Champ mean to the kids? A 
quote from Russ Matthews: 
 

The best thing I saw was one kid getting a new pair of shin 
pads. You should have seen the look in his eyes when he 
held them up. His eyes were so full of optimism and 
anticipation and excitement. 
 

It spilled right across the Outdoor Hockey League, and I wish 

Russ and all the volunteers and the players to keep on being 
champions and keep up the good work. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to New Saskatchewan Bar Member 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to congratulate 
Andrea Leaman Argue, originally of Chaplin, Saskatchewan, 
for recently being admitted to the Saskatchewan bar. In a bar 
admission ceremony conducted by the Hon. E.D. Bayda, Chief 
Justice for Saskatchewan, Andrea was recognized for obtaining 
the highest mark in the Saskatchewan bar exam for the year 
2002. 
 
Such accomplishments at a relatively young age are an 
indication of an individual with a good fundamental education 
and commitment to post-secondary studies. Obviously Andrea 
has worked very hard to achieve success that can be attributed 
to a strong work ethic, self-discipline, and a strong and 
supportive family environment. 
 
I am especially pleased that Andrea has chosen to practise law 
in our province. While I am sure she will be a valuable asset to 
Anderson & Company law firm of Swift Current, she is an even 
greater asset to her community and to the future of 
Saskatchewan. I am confident her achievements will serve as an 
inspiration to future generations of Chaplin school students. 
 
Her parents must be very proud. Andrea is the daughter of Ellis 
and Bev Leaman of Chaplin, Saskatchewan. Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
future is wide open and Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations 
have played an important role in the development of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Did you know, Mr. Speaker, that the province’s Crown 
corporations have strict buy-Saskatchewan policies and spend 
$2 billion in our province every year on employee wages and 
local goods and services? The province’s Crown corporations 
are important, respected customers of over 12,000 
Saskatchewan businesses. Over 9,000 Saskatchewan people at 
work at our Crown corporations — half are located in 
non-urban communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Saskatchewan’s four major Crown corporations partner with 
over 600 local dealers and brokers to deliver 
telecommunication, insurance, and natural gas services all 
across the province. 
 
Crown corporations were established many years ago to provide 
utility and insurance services at affordable rates to people 
throughout the province, and that remains their number one job. 
 



3038 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

Since 1997 the Crowns have paid $600 million to the General 
Revenue Fund. On 2002 earnings, CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) will pay another $300 million in 
regular and deferred dividends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crowns will continue to fulfill their mandates 
as engines of growth and opportunity for our wide open future. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maintenance of the Diefenbaker Homestead 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last summer the provincial government closed the Diefenbaker 
homestead buildings. The original buildings dated from the turn 
of the last century at the family farm near Borden. They were 
relocated to Wascana Centre in 1967. As we move to our 
provincial centennial, this link with our past must not be lost. 
 
Diefenbaker was Saskatchewan’s only prime minister, the 
author of the first Bill of Rights, and a champion of civil 
liberties as demonstrated when he granted voting rights to First 
Nations. 
 
In light of Mr. Diefenbaker’s place in Canadian history, I call 
on the provincial government to provide the estimated $11,000 
required to maintain the homestead. 
 
If the government does not consider the preservation of these 
buildings important to our history, they should say so clearly 
now. Then it will be up to Saskatchewan citizens to express 
whether they think the homestead is worth saving. Diefenbaker 
was a great believer in the wisdom of the people and it will be 
up to the average citizen to convince the government that 
history is worth preserving. 
 
As Mr. Diefenbaker loved to quote, “a nation without a history 
has no future.” 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investment in Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday the legislature made changes to The Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool Act. These changes will give the Wheat Pool the 
flexibility it needs to attract new private sector investment. 
 
However before the Bill was even passed, the Minister of 
Agriculture was telling reporters that the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) is considering putting government money 
into the Pool. Mr. Speaker, the Pool now has the opportunity to 
attract private investment. It should be given the opportunity to 
do so. The last thing we need is the NDP pouring millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars into a grain company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Will the Premier give us assurance 
that his government will not be buying shares or providing any 
debt equity or financing to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin my 
comments this morning by saying exactly what I said yesterday 
to the media and to the people of Saskatchewan. And this is 
what I said to the media, and I say to the member opposite this 
morning and to this Assembly: that when the question was put 
to me about whether or not we’ve had any discussions with the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, I said that we have had confidential 
discussions with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, like many other 
organizations across the province have had confidential 
discussions with the Wheat Pool because, Mr. Speaker, of their 
value to the province and agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was asked by the media about whether or 
not this government was investing in the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool through a share offering — and I say to the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar this morning — I said that there have been 
absolutely no commitments by this government and there have 
been absolutely no decisions by this government to make any 
kind of financial investments in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
And that is the position that we’ve taken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, we need to today recognize 
the kind of work the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has done in this 
province, and in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a debate about the 
importance and the role of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in 
Saskatchewan’s economy. The minister is accurate in saying 
. . . in relating his comments to the media outside of this 
Assembly yesterday. In fact, the minister said that no decision 
had been made. No decision has been made. That’s the 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The legislation was passed yesterday by this Assembly. What 
we need now from the government is a confirmation or a denial 
that these discussions also involved the possible investment by 
the NDP government into the Wheat Pool. Mr. Speaker, it 
seems like a fairly simple question to ask on behalf of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. And quite frankly, it deserves a 
straight and unequivocal answer — not one that no decision has 
yet been made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the NDP government considering becoming a 
shareholder or a debt or equity investor in the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool? Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the members 
opposite and members on this side of the House debated the 
importance of the changing of the legislation to allow the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Mr. Speaker, to proceed to do the 
kind of work that it needs to do. 
 
And I say to the members opposite — and those on this side of 
the House already understand this, Mr. Speaker — that the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool today is undertaking a number of 
issues to secure their position as a significant corporate entity in 
our province. 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3039 

 

And it would be unusual, Mr. Speaker, for the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool in my view not to have conversations with one of 
its greatest partners in this province which has been the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And irrespective of 
which political stripe has been in government in Saskatchewan, 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has done business with them. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and to this 
House, we need to cherish the work of the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool in this province, Mr. Speaker. And I say to the members 
opposite that there has been confidential conversations with the 
Wheat Pool, and there’s been no commitments made with the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meeting with Electronic Data Systems Officials 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there must be a serious shortage space . . . 
shortage of office space here in the city of Regina because 
yesterday we confirmed that the hand-picked . . . the NDP 
hand-picked president of CIC, Mr. Frank Hart, indicated that he 
had to fly all the way to Minnesota in August to tell EDS 
(Electronic Data Systems) that he wasn’t interested in a 
proposal to privatize IT (information technology) jobs at 
SaskTel. 
 
And while Mr. Hart was in Minneapolis, he decided to take in a 
couple of rounds of PGA (Professional Golf Association) golf 
at the PGA championship, and dinner just outside the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan and EDS have 
plenty of office space and boardrooms right here in the city. 
And SaskTel, frankly, has some pretty decent long-distance 
rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why couldn’t the NDP’s hand-picked president of 
CIC meet with EDS officials that are already here in Regina or 
just pick up the phone instead of flying all the way to 
Minnesota for dinner and a golf tournament? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
need to first of all, Mr. Speaker, report to the Assembly that I 
had an awful night’s sleep last night, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was visited last night by that ghost of Christmas past, Mr. 
Speaker. I was visited by the ghost of Christmas past, Mr. 
Speaker, and you know what? It was a little fellow playing a 
guitar inviting me to visit the Country Music Hall of Fame, Mr. 
Speaker. It was awful. I tossed and I turned all night, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? When I woke up 
this morning and realized that it wasn’t true, Mr. Speaker, I felt 
wonderful. 
 
If they’d just get on the program and realize that we have a 
bright, important, wonderful, great future here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and quit criticizing every positive economic 

development initiative that this government takes part in, all of 
us would be better off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the real nightmare in 
this province — the real nightmare in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they don’t have an answer or when they 
refuse to answer, they fill in with really lame and bad jokes, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is the same minister, the one that just 
got up with his attempt at humour, this is the same minister that 
called a $28 million loss at SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Corporation) a large success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the same minister who refuses to comment on what 
apparently were actions by him to sabotage a private sector 
company. 
 
This is the same minister that refuses to answer questions about 
one of the biggest cover-ups in modern political history in this 
province — that’s spudgate, Mr. Speaker. That’s who we’re 
talking about here. 
 
Well now this particular minister has a senior official who 
needs to travel all the way to Minnesota to meet with EDS 
(Electronic Data Systems) officials to say no, we’re not 
interested in a proposal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: when will he 
get a handle on his portfolio? When will he start providing 
answers to the Assembly and when will he start controlling Mr. 
Frank Hart over at the CIC offices? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this 
member and this party can continue to criticize our public 
servants, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that 
the president of Crown Investments Corporation has a role, Mr. 
Speaker, in our government and that is, Mr. Speaker, to attract 
every and investigate every economic initiative that he possibly 
can check, Mr. Speaker, to try and bring jobs back to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The proposal that was presented would have brought some 
hundreds of jobs to this province and if that member is now 
suggesting that our president, a senior official in charge of 
economic development, should not be investigating and trying 
to attract business to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they should 
stand up and say so. But, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important 
that our senior officials, our senior officials in government, Mr. 
Speaker, seek out every positive initiative that they possibly can 
around economic development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Treaty Land Entitlement Claims 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
office is being flooded with calls and letters from ranchers in 
southwest Saskatchewan who fear that they may lose their land 



3040 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

and their livelihood as part of the government’s treaty land 
entitlement process. Massive claims involving thousands of 
acres of Crown land is affected, and all of this land is leased by 
ranchers. Some of the land has been in the family for three 
generations, and now these ranchers believe that they may be 
forced to give the land up, rendering their operations 
completely uneconomic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these ranchers have always been of the 
understanding that they would be given the first opportunity to 
renew when the lease expires. That has been government 
policy. Will it continue as government policy? Will the 
government guarantee that no one will be forced to give up 
lease land they are currently ranching, as part of a treaty land 
entitlement claim? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks a very 
important question — a very important question, Mr. Speaker. 
And not only does the member ask a very important question in 
terms of how it affects the future of ranchers in Saskatchewan, 
the member also asks a very fundamental and important 
question about what will be the decisions regarding the 
agreements that the province has signed regarding First Nations 
treaty eligibility. 
 
Because we have an agreement in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
which we entered with First Nations in which they can select 
property across the . . . or across our province. And we have 
long-standing leases today, Mr. Speaker, with agricultural 
families today, and farmers and ranchers. 
 
And today I can say to the member opposite, we’re engaged in 
this important discussion. We’re engaged in this discussion 
about determining how and where and in what fashion we’re 
able to work out a solution, a solution that will be helpful to 
meet the obligations under the treaty land entitlement, and a 
solution, Mr. Speaker, that will be helpful to ensure that 
ranchers in Saskatchewan who make a living, Mr. Speaker, off 
the management of the livestock industry and growing it. 
 
So we’re working today, Mr. Speaker, with First Nations people 
and ranchers to find a solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday we learned this 
government was haunted by ghosts of deals past, present, and 
future. Today we’re realizing that this government may actually 
be the grinch that stole Christmas for ranch families in the 
Southwest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first of these land claims was filed with this 
government at the beginning of October — the beginning of 
October, Mr. Speaker. The government has 90 days to respond 
and it’s supposed to immediately notify all affected third 
parties. However, ranchers are telling me, Mr. Speaker, that the 
first they heard of these land claims was late in November. So 
the NDP had already circumvented the 90-day response time by 
60 days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people in the Southwest deserve answers, 

but they aren’t getting any from this government. No one in this 
NDP administration will give any of my constituents a straight 
answer. All they get is bafflegab. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Tomorrow afternoon, Mr. Speaker, there will be a public 
meeting on this issue in the Lancer hall. I will be there. The 
Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, and the Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs have also been invited. I expect they too will 
attend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is the question my constituents want 
answered. Will the current leaseholders be forced off their land 
as part of this government’s efforts to satisfy the treaty land 
entitlement claims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to 
the member’s description of the issue in his part of the province 
and I understand it fully because I’ve been meeting with 
ranchers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for the past year and a 
half. I understand this issue, Mr. Speaker, not only in his part of 
the province but also across the province. 
 
And I’m offended to hear the member say that these are going 
to be some kind of — and he uses the word deals. These are not 
individual, special deals for anybody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are public policy as it relates to the leasing of agricultural 
land, Mr. Speaker, and it is now in legislation, Mr. Speaker. We 
now have in legislation today, Mr. Speaker, an agreement with 
First Nations people about processes, which aren’t just in 
Saskatchewan but are national, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that we have today, Mr. 
Speaker, people who will be attending the meeting tomorrow in 
Lancer and I say to the members opposite, we have a long-term 
policy in terms of how we manage Saskatchewan. I’ll be 
interested to know what their policy is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearm Registration 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Justice. The Government of Nunavut has been 
successful in winning a court injunction that will protect Inuit 
from prosecution for not registering firearms by January 1. 
 
The federal government has argued their new firearms 
registration system is necessary to protect people, prevent 
crime, and give police information as to who owns firearms. 
How does allowing one group of people an exemption achieve 
those goals? If the federal court decision contemplates an 
exemption for one group of gun owners, in this case the Inuit, 
then gun registry fails to meet the federal government’s stated 
reasons for establishing it in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the provincial government seek a similar 
injunction for Saskatchewan citizens while the courts deal with 
the legal challenge in Nunavut? 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3041 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a matter which has plagued Canada for a long time. This 
government, as the member will know, has been steadfast in its 
opposition to the gun registry. And indeed all parties in this 
legislature have been steadfastly opposed to the registration 
simply because, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, it won’t work, 
and it won’t do anything to ensure safety and security in our 
communities by attacking responsible firearms owners. 
 
Let me just say on the matter the member raises, the litigation 
instigated by First Nations people across this country is 
supported by firearms owners in this province. I’ve met with 
them on many occasions and they support the actions of the 
First Nations, Mr. Speaker, primarily because they want to 
ensure that the registry is not . . . is no longer in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member raises the important question of 
disparities across this country, It’s a matter we consider very 
carefully. The fact of the matter remains, Mr. Speaker, that I 
think everybody in this House is opposed to the registry and we 
will continue to take that position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’re 
glad to hear that the Minister of Justice is supportive of this. 
The federal government has given a court injunction which 
exempts one group of people in Canada from having to register 
their firearms on January 1, 2003, while everyone else is 
required to do so. Failure to register firearms or to own 
unregistered firearms could result in criminal charges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t fair. And the exemption of one group of 
firearms owners from the new federal law also undermines the 
federal government’s stated purpose for establishing the gun 
registry in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Canada the law should apply to all citizens 
equally. Will the Minister of Justice seek an injunction 
exempting Saskatchewan firearms owners from registration 
requirements until the court action in Nunavut is concluded? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Let me just say that I’ll consider that 
option and see how best to, see how best to proceed, Mr. 
Speaker. If that’s an option which appears to be workable, then 
we’ll certainly implement it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Insurance 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Throughout this 
session we’ve heard the NDP government blame the drought for 
their growing deficit. They’ve blamed the struggling agriculture 
economy for their huge provincial debt. They’ve used the tough 
times in agriculture as an easy excuse for so many problems of 
their own making. 
 

So let’s see exactly how serious the NDP take the financial 
difficulties being faced by the farm families today. Mr. Speaker, 
today the Saskatchewan Party will be introducing a motion 
calling on the NDP government to allow crop producers the 
option of not using the yields from this last devastating drought 
year in the calculation of their five-year crop year average 
which determines their crop insurance coverage for the next 
crop year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister and that NDP government 
support this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have been waiting for some 
weeks for the member opposite to come to her feet and talk a 
little bit about agricultural policy in Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible) . . . weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and I say to 
this House, thank you very much to the members opposite for 
not injecting themselves in rural policy. Thank you very much. 
Because every time the members opposite and the Leader of the 
Opposition inject themselves in rural agricultural policy, we 
have an absolute mess, Mr. Speaker — an absolute mess. And 
so thank you very much to the members opposite for not 
injecting yourself in agricultural policy for the last year and a 
half. 
 
I say to the members opposite . . . And the member opposite 
said to me, and the member from Kindersley, who is now here, 
a year and a half ago or year ago said to me, you know what? 
We’ve got a plan in agriculture and you’re going to see our plan 
last February in agriculture. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 
We’ve seen nothing from them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a group of men and women — 25 men 
and women from rural Saskatchewan — who have no idea 
about agriculture in rural Saskatchewan, no idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, how dare that 
Agriculture minister blame the opposition for the problems in 
agriculture. That government and that minister are the ones that 
hiked the premiums in crop insurance. They stripped the 
variable price option and they’ve axed the spot loss hail 
coverage and they’re blaming the opposition for all their 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be many farmers in this coming year 
whose coverage will be so low due to the five-year average 
yield being down that it just won’t even pay for them to 
participate in the crop insurance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government blames its own fiscal 
situation on the drought just like they’re blaming the opposition 
for all their problems in agriculture, so I’m sure they also 
realize that the situation for crop producers that have been 
through one and possibly two years of drought. Why then, Mr. 
Speaker, will they not support this motion today that will help 
the producers for 2003? 
 



3042 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve come through, in 
Saskatchewan, the worst drought in the history of our province. 
And what have we done for agricultural producers, Mr. 
Speaker? This year, Mr. Speaker, we put money into a hay 
program for livestock producers in Saskatchewan. And what 
does the opposition . . . the opposition said well that’s a good 
thing I guess. But we heard nothing from them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we put money today in a hog program because the 
prices are lower, Mr. Speaker, and producers say thank you 
very much. And what did the opposition say? Oh this is not a 
bad thing. You know, finally they wake up to the idea that we 
have a crisis in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, we negotiated with the federal 
government to change the formula for western provinces on 
Fredericton. And you know what the member opposite from 
Watrous said in August? She said, you should go to Ottawa and 
negotiate a deal accepting what we have from Ottawa. And I 
have her quote, Mr. Speaker, from August. And today, Mr. 
Speaker . . . today, Mr. Speaker, we negotiated for 
Saskatchewan and Western provinces the best agricultural 
formula that this country has ever seen. And what did the 
member opposite say? Sign the deal in August. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Performance of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I 
guess it’s fitting that there’s a snowstorm on the last day of this 
session because that’s all we got from the NDP for eight days, 
is a big snow job. Mr. Speaker, we asked them how big is the 
deficit; they wouldn’t answer. We asked them about the 
cover-up in SPUDCO; they wouldn’t answer. We asked them 
about the status of their investment in FarmGro; they wouldn’t 
touch it with a 10-foot pole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we asked them if they planned to put 
taxpayers’ money in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And again 
even today, they would not answer. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
people deserve better than what they’re getting from an 
unelected Premier of an unaccountable government, a 
government that even lost the popular vote in the last election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
blatantly refused to answer questions. Why is the NDP so afraid 
to stand up and defend their record and to answer the questions 
of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these past 
eight days of sitting have provided to the opposition, the 
opposition party, an opportunity for once — for once — to 
come forward with a new substantive idea and a plan. Eight 
days of sitting, not one new idea, not one plan, Mr. Speaker. 
What have we heard? Day after day the sloganeering of that 
opposition party. The sloganeering, no plan. 

Compare that with a government, Mr. Speaker, who has a plan 
in agriculture, who has a plan in health care leading the nation, 
a plan in education, a plan for ethanol, a plan to grow the 
economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Everything we say 
we’re doing, they say can’t be done. Well I say, Mr. Speaker, 
those who say it can’t be done should not be interrupting those 
who are doing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my colleague 
just came forward with an idea for crop insurance. They weren’t 
listening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an NDP . . . we have an NDP government 
that can’t even spell the Premier’s name. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
can’t balance the budget. They won’t take responsibility for the 
millions of dollars that they’ve squandered. They won’t answer 
any questions about their actions. So really, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s only one question left to ask and that is, when’s the 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — We need an election so we can get this 
province back on track. We need an election to stop the NDP 
from blowing millions and millions of taxpayers’ dollars. Mr. 
Speaker, we need an election so we can get Saskatchewan 
growing again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that election can’t come soon enough. Will the 
Premier bring some Christmas cheer to Saskatchewan by 
calling an election so the people of this province can give 
themselves a gift, and that is the gift of good government, a 
Saskatchewan Party government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition now wants to talk about our party conventions. Let 
me talk about their party convention. 
 
You know, he denied his party members the right to debate 
public policy at his convention. They had one little resolution 
about Kyoto they debated in five minutes. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, he came into this session saying 
that that was going to be the big issue. The big issue in this 
session was going to be about Kyoto. We had a vote on Kyoto. 
The Leader of the Opposition didn’t even show up for the vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, you bet. You bet I’m 
looking forward, I’m looking forward to meeting that Leader of 
the Opposition and that party in a general provincial election 
because we’ll be talking about our plan for Saskatchewan — a 
plan that’s working. And we’ll point out the slogan that is their 
plan. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, just a moment. Maybe I err. Maybe they do 
have a plan; they’re just not willing to tell us what that plan is. 
Maybe that’s the problem. 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3043 

 

Now I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition today, I’m 
looking forward, I’m looking forward to meeting that Leader of 
the Opposition — not the leader from Swift Current, but that 
leader — meeting him in Rosetown. I’ll meet him in 
Riversdale, I’ll meet him in Regina, I’ll meet him in Radville. 
And when that election is over, they’ll have . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please; 
order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
Order, order. Order, please. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member just to defer . . . I 
would ask the member to defer his point of order for a few 
moments because I prefer to deal with a point of order one at a 
time and I have not yet responded to the previous point of order. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Yesterday the Opposition House Leader 
raised a point of order regarding the relevancy of certain 
answers given by members of the executive. I wish to thank the 
Deputy Government House Leader as well, in addition to the 
Opposition House Leader for their comments. 
 
I have reviewed the record and note that on several occasions 
over the past week the opposition has indicated, both on and off 
the record, its dissatisfaction with the answers given. 
 
The Opposition House Leader quoted paragraph 417 of 
Beauchesne's 6th edition which directs that: 
 

Answers to questions should . . . deal with the subject 
matter raised . . . 

 
I further note that he was correct in his comments when he 
referenced this Assembly’s practice of giving ministers a great 
deal of latitude in answering questions. 
 
For his part, the Government Deputy House Leader was also 
correct in noting that it is entirely within the purview of the 
government and its ministers to address a question in the way 
that they consider most appropriate. The corollary to this 
statement is that answers may be given that are procedurally 
correct but which may not contain the information that the 
questioner sought. 
 
The role of the Speaker in these . . . Order. Order, please. The 
role of the Speaker in these circumstances is restricted to 
applying the applicable rules and procedures. I direct members 
to a ruling made on December 22, 1986 in which my 
predecessor stated: 
 

I want to re-emphasize that the Chair cannot insist that a 

minister must answer a question a certain way. As long as 
the answer is relevant, it is in order . . . 

 
Order, please. Order. 
 

As long as the answer is relevant, it is in order even if the 
answer isn’t the one the questioner was seeking. I define 
relevancy in answers in the same broad way as in all 
debates in the Assembly. A remark is relevant if it deals 
with the topic raised . . . 
 

I indicated yesterday that I would bring back guidelines, and I 
intend to do so now. 
 
First, I remind all members of the purpose for question period. 
Question period is a forum in which to seek information, 
publicize government programs and decisions, and to hold the 
executive accountable for its actions. 
 
Concisely phrased questions and responses will uphold these 
purposes. Rambling preambles that contain extraneous matter 
only invite rambling responses. If a member . . . if members 
wish to have direct answers, they would be well advised to limit 
the extraneous matter that they include in their preambles. 
 
Secondly, question period was not intended merely as a warm 
up for events later in the day, such as media scrums. I remind 
all members that they remain accountable to this Assembly 
first. It is a long-established, parliamentary tradition that, 
whenever possible, important matters should be dealt with first 
in this Assembly. 
 
The growing willingness to provide information, to inform 
outside this chamber when it may have been done in the 
chamber, is eroding this tradition and reflects poorly on 
members’ respect for each other and for the legislature. 
 
Finally, I share the concerns raised in the point of order that 
some ministerial responses are occasionally straying beyond the 
boundaries of what is an acceptable level of relevance to the 
topic raised in the question. 
 
In keeping with the important role of this Assembly, I ask 
ministers to ensure their responses relate to the questions while 
respecting the restrictions of the sub judice convention. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a long-standing rule 
and practice in this House that the attendance or absence of 
members is not to be included in the debate and Hansard. 
 
We have observed that in noting the attendance or absence of 
the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and not commenting on it. 
 
I would ask that the Premier be instructed to not comment on 
the absence or attendance of members either in debate or in 



3044 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

question period as he just did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the House 
Leader’s point of order, I do refer you and the House, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Premier’s reference in question period today to 
the absence of the Leader of the Opposition from a vote — 
from a vote. 
 
And I refer you, Mr. Speaker, and all hon. members to page 4 of 
the Votes and Proceedings of Wednesday, December 11 in 
which is recorded for public consumption — is on the record — 
the vote taken on the Kyoto debate here in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the recorded division, on the recorded division, 
in which the names of all members are listed as they voted on 
the amendment, Mr. Speaker, there were 22 yeas, all of whom 
were members of the opposition, and not among those listed is 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
On the motion then, Mr. Speaker, when it was put, among the 
22 nays, again where members are listed, the names of the 
members, all of the opposition, but among them is not listed the 
name of the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, on the public record on the vote, on the 
vote, is listed the absence of the Leader of the Opposition when 
voting on the Kyoto resolutions in this House. Purely and 
simply, Mr. Speaker, that is . . . that was the reference of the 
Premier in the debate and I would urge you to find that the hon. 
member’s point of order is not well taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members, while I might like to allow 
myself the luxury of taking some time to look at these, I think 
the ruling might become quite moot if I don’t say something at 
this time. 
 
So I would just like to bring to the members’ attention, first of 
all, that they should not . . . be reminded of the rule that we 
should not do indirectly what we can do directly. That is, 
bringing any comment or making any comment indirectly 
which it could be interpreted that if you’re talking about a vote, 
that it may imply that that member is . . . has not been present. 
 
However that is . . . there are ways of saying that a vote, 
referring to a vote, which I think is quite proper, that will not 
necessarily imply the absence or presence of the member. 
However, and I do hold the point . . . uphold the point of order 
that the member is not to refer to anybody’s presence or 
absence in the legislature and I would ask members to observe 
that. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table the 
responses to written questions nos. 482 through 496, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has submitted 

responses to written questions 482 through to 496. 
 
Order, please. Why is the member from Watrous on her feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — With leave to move a motion under rule no. 
46. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Crop Insurance 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It’s rather appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that 
rule no. 46 allows me to propose a motion. It has to be in a 
motion that’s urgent and with pressing necessity, and 
considering that both the Premier and the Minister of 
Agriculture asked for our ideas on what we could do about 
agriculture and the difficulties they’re facing, this becomes 
more urgent and pressing because this is what the government 
itself has asked for. 
 
I’d like to take a few minutes because this is the season of 
reflection. And I want to reflect through the challenges in 
agriculture, in the whole entire industry throughout the year of 
2002. And at the end of recapping what has happened in 
Saskatchewan in agriculture in 2002, I will be moving a motion 
that will encourage the government to make changes to crop 
insurance that will assist the producers to face the challenges 
that I know that they are going to have to meet for the crop year 
in 2003. 
 
I don’t believe that we in this province could ever be more 
acutely aware of the extreme adverse effects of the failure of 
this NDP government to implement a meaningful . . . or a safety 
net program over the last 10 years — a safety net that would 
have not solved all of the problems of this year, for sure, Mr. 
Speaker, but it would have been a cushion. The producers could 
have entered the year in 2002 with a little more . . . a little more 
prepared financially, actually, to face the fact that we’ve had a 
severe drought. 
 
The NDP government has repeatedly blamed the challenges in 
agriculture industry for their own financial woes. They say that 
they’re in financial difficulty because of the agriculture 
problem. And now today obviously the minister thinks that 
there’s difficulties in the agriculture because of the opposition 
party — that we’ve created the problems in the agriculture 
industry. 
 
And this demonstrates in my mind like nothing else that there’s 
a total lack of vision, there’s a lack of planning for the future, 
and there’s a lack of prioritizing spending in this province 
shown by the NDP government. And it’s negatively impacting, 
Mr. Speaker, not just agriculture and agriculture producers, it is 
now to the scale where it’s negatively impacting the whole 
entire province. 
 
(11:00) 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3045 

 

And when you have a year such as we had . . . And I’ll use the 
minister’s own words, when you have a year that’s a wreck — 
and indeed 2002 has been a wreck for the agriculture producers 
— when you have a year that’s a wreck and you’ve entered that 
wreck already crippled by the lack of safety nets in place, a lack 
of support from both levels of government, then it is extremely 
difficult to face the challenges of that wreck, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s just review 2002 and we’ll begin with . . . You know, 
we’ll review what the NDP government has done to rectify the 
fact that they have neglected implementing a safety net program 
— a safety net program, by the way, that they promised in each 
and every budget throughout their governing years; a safety net 
that they promised would replace the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program which they themselves tore up. 
And let’s just review and see, and I think we will demonstrate 
quite easily the lack of vision that’s been demonstrated by that 
Agriculture minister. 
 
And it probably does explain, Mr. Speaker, why that 
Agriculture minister repeatedly says what’s the opposition 
party’s ideas, because he has none of his own. So he needs 
someone to give him some ideas. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, one of the first things that I notice 
when I look back through 2002 was the lack of the property 
land tax rebate. And a lot of people listening to this may wonder 
what the property tax rebate was, and indeed I can understand 
why — because it no longer exists. 
 
It was a program. It was a two-year program that the 
Agriculture minister of the day said would help the producers 
address the fact that commodity prices were low, that the input 
costs were increasing. And although they didn’t admit it, the 
fact is they’ve downloaded education funding quite shamefully 
on to agriculture producers — and on property owners as a 
whole in this province, not just agriculture producers. 
 
So they said, due to the difficult times, they would implement a 
property land tax rebate and they carried it for two years. And 
what happened in 2002? Well even though those difficulties 
were still there — these were difficulties that the government 
acknowledged and recognized — they took the program away 
and they just ripped that away. 
 
It kind of sounds like another program that they had done that 
to before that. I think it was called GRIP, Mr. Speaker, and they 
pulled the pin on that just as quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even implementing the program, I would like to 
point out . . . And this is just one example that I’m going to 
demonstrate where the minister tends to message the good 
things he’s going to do for agriculture in the province. He tends 
to tout it as if he’s doing it because he understands the industry 
and because he understands the difficulties. But in fact, I 
believe — and the fact they took it away substantiates that 
belief — that the only reason why they even implemented the 
program in the first place was not because they were going to 
take responsibility for the fact that they’ve downloaded 
education funding on to property owners, but rather because 
there was a rapidly accelerating tax revolt that was happening in 
rural Saskatchewan and they didn’t know how to deal with it. 
 

So the way they chose to deal with it was to put that rebate in 
place to encourage the property owners to indeed pay their 
taxes. Because of course, and understandably so, they had to 
pay their taxes in order to qualify for the rebate. And the minute 
that those property owners complied, they ripped the program 
away. So that is the first initiative that this particular 
Agriculture minister can brag about that he did to help out the 
agriculture producers in this province. 
 
The next initiatives, Mr. Speaker, is what I heard this minister 
call is an enhanced crop insurance. The forms arrived for that 
said enhanced program two weeks late, and as the producers 
soon found out many, many dollars short. And of course it’s no 
surprise that the Agriculture minister said that the reason why 
it’s late is it’s the federal government’s fault. And the reason 
why it was a few dollars short was, well that’s the federal 
government’s fault. 
 
But as typical of this particular Agriculture minister, the one 
that we have today, the one that we’re relying on and should be 
able to trust today, he announced details of the 2002 crop 
insurance program, Mr. Speaker, and he said — he admitted — 
that producers would have to pay 7 per cent more for their share 
of the reduced program. Now, Mr. Speaker, he led the 
producers to believe that the delay in the crop insurance was 
because there would be more enhanced programs in the crop 
insurance program. That’s why it was delayed. 
 
The reason why, he gave the producers, that there was a 7 per 
cent increase was because the federal government didn’t pony 
up with their share of the money. And yet Mr. Vanclief in the 
federal government says it simply isn’t so. It was something 
that this Agriculture minister and department had borrowed and 
so therefore they had to repay. 
 
But irregardless of who is responsible for the 20 million — and 
as the minister says, that created the 7 per cent increase — he 
told the producers there will be a 7 per cent increase. When the 
producers received their crop insurance forms those premium 
increases, Mr. Speaker, were 40, 50 and even 60 per cent 
increased. 
 
Oats was up 30 per cent. Canola was up 38 per cent. Durum 
was up 44 per cent. Chickpeas was up by 45 per cent. Barley 
was up by 50 per cent. And the premium for lentils, Mr. 
Speaker, the premium for lentils was up 64 per cent. 
 
Now I realize there are times when we can make mathematical 
errors but that goes far beyond a minor mathematical error. It all 
goes in messaging and how this minister messages what he is 
doing for the agriculture producers and how he deceives the 
producers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this so-called enhanced crop insurance dropped 
spot loss hail. It was something that was well liked by the 
producers so I’m sure that’s one of the reasons why he would 
need to scrap it. It was well received and there were very, very 
few complaints on the spot loss hail option that our crop 
insurance program used to offer. 
 
It dropped the variable price option and again that was a critical 
option, especially for this year. And a lot of producers who have 
done the calculations now that the crop year is over — and I 



3046 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

should say the crop is in the bins but unfortunately that’s not the 
case this year, Mr. Speaker — but they’ve done the math; 
they’ve pencilled out what the loss of the variable price option 
has cost them. And it’s dramatic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so basically the only thing that they’ve enhanced in this 
enhanced crop insurance program was the premium, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s shameful. And yet that minister will stand 
up and he will say time and time again that he has done so 
much for the producers of this province. 
 
I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t mention something 
that was added to the crop insurance program, and that was the 
little rainfall roulette game that he included in his crop 
insurance. 
 
Only . . . well actually less than 5 per cent of the farmers could 
participate in that program and it defied all logic in its design. It 
did absolutely nothing to address the hurt where it was, because 
you could bid on any rain station no matter where it was or 
where you lived. But in defence of that little program that he 
ran in his crop insurance this year, it did become great coffee 
shop talk. It became a good joke and that’s about all it did to 
help agriculture this year. 
 
Later in June, Mr. Speaker, the long-awaited federal agriculture 
package was finally announced, and sadly it was far short of the 
billion-dollar trade injury payment that we had hoped for and I 
know that the government had hoped for. In fact if the province 
chose not to participate, it only would amount to approximately 
$2 an acre for Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And in all honesty it should be entitled the Saskatchewan 
government fiscal irresponsibility impact compensation 
program, because if we do the math on what the producers had 
to pay extra this year with this Agriculture minister saying that 
he’s helping them so much — well the NDP government jacked 
up crop insurance rates and that cost the producers about 
approximately $4 an acre; and the NDP and that Agriculture 
minister cancelled spot loss hail so that cost the agriculture 
producers about $3.50 per acre; and the NDP cancelled the farm 
land property tax rebate so that cost the producers about 50 
cents an acre. 
 
So without even factoring in the huge loss farmers realized 
because the NDP cancelled the variable price option — without 
even using that calculation, Mr. Speaker — that’s a net loss to 
the producers in Saskatchewan of $6 an acre. That’s how that 
Agriculture minister has helped producers in this province. 
 
This is his vision. It’s no wonder he keeps saying to the 
opposition party, to myself, Mr. Speaker, what’s your plan, 
what’s your idea? Obviously his ideas aren’t working all that 
great. And this is why, Mr. Speaker, that minister doesn’t have 
a hope; he doesn’t have a prayer, Mr. Speaker, of winning the 
next election. 
 
As we continue down memory lane, Mr. Speaker, following 
session both leaders, the Leader of the Government and the 
Leader of the Opposition, embarked on provincial tours. The 
Leader of the Opposition visited a number of 
drought-devastated farm land municipalities. The leader of the 
NDP, which is our Premier, Mr. Speaker, visited pancake 

breakfasts, ball tournaments, golf courses. 
 
And the final result, Mr. Speaker, of these two tours that were 
conducted at the same time was the opposition party proposed a 
six-point plan of changes — and albeit it wasn’t enough but it 
was what we could fiscally afford — a six-point plan of 
changes that could be made to crop insurance that could ease 
some of the pressure that the producers were facing due to the 
drought. 
 
The NDP came back from their tour and proposed nothing, 
absolutely nothing. They could . . . Well no, that’s not true, Mr. 
Speaker. What they did was they criticized our six-point plan, 
said that it wasn’t, it wasn’t good enough. It wasn’t going to 
make a difference. It wasn’t going to help. And he proposed 
nothing. And that is again characteristic of what this minister 
has been doing for agricultural producers in the province. 
 
The messaging that he uses is alarmingly deceptive. And it was 
never more apparent than when he finally made an 
announcement. And he finally did, in . . . when he announced 
the drought package that they were . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Now why is the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your 
gallery we have seated two individuals who I met with earlier 
today. And they are doing some very powerful and compelling 
work in the province of Saskatchewan right now. We have 
Judge David Arnot, the Treaty Commissioner, from the Office 
of the Treaty Commissioner. And with him, Michael LeClaire 
of SchoolPLUS fame who now is the director of education in the 
Office of the Treaty Commissioner. 
 
They are currently meeting with officials and will be meeting 
with officials from my department with regard to a proposal for 
education that is very broad based, that deals with curriculum 
development on increasing education in our system with regard 
to treaties, and improving relationships across society. 
 
I’m very pleased to have met with them earlier today. And I 
would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as well, 
my welcome to the guests that were already introduced, but I’d 
like to introduce another gentleman in the gallery, Lionel 
Labelle. Now I don’t want him to be implicated by my 
introducing him because I know that in the Labelle family 
politics float freely. 
 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3047 

 

But his sister Pamela Labelle is a very good friend of mine and 
Lionel, although a bunch of his background has been with 
agriculture, is doing a lot of innovative consulting work and 
particularly lately with people with disabilities. And we’ve 
discussed some interesting ideas. 
 
So I’d just like the Assembly to join me in welcoming Lionel 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — With leave to introduce guests. And I also 
would like to join with the previous member in welcoming 
Lionel Labelle to the Assembly. 
 
Lionel is originally from Sedley, Saskatchewan and his family 
ran a dealership there in Sedley. And I know we went over and 
bought a number of pieces of equipment. And I always thought 
it was interesting how long it took some days for a deal to be 
closed in the Labelle shop as Dad seemed to spend a lot of time 
after the deal was formalized. 
 
But, anyway, I’d like to welcome Lionel to the Assembly and 
hope he enjoys his stay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my colleagues who 
have recognized the members who are here today in your 
gallery as our guests. 
 
I do want to, in particular however, Mr. Speaker, to recognize a 
Mr. Michael LeClaire because when I was the Minister of 
Education, I had the opportunity of touring his school, Nutana 
high school in the province, where Mr. LeClaire was the 
principal. 
 
And I have to say that when I had the opportunity of touring the 
school, I recognized the tremendous work that he was doing in 
integrating public service and the school system. 
 
And it’s from that meeting that we had that grew the Role of the 
School and which has been a tremendous document which 
Minister Melenchuk has taken on. The minister from 
Northwest/Learning has taken forward and now built a very 
strong program in Saskatchewan. 
 
But you should know, Mr. Speaker, that the key principals in 
getting this project on its way was Michael LeClaire. And I 
want to thank him for the tremendous work that he’s done not 
only in his school, but for the policy position that we’ve taken 
in this province which by and way has been spawned by his 
work at Nutana, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Crop Insurance 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 

was mentioning prior to the introduction of guests, that the 
messaging . . . producers have caught on very quickly that they 
have to be very cautious about the messaging that they get from 
this Agriculture minister. He rolled out a multi-million dollar 
package which was his drought package for this summer. In 
reality it only added $20 million of additional drought 
assistance. 
 
He tried very hard to make it sound like it was far more dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, but it only took very little time in fact for 
everyone to realize that that was not the case. In fact it was less 
than half the amount that the NDP cut out of the agriculture this 
spring when it cancelled the farm land property tax rebate 
alone. It was less than that. 
 
Throughout all of this there’s also been the ongoing federal 
APF (agricultural policy framework) negotiations — 
negotiations that this NDP minister has had little participation 
in, to my knowledge. And it demonstrates again, more than 
ever, that he has . . . he’s lacking in leadership on this particular 
issue. 
 
He’s also lacking in a clear, clear message. First he’s going to 
sign; he’s not going to sign; he is going to sign; he’s not going 
to sign. It’s like the rainbow flavour of the week, from one 
week to the next, what he’s going to tell media what we’re 
going to do. There’s a lack of leadership and a lack of direction 
and a lack of vision by this minister. 
 
And now I read an article — not all that long ago, Mr. Speaker 
— that apparently there was a meeting and there’s concerns by 
the ministers of where the APF negotiations are going. And 
they’re concerned that perhaps the planning of a new safety net, 
a new program, will be lacking because it’s going to be rushed. 
And they’re saying why do we rush it; why don’t we do a good 
job? And yet, in that case, our Agriculture minister who hasn’t 
signed, who hasn’t been participating, Saskatchewan minister, 
Clay Serby who has not signed the APF said, he does not — 
meaning he does not want to wait. 
 
I wish he would let Saskatchewan know what his plan is at the 
end of the day on this. Where is it going? I have placed phone 
call after phone call to that minister, who has never returned my 
phone calls, and all I wanted to know was how those 
negotiations were going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time again we hear the minister say 
what’s your plan. We hear the media and the public, and quite 
justifiably, say where’s the money going to come from? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take too long to know that there 
isn’t a lot of money that’s going to be available for agriculture 
programs, but we could start with $20 million that was spent on 
the dot-com company in Atlanta, Georgia. We could discuss, 
and have discussed at length, the $28 million that was blown in 
the successful — so-called successful —enterprise in SPUDCO. 
There’s $6 million that was spent not all that long ago in Chile. 
There was $15 million that was spent in Mexico. There’s $88 
million that was spent in our land titles Crown corporation that 
just simply isn’t working. Recently, $80 million in Australia 
and now I read that they want to invest money in India. 
 
So perhaps there is money for agriculture programs. There is 



3048 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

money to do something meaningful, but you need to prioritize 
your spending, Mr. Speaker. It is ultimately important and it’s 
particularly important when we’re in a situation where, as the 
minister would say, we’re having a wreck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that I want to bring forward is 
addressing crop insurance and a small change that could be 
made. Presently there’s a clause in crop insurance that you take 
your last five years, your own farming practice record, and 
that’s averaged and that’s the basis that your present year’s 
coverage is calculated on. 
 
And this government said time and time again that the huge 
deficit that they’re facing is because of the drought. This is 
circumstances that’s out of their control. Well I say that the 
problems that the agricultural producers are facing is also out of 
their control. It’s not reflective of their farming practice or the 
ability of their soil on their farm to produce. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this motion, 
seconded by the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That this Assembly urge the provincial government to take 
the necessary action to give farmers covered by 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance the option to omit the 2002 
crop year when calculating their long-term average yield in 
recognition of the devastating drought that struck our 
province this year. 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be entering into the debate on this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look at this past year of 2002, particularly 
from the agriculture producers, the grain and oilseed producers 
of our province, and we looked at the various parts of the 
province, we will see two extremes. In the central and 
northwestern part of the province and the northern part of the 
province we had what was . . . been termed by Environment 
Canada as probably the worst drought on record. Yet in other 
parts of the province, particularly the southeast, we had 
excessive rainfall. And that excessive rainfall extended into 
parts of central and northern parts of the province during the 
harvest. 
 
So to say that this production year has been a trying one is a 
huge understatement, Mr. Speaker. We had areas of the 
province which produced nothing. There were farms, farmers 
who, in 30 and 40 years of farming, never took their combine 
out of the shed for the . . . and that was for the first time in those 
30 or 40 years. And in other parts of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
we had farmers not able to get out and harvest all their crop 
because of excessive flooding. 
 
So when we are faced with these extreme conditions, I think we 
need to make some changes to some of the programs — 
particularly crop insurance. And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that this motion that the member from Watrous put forward 
should be very strongly considered by the Minister of 
Agriculture and that change should be made to the crop 
insurance program. 
 
Certainly there are producers who would want to include the 
2002 yield data in this year’s . . . in the average calculation 

because they had some pretty good yields and they would want 
to incorporate them to bring their average yield for their farm 
up. But there are producers in the drought area of the province 
and some of those producers have suffered severe drought for 
two, three, and four years —and with this year being the worst 
of those drought years — who would benefit greatly by having 
the option to not include this year’s yield data because they had 
no yield, Mr. Speaker. And being able to omit that from the 
rolling average would be hugely beneficial, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this . . . as I said, this year has been a very unusual 
year and for those people who . . . and those farmers who have 
lived and farm in the worst drought area, it has been a very 
devastating and challenging year. And, Mr. Speaker, this comes 
in a year where this government and this Minister of 
Agriculture made some very detrimental and harmful changes 
to crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It has been calculated that due to the two changes alone of 
withdrawing spot loss hail and the variable price option, at the 
very least, farmers of this province suffered negatively to the 
tune of, at the very least, $150 million, Mr. Speaker. And that is 
a very conservative calculation. 
 
I raised the issue with the Minister of Agriculture during 
estimates earlier this year with regards to the withdrawal of spot 
loss hail and he agreed that that move alone would probably 
cost the farmers of this province an additional $50 million in 
increased hail insurance coverage . . . costs, I should say. 
 
Also, then if we look at the variable price option, if crop 
insurance is estimating a billion dollar payout, the variable price 
option allows commodity prices to rise by 25 per cent. And, Mr. 
Speaker, all commodity prices have risen dramatically this year 
because of the crop failures in Canada and the United States and 
in other parts of the world. 
 
So if that option had have been available to the producers, and 
granted not all producers would have selected that option, but if 
all the producers had of selected that option they could have 
actually seen their crop insurance coverage increase by another 
25 per cent or an additional $250 million. But as I said, not all 
of them would have selected it so in my calculations I lowered 
that number to 100 million just to . . . and as I said, I think 
that’s on the low side. 
 
So just to reiterate, the two changes that that minister made this 
year cost the producers of this province at a very minimum 
$150 million. 
 
And so now what we are asking . . . We’ve asked that minister, 
the Minister of Agriculture, to not make those changes earlier 
on when the program was first announced. He refused. So now 
what we are asking — and this is by and large no cost to the 
program or very little cost to the program — is to at least give 
the producers the option of eliminating this year’s coverage, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and the reason why this is important if we look 
forward to what could happen next year and in following years, 
if we look at what some of our . . . what Environment Canada is 
saying, what Dr. Peter Leavitt here at the U of R (University of 
Regina) is saying, is that Western Canada and Saskatchewan 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3049 

 

included, there’s a real chance of us seeing more drought in the 
upcoming years. 
 
Dr. Peter Leavitt has said that the prairies could relive the 
droughts of the ’30s. In fact he said that the odds are about 40 
per cent that southern Alberta will go through a series of 
droughts just as the prairie provinces did back in the ’30s. And 
central Saskatchewan, there’s a 25 per cent chance of that area 
of the province incurring significant drought. 
 
(11:30) 
 
So why is it important that this change be allowed, Mr. 
Speaker? Well it’s important so that producers have adequate 
coverage in future years so that they can have something to fall 
back on. It’s an insurance policy. It’s not unlike individuals 
insuring their automobiles or their houses except that it’s a very 
complicated program that people who don’t deal with it on a 
daily basis, you know, certainly wouldn’t understand how the 
program works. 
 
And what I would like to do is just briefly explain in general 
terms how the program works so that those people who aren’t 
familiar with the crop insurance program may get an 
understanding why this motion is so important to them. 
 
Coverage is determined by yield times a price, and at the end of 
the day it works out to . . . when the producer has . . . looks at 
his total contract, it works out to dollars. And I mean that’s 
what all of us insure for. When we insure our house, we insure 
to a certain level of coverage expressed in dollar terms, and we 
insure our automobiles the same. 
 
And this is the same, except that it starts with a yield on each 
crop, and that yield is determined by a rolling average of your 
own production history. And so therefore you can see if you 
incorporate a zero yield in a rolling average, it’s going to have a 
pretty dramatic effect on the amount of . . . on that yield figure. 
 
So when you determine the yield, you times that by the said 
price for the commodity, and then you end up with your 
coverage per acre for each crop. And then, of course, they’re all 
added up and that’s how you determine the amount, total 
amount of dollars that you have as far as coverage under your 
crop insurance program. 
 
And that’s a valuable figure to have when farmers are talking to 
their financial institutions or to their crop input suppliers, cash 
advance — particularly the spring cash advance needs that 
information — and of course the higher coverage you have, the 
more credit is available to you. 
 
And for those farmers who have suffered severe crop losses in 
the . . . over the past few years, they depend on those type of 
programs to secure the inputs and the financing needed to put in 
the following crop. And as I said, those calculations are done 
for the various crops. 
 
Now if we look . . . I’ve already said that there is some 
indication that we may be looking at some pretty severe 
droughts in the future in Western Canada. And if we look 
forward to 2003 to see what may be in store for various parts of 
the province, Mr. Speaker, we see that part of our province, the 

southern part of the province and perhaps the northeastern part 
of the province, have received over the last few months 
substantial moisture. And at least from a moisture standpoint, 
the prospects for a reasonable crop next year look fairly good. 
 
But we have a large area of the province — in fact the area that 
has suffered the worst drought, Mr. Speaker — that have 
received very little precipitation. I have talked to a number of 
farmers in the northwestern part of the province and I remember 
one farmer telling me that the moisture received this past fall 
was just enough to start a second growth and to delay harvest. 
In fact, that producer had a number of acres of crop out. But he 
said there really is no moisture there to start a crop in this 
upcoming year. 
 
And if we look at what’s happening today, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
snowing here in Regina and in parts of the province. And the 
forecasters tells us that the snow will . . . The part of the 
province that’ll be covered by today’s precipitation will be east 
of the third meridian. Well that basically is the east half of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. So the area that suffered the worst 
drought, according to the forecasters, aren’t going to be getting 
the much needed precipitation that we are here, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is very worrisome to those producers in that area. 
 
So they are very concerned about what a crop insurance 
program will look like for 2003. This option would be 
extremely useful to those producers, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
that we should be . . . this Minister of Agriculture should be 
incorporating that option. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture asks, well what are our plans. Well 
this is one small piece of our plan for agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
And let’s see if the Minister of Agriculture has the courage to 
adopt a plan that has been suggested by the opposition. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it is the Christmas season, the festive 
season, the time to be charitable and so on. And when I look 
across the way at members opposite and I see the Minister of 
Agriculture sitting there with the huge responsibility he has to 
develop plans for agriculture and programs that will greatly 
affect the producers of this province, and I look across at the 
rest of the members of his caucus, Mr. Speaker, and you know, 
because it is the Christmas season, you know, I feel somewhat 
sorry for him. Because really, when he . . . The sole 
responsibility of agriculture falls on his shoulders and if he 
would like some help from some of his caucus members — and 
this is in no way denigrating the other caucus members of his 
caucus — but really, there is no one over there with any 
experience or very little knowledge on agriculture. 
 
So the Minister of Agriculture is left there all alone, on his own. 
And he’s responsible for developing programs and policy for 
that government, and we can see that sometimes it falls far 
shorter of the mark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it would be in his best interests and in the best 
interests of producers in this province if he would accept some 
advice, some of the expertise. We have a great amount of 
expertise on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, a great deal of 
knowledge. I know the Minister of Agriculture’s commented on 
a few occasions that he feels that myself and other members of 
this caucus are very knowledgeable in agriculture. Well we’re 



3050 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

offering in this festive season a helping hand, Mr. Speaker, 
something to help him so that the producers of this province 
will benefit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at what’s in store in the future 
and I look at the new agricultural policy framework that the 
federal Minister of Agriculture has put forward some time ago 
and the implications that it could have for the producers of this 
province, and then I look across and I see the Minister of 
Agriculture, our Minister of Agriculture, who is . . . who has the 
responsibility to make sure that Saskatchewan is well 
represented, that Saskatchewan puts forward good plans, and I 
am fearful, Mr. Speaker. Because I said, the plans that this 
minister has put forward in the past have fallen short of the 
mark. We only need to look at the changes to last year’s crop 
insurance program to understand why farmers are fearful of 
leaving all that responsibility in that minister’s hands. 
 
I look at some of the information that’s on the Ag Canada Web 
site dealing with this new agricultural framework, and I see . . . 
one area there are five pieces, Mr. Speaker, to the new 
agricultural framework policy. One is food and food safety and 
food quality. 
 
Another area is the environment, and that area could have some 
huge implications for Saskatchewan farmers. They’re talking 
about controlling pollution and that sort of thing, which is a 
good thing, Mr. Speaker. We don’t want to be polluting our 
waters and our air and that sort of thing. But I understand that 
some of the requirements may be very onerous, and I would 
make . . . I would feel more comfortable if our Minister of 
Agriculture and his department were up to speed in that area. 
And I’m not convinced that they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we have renewal, science, and innovation, and 
business risk management. And that . . . if there’s one area that 
concerns me, Mr. Speaker, is that area of business risk 
management. Because in that area there is a . . . to quote, “a 
new approach being taken to risk management.” And crop 
insurance is becoming a major portion of business risk 
management. 
 
And in fact, if I read the information correctly, it is the intent of 
the federal Minister of Agriculture to boil all the farm programs 
down into two programs — that being NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) and crop insurance. 
 
Well if we’re only going to have those two programs, Mr. 
Speaker, we better make sure that those programs that . . . that 
the people making decisions on those programs get it right 
because they will have huge implications on the producers of 
our province. And there is . . . Huge responsibility rests on the 
shoulders of the Minister of Agriculture to make sure that 
Saskatchewan is fairly represented, that our Saskatchewan 
negotiators are knowledgeable, and that they get . . . and that 
when this whole process is completed, that the programs 
brought forward are in the best interests of our producers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I am not convinced and I don’t 
have the confidence in this Minister of Agriculture that I think 
. . . and I know farmers of this province are somewhat 
concerned, Mr. Speaker, and because of the past. 

And there’s some real concerns for us in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, as legislators. When I look at some of the information 
in that whole area of business risk management funding, there is 
. . . the federal government is talking about transition funding, 
wedge funding which sees, from the information I’ve been able 
to look at, sees a declining amount of funding to Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s a table in that section, Mr. Speaker, for illustration 
purposes but I would suspect that those numbers would pretty 
well reflect what . . . the thinking of the federal government in 
that. It’s entitled, “The transition wedge by province.” This 
wedge funding that the federal government talks about that 
they’re going to put in place from . . . next year until the end of 
2006, when by 2007 I understand that the new programs will be 
fully implemented. 
 
And when I look at that table, I see the wedge funding for 
Saskatchewan for next year at $13.1 million. Yet Manitoba is 
$22.4 million. Well that’s cause for concern, Mr. Speaker. Our 
agriculture industry in Saskatchewan is a much larger industry, 
Mr. Speaker, and so why is there fewer dollars? 
 
And then when we look at subsequent years, Mr. Speaker, our 
funding drops — as do other provinces — but our funding 
drops greater in relationship to the other provinces, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So those are some questions I think that farmers of this province 
want some real answers to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, this Minister of Agriculture has some huge 
responsibilities and to this point in time he certainly hasn’t been 
forward, coming forward with the information, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact I don’t recall this minister mentioning that word, wedge, 
transition wedge funding or explaining that concept to the 
farming public and to the citizens of this province, and 
explaining the financial implications that it may have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, crop insurance does play and it will 
play in the future a very important part of the whole risk 
management portfolio that farmers have . . . and program that 
farmers have to draw on. 
 
And so therefore it’s incumbent that farmers know what the 
programs are. They don’t need any more surprises. They don’t 
need any more enhancements of the type that this minister has 
put forward in the past year. And they need to have some 
assurances that they are being fairly and competently 
represented in the negotiations with the federal government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at the end of the day what we need in this province is farm 
programs, and crop insurance being one of them, that work for 
all farmers. That’s one of the things that I hear from a number 
of my constituents and farmers around this province is that 
some of them . . . There’s probably 25 per cent or so that don’t 
enrol in crop insurance; and asked why — they say the program 
doesn’t work for them. The numbers are too low, it’s too 
expensive in some cases, and that sort of thing. 
 
And what we need to do, if it is the intent of the federal 
government to have these two farm programs, NISA and crop 
insurance, then we’d better make sure, Mr. Speaker, that those 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3051 

 

programs work for the producers of this province and that they 
are affordable, Mr. Speaker. And it is that Minister of 
Agriculture’s responsibility to make sure that those programs 
take that type of form, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to support the motion. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be 
moving an amendment, seconded by the member from Regina 
Coronation Park, that will read this way: 
 

That the words after “Assembly” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 
 
that it supports the efforts of Saskatchewan farmers to 
adopt new practices and technologies that increase their 
competitiveness and profitability to pursue new market 
opportunities and diversification initiatives; and further 
 
that this Assembly express appreciation to the staff of the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance for their diligent efforts in 
serving producers that already processed a record amount, 
$750 million claimed payable to this date. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to begin my comments by saying first of all 
that I very much appreciate some of the words that the member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood spoke about today. Because it 
seems to me that on that side of the House, we do have an 
individual who does have a fairly strong appreciation of what is 
happening in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(11:45) 
 
And from time to time I’ve had conversations with him, both in 
the House and outside of the Assembly and during estimates. 
And he does, I must say, have a better grasp of the rural 
agricultural issues than anyone else that I’ve had a conversation 
with — I must say, Mr. Speaker — on that side of the House. I 
appreciate his comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, on the onset that I recognized . . . 
Well I should say, Mr. Speaker, that he is by far the strongest 
member from rural Saskatchewan that provides me with some 
information from that side of the House. And others, and others 
he’s gradually educating as we’re moving along, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the member opposite asked a minute ago from whom do I 
get my advice from. And I want to say to the member opposite, 
that’s it’s been now the better part of three years that I’ve — 
coming on to three years — that I have been the Minister of 
Agriculture. And I have been meeting at least every five or six 
weeks with farm leaders and farm groups in the province — 
actually face to face or through telephone conversations with 
them — and I’ve been doing that for the better part now of three 
years. 
 
And it is those farm leaders that have been helping me craft the 
kinds of agricultural policy that we have in Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
I do have also, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan the ability . . . and 

have a committee, the Farm Support Review Committee of 
whom I meet with, Mr. Speaker, also on a regular basis, 
probably every two months. And it has been that group of men 
and women who have been assisting me in the development of 
the farm safety net pieces in this province. And we’ve been 
moving that along nicely, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say though, at the onset, Mr. Speaker, that whom I 
have not been paying a lot of attention to in the development of 
agricultural policy in Saskatchewan is the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to you why it is that I have spent so little time 
in listening to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, about 
agricultural policy. And this motion today is a prime example 
about why it is that I’ve been spending so little time. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, today — we’ve just come out of one of the worst and 
most devastating droughts that this province has ever had. And, 
Mr. Speaker, what do they bring to the Assembly today to 
debate? What do they bring to debate? On agricultural farm 
policy, Mr. Speaker, and/or rural development, what’s their 
motion? 
 
Their motion is a sector of a farm risk management piece — 
crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. One little sliver of a farm policy 
of which they bring to the Assembly to debate after we’ve had 
the kind of year that we’ve had, Mr. Speaker. This is their 
contribution, Mr. Speaker, to farm policy, Mr. Speaker. This is 
their contribution to farm policy. 
 
And examine from where this farm policy sliver that they bring 
to the legislature today to talk about, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you 
where it comes from, Mr. Speaker. This recommendation to 
date comes from a 1980 policy. This is where it comes from. It 
comes from the old guy that . . . (inaudible) . . . say people are 
forgotten about — Mr. Grant Devine. 
 
This is exactly what he recommended, Mr. Speaker, in farm 
policy in the ’80s. This is his policy, where he said we should 
take crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, and what we should do is we 
should adjust it in the way in which they say we should do it 
today. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, you should examine the 
Crop Insurance Fund . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just ask the member to continue to speak 
to the Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker . . . and it’s you, Mr. Speaker, 
who I most like looking at. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that when you examine what happened to 
the crop insurance program in the ’80s, it was exactly this kind 
of a recommendation that made its way to bankrupt the 
corporation, Mr. Speaker. It bankrupt the corporation. And it 
took crop insurance rates to a level of which we’ve never seen 
before. 
 
And today this recommendation makes its way onto the floor of 
the House, and this is their major contribution to farm policy for 



3052 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

the last three and a half years, Mr. Speaker. This is their major 
contribution: that we should adjust crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
To a way in which it would do what? It would do what? 
 
And it clearly demonstrates how little they understand about 
farm risk policy. Little they understand. Because to make an 
adjustment as is recommended here today, Mr. Speaker, you 
have to do two fundamental things. The first thing you need to 
do is have a conversation with the reinsurance companies in 
Canada and across the world because they reinsure this 
program, Mr. Speaker, to hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
And the second discussion, Mr. Speaker, you would have to 
have is that you would have to have this approved by your 
national government in order to make adjustments to the crop 
insurance program in the way in which they suggest today. 
 
And today they bring this to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and 
they say, you know what? We’re going to help farmers in 
Canada and Saskatchewan today by adjusting the crop 
insurance program. By what? By what, Mr. Speaker? And to 
give them what additional dollars, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This is the Saskatchewan Party’s contribution to farm policy in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is their, this is their, this is 
their policy, Mr. Speaker. And I say to the members opposite, 
you have 25 members who represent rural Saskatchewan today, 
or at least you say you represent. You say you represent. 
 
And for the last three years, Mr. Speaker, I have not yet 
received, not one — except for today — where I actually have 
something in writing from the Saskatchewan Party that says we 
should make an adjustment to farm policy. This is the very first 
piece. 
 
And this recommendation that they bring today, Mr. Speaker, is 
so far out of touch with reality, so far out of touch because it’s 
not doable, Mr. Speaker. This is not doable in the framework of 
which we operate today in Canada — never mind Saskatchewan 
— in Canada. And this is their understanding of what we should 
be doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, why don’t you provide 
some direction? Why don’t you provide some direction in terms 
of what your agenda might be on farm policy? What would be 
your contribution to farm policy today? 
 
The Speaker: — Just another reminder to the minister in the 
way he phrases his questions. And I would ask him to phrase 
his questions through the Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m interested in 
learning, as we move along over the next while, what the 
Saskatchewan Party’s position will be on agricultural farm 
policy. And I can tell you what their contributions, Mr. Speaker, 
have been to date. 
 
And I’m proud to put my record on the line, Mr. Speaker, and it 
will be tested soon, Mr. Speaker. It will be tested in 
Saskatchewan today and we will be sure, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan people will know where this government stands 
on agricultural farm policy and rural development. 

And the member from Canora, people will know where he 
stands. Because the member from Canora-Pelly, Mr. Speaker, 
has not offered up any ideas or suggestions about farm policy, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact what I see, the member from Canora stand 
up from time to time and say, Mr. Speaker, what he says from 
time to time, Mr. Speaker, is this. He says you should not be 
investing in rural Saskatchewan, is what the member from 
Canora-Pelly . . . stands up and he criticizes investment in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet in his backyard he’s got hog barns going up and 40 
people that are working brand new in his constituency. And 
does the member from Canora-Pelly ever stand up and say, you 
know what? This is pretty darn good farm policy that you’ve 
got, Mr. Speaker, a pretty darn good farm policy. 
 
And in fact when the member from Canora-Pelly meets with his 
constituents, what he says is I support the hog industry in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And you know what? I support the 
investments in hog barn development in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But we hear . . . what’s the words that the member from . . . 
what does the member from Canora-Pelly say when he comes 
here? He says we shouldn’t be investing in rural Saskatchewan. 
We shouldn’t be investing in it. 
 
But you know what, every time that there’s investment that’s 
made, Mr. Speaker, every time there’s an investment made in 
his constituency, he shows up at the grand openings and he 
takes credit at the grand openings and he says what a good thing 
I’ve done for rural Saskatchewan today. But that’s not what the 
member from Canora-Pelly says when he’s in the House here, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s opposed to investment. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, what the contributions today on 
farm policy have been by the Saskatchewan Party. What has 
been their contributions? Well let’s take a look at what 
happened in the year 2000 when we travelled to Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker. The Premier of Saskatchewan, the Premier from 
Manitoba, and representation from the opposition party 
travelled to Ontario to get a new package for Saskatchewan 
farmers. And we negotiated, Mr. Speaker, at that point, an 
additional $300 million for Saskatchewan producers in 1999. 
 
And we weren’t home, Mr. Speaker, 10 minutes we weren’t 
home, and members of the Saskatchewan Party were in front of 
the media saying that, you know what, we should keep this old 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program. We 
should keep this AIDA program and we should convert it to a 
new language. And the member from Saltcoats was at that 
meeting, and the member from Kindersley was at that meeting 
in Ottawa, and they couldn’t wait to get back, Mr. Speaker, and 
endorse that AIDA program that we had in Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s been the contribution of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, on risk management — to adopt the AIDA, CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program) program. And we had it for 
two and a half years and every day they’d stand up in their 
places and say we should get rid of this thing. But they 
supported it, Mr. Speaker, on every occasion that they had. 
 
And then we have the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3053 

 

Well what did he hand off to Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. 
Speaker? What did he hand off? Well he handed off a $300 
million Crow rate payment that disappeared, Mr. Speaker. The 
member of the opposition hands that off. 
 
At that point, Mr. Speaker, he was representative of the 
Canadian Alliance Party, supporting Mr. Stockwell Day, Mr. 
Stockwell Day in his wonderful leadership campaign. And you 
know what happened to Mr. Stockwell Day, Mr. Speaker. And 
what happened to Mr. Stockwell Day is exactly what’s going to 
happen to the member from Rosetown, Rosetown Elrose in the 
next federal . . . provincial election. We know what will happen 
to him. The residents of Saskatchewan will do to him what they 
did to him in the Saskatchewan election, Mr. Speaker, federally. 
That’s what will happen to him. 
 
But that’s been the Leader of the Opposition’s contribution to 
Saskatchewan — the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker. Where he speaks 
in favour of the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker, and says we should do 
away with the Crow, costing Saskatchewan farmers $300 
million is what it did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today the member opposite, you know, spouts from his 
chair, from Swift Current, Saskatchewan, and says, I appreciate 
the work of my leader. I appreciate the work of my leader, 
where he takes $300 million out of the jeans of Saskatchewan 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. And the member from Kindersley who’s 
supposed to have the agricultural plan in his back pocket, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think Mr. Boyd when he left took it with 
him. And maybe the member from Kindersley has it today 
because he said he had the plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we have today is we have a party 
opposite who say they represent rural Saskatchewan, and both 
on AIDA and CFIP and now on the Crow have cost 
Saskatchewan farmers money, is two examples, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member in August from 
Watrous stand up and say or publicly say on the radio waves — 
you know what? — the minister from Saskatchewan should go 
to Ottawa and he should sign the agreement. He should sign the 
APF agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I said, Mr. Speaker, and have been saying all along that 
we’re not signing the agricultural policy framework, Mr. 
Speaker, until we can get a better adjustment for Saskatchewan 
farmers. And that’s been the position of my farm groups, Mr. 
Speaker, whom I meet with every couple of weeks. That’s been 
the position of the Farm Safety Net Review Committee from 
Saskatchewan. That’s been the position of the western 
provinces, Mr. Speaker, that we shouldn’t be signing the 
agreement. 
 
But what was the member from Watrous and their agricultural 
critic say? Saskatchewan should sign the agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well we didn’t sign the agreement, Mr. Speaker. And by not 
signing the agreement, we today have the largest share of the 
new agricultural formula in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
have it today. And that leadership on farm policy has been 
provided by this minister and my farm groups and this Premier. 
 

And the member opposite from Watrous and the Saskatchewan 
Party have gotten in the way of that conversation on every 
occasion and nearly again sold out Saskatchewan farmers to the 
tune of $600 million, Mr. Speaker — almost sold Saskatchewan 
farmers out again. And that’s how little they understand about 
agricultural farm policy, Mr. Speaker. That’s how little they 
understand. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I hear on a regular basis on 
that side of the House, their members stand up and say, you 
know what, we need to move away from the Canadian Wheat 
Board in this province. What we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is we 
have to go to a dual marketing system here in Saskatchewan, 
because you know what — that’s what’s going to work here in 
Canada for us in the future. 
 
And just recently . . . And that’s the position of Mr. Ralph Klein 
and that’s the position of the old Stockwell Day before, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is the same position of this Saskatchewan 
Party because they’re all of the same cloth, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re all of the same cloth. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the contributions that the 
Saskatchewan Party has provided to date to Saskatchewan 
farmers and Saskatchewan producers has been a dismal, dismal 
record. And I’ll say to you, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
producers, Saskatchewan farmers, the Saskatchewan rural 
community understands what the Saskatchewan Party has done 
for rural Saskatchewan producers and farmers. They’ve 
contributed zero, Mr. Speaker — zero — to the development of 
agricultural policy. 
 
And come the next vote, Mr. Speaker, the next federal vote, 
we’re going to see what will happen in rural Saskatchewan, 
where you’re going to see on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, a disappearance of at least a back row and part of the 
second row because those are the people, Mr. Speaker, who say 
they represent rural Saskatchewan and they have no idea about 
what rural Saskatchewan is about. They have no idea about 
what farm policy is about and they’re totally disengaged from 
the kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, that are happening in rural 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
(12:00) 
 
And I look forward to the debate in the future, Mr. Speaker, as 
we move and work towards a better and stronger Saskatchewan 
safety net program. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of this government’s record 
on agriculture and farm policy — proud of it, Mr. Speaker. And 
I say this from this perspective, Mr. Speaker, from this 
perspective. We delivered, Mr. Speaker, we delivered for 
Saskatchewan farmers in 1999 $600 million for Saskatchewan 
farmers last year and we delivered this year for Saskatchewan 
farmers an additional . . . or for Canadian farmers — sorry, Mr. 
Speaker — for Canadian farmers, we delivered $600 million 
last year and we’re delivering $600 million for Canadian 
farmers next year because we understand what needs to happen 
in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We understand it. 
 
And we’re building a stronger rural Saskatchewan and farm 
policy because we are working with Saskatchewan farmers and 



3054 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

producers to achieve that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what did we say, Mr. Speaker, when we said that we’re 
interested in making sure that we have a better safety net, risk 
management program? We said that we need to show, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone wants to know how the polling in 
Saskatchewan is doing. 
 
The member from Rosetown . . . the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, Mr. Speaker, knows how the polling in 
Saskatchewan is doing. Mr. Speaker, the polling in rural . . . the 
polling in Saskatchewan is saying that their leader is behind 
their party by at least 22 points. That’s what the polling is 
saying, Mr. Speaker, and the polling is saying that our Premier 
is ahead of their opposition leader by better than 25 points. 
That’s what the polling is saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why is the polling saying that, Mr. Speaker? Because of 
the rural policy. Because of the rural policy. Because you know 
that these people here are totally disconnected, Mr. Speaker, 
from what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan today. And I can 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when we start to see, if we ever do, 
any of the rural policy by the opposition party, which we’ve not 
seen yet, Mr. Speaker, in the last several years, it will be a 
delight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This speech, Mr. Speaker . . . this session, Mr. Speaker, was to 
be about three major issues. This debate, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just remind the member of the 
discussion on the motion before us, which has to deal with crop 
insurance for the 2002 crop year. And I would ask him to keep 
his remarks relevant to the motion at hand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I’m . . . what 
we’re proposing on the crop insurance file, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we’re going to have two major programs in Canada, two for 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to have an enhanced crop insurance 
program, and we’re going to have nationally a new NISA 
program. 
 
And we’re . . . we’ve been advocating, Mr. Speaker, that we see 
enrichments to the 1.1 billion which I don’t believe that the 
federal government will be adding, but we’re saying we should 
have additional money there. And we’ll be working towards 
enhancing both of those programs. 
 
We’ve already made a contribution on the transition program. 
We’re leading the country, Mr. Speaker, on transition. Clearly 
we’re leading the country on our contributions per capita to 
Saskatchewan agriculture and that will continue to be our 
position. 
 
And I want to close my comments, Mr. Speaker, by saying this. 
That as we move into a new year, Mr. Speaker, and as we move 
into a new . . . a new era in terms of what we’re doing in 
agriculture, and in Canada, this new policy nationally, Mr. 
Speaker, will be the very first time that you’ve seen a strong 
agricultural policy in Canada. The very first one. 
 
And we’ve been working hard over the last couple of years, and 
I’ve been very pleased to be part of a national strategy, a 

national program. And I say to the members opposite that it 
would be good some day . . . over the next six or eight months, 
it would be good to see where you really stand because, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a plan, an integrated plan on agricultural 
policy; we have an integrated plan on rural development; and, 
Mr. Speaker, they have a slogan only. They have a slogan, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have a plan. 
 
And so I’m not going to be supporting the resolution, Mr. 
Speaker, and my motion would be this. My motion, seconded 
. . . the motion from Yorkton . . . seconded by the member from 
Regina Coronation Park: 
 

. . . after the words “Assembly” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 

 
that it supports the efforts of Saskatchewan farmers to 
adopt new practices and technologies that increase their 
competitiveness and profitability to pursue new market 
opportunities and diversification initiatives; and further 
 
that this Assembly express appreciation to the staff of 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance for their diligent efforts in 
serving producers by already processing a record amount of 
730 million in claim payments to this date. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 
colleagues. 
 
It’s my pleasure to follow the Hon. Minister of Agriculture as 
he so eloquently outlined safety net programs and talked about 
crop insurance and the importance of crop insurance to 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I intend to not have extended comments, but 
there are a number of things that I wish to get on the record on 
this issue, not the least of which is I’m proud to have this 
opportunity to talk a little bit about crop insurance — a little bit 
about its history, its proud past, its very proud right now, and 
the proud future that we see for crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t express some regret 
that the opposition came with a motion to tinker a little bit with 
crop insurance, and that was the best that came out of it. 
 
I’m very pleased to support the amendment to the motion and, 
of course, I’m very pleased with the job that crop insurance 
does for farm families day in and day out. 
 
I want to talk, Mr. Speaker, a little bit about crop insurance. 
And one of the comments that I’ve heard from some farmers 
that I know — and I’ve asked some other, some farmers about 
— and the phrase that keeps coming back to me is, well crop 
insurance doesn’t pay. And it’s true. 
 
It depends a lot on what your view of crop insurance is. Crop 
insurance is — in my view and in fact I heard it expressed by I 
think by the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood — crop 
insurance, I think the analogy was, is similar to fire insurance or 
vehicle insurance. I’m not trying to put words in the member 
opposite’s mouth but that’s how I see an insurance scheme, is a 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3055 

 

scheme that is set up to replace hard costs — in this case, the 
hard cost of seed, fuel, fertilizer, chemicals, that sort of thing if 
you have a crop failure. 
 
There are other programs designed to be a top-up of income but 
crop insurance is set out to replace your hard and fixed costs. 
 
Crop insurance is actuarially certified. It’s a federal-provincial 
program and it’s got a formula that others have gone into earlier 
and I don’t want to take the limited time I have to deal with the 
formula on average yields and so on. 
 
I want to point out a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about the history of 
crop insurance which started in 1961, a year that I actually 
remember very, very well growing up on a farm. I remember it 
for it being incredibly dry. I remember 1961 as a year of virtual 
crop failure and that was the year that crop insurance was set up 
under the forerunner to the New Democratic Party, the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), 1961. Look at the 
history of it. 
 
In that time, Mr. Speaker, of crop insurance being set up, 
farmers paid 80 per cent of the premium and after six years that 
went to 75 per cent of the premium for crop insurance paid by 
farmers. And then from 1973 to ’96 it was 50 per cent. It’s 
interesting; 1973 was Al Blakeney’s New Democrats where we 
lowered the premium. And we continued to improve the 
situation right up until today. Farmers pay 37 per cent of the 
premium for crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment deals with Saskatchewan farmers 
adopting to new technologies, new practices, increasing their 
competitiveness and their profitability. I could talk about many 
things that farmers have done over the years from the 
development of the Noble blade in the ’30s as a soil 
conservation member, rod weeders in the ’50s and ’60s, air 
seeders in the late ’80s and into the ’90s. I could talk about 
farmers developing zero tilling and direct seeding, various other 
things. There’s much that we could do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ag critic opposite says, why don’t you talk 
about the ’90s. Well I’m going to talk a little bit about the ’90s, 
then. In 1997, crop insurance premium was reduced from where 
farmers paid not 50 per cent, but down to 42 per cent. 1998-99, 
it was again reduced so farmers paid 39 per cent. In 2000-2001, 
it was again reduced where farmers paid 30 per cent of the 
premium. 
 
This is in the ’90s that you just asked for. Be careful what you 
ask for, member opposite, because you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 
request the member for Regina Coronation Park to address all 
of his comments in this legislature through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to, as I near the 
conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out one 
thing to you and to . . . through you to everyone. And that is that 
day in and day out, we’re working and we’re committed to 
making crop insurance work better and better and better. That’s 
the history of government members, it’s a history on this side of 
the Chamber. We’re very, very proud of what’s happened in 
crop insurance. 

Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, will snipe at crop insurance. 
They’ll complain that it’s somehow a deficient program while 
we work day in and day out to make it better. I’ve got many 
more things that I’d like to say about it, but I think sufficient to 
say, Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of crop insurance. We’re 
very proud of the future. We’re very proud of the staff at Crop 
Insurance for the terrific job they’ve done in a very, very trying 
year. They’ve done a terrific job of getting money into the 
hands of the producers, the people that it’s set up for. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to support the amendment to this 
very important motion. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
thank the member from Regina Coronation Park — and I 
emphasize, Regina Coronation Park — for his eloquent defence 
of the 1960s crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker. It would 
seem that the speaker wants us to go back to farming with horse 
and buggies, Mr. Speaker, and wishes to emphasize the benefits 
of the buggy whip and the rod weeder. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved a little bit beyond that in the 
last few years. Farmers across this province have — in spite of 
this NDP government — diversified and made their farms as 
profitable as possible with the . . . trying to circumvent the 
interferences of this government and this government’s 
complete lack of support for agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think the election results in the last election in 1999 
clearly outlined the support that Saskatchewan agriculture had, 
or perhaps I should say the contempt that Saskatchewan 
agriculture had for the NDP’s policies and their 
implementation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The government went from a fairly 
strong rural caucus, Mr. Speaker, to two members that could 
even at the outside be classified as rural members. One of those 
represents the city of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, and the other 
member represents a northern fringe riding that is more attuned 
to forestry than it is to production crops of agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, and that would be Meadow Lake. That is the extent, 
Mr. Speaker. That was the condemnation that rural 
Saskatchewan gave to this government and its agriculture 
policies. 
 
The member praises, Mr. Speaker, the 1961 crop insurance 
program but fails to mention that they cut spot loss hail this 
year, they cut the variable price option, Mr. Speaker. In 
reducing the premiums the member forgot to mention they also 
reduced the coverage. The premium could go down to zero, Mr. 
Speaker, and still have no value if the coverage is also zero. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as my leader said earlier, there may be a 
snowstorm outside but the largest snowstorm is happening from 
the other side as they try to pull the wool over the eyes of rural 



3056 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 2002 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that it’s time that we have this vote so 
that the people of Saskatchewan can understand exactly that this 
government has no concern for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on division. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — All right. Order, please. Order. I would . . . 
Order, please. Order, please. 
 
I would like to bring to the members’ attention that earlier this 
day I tabled the first annual report of the Saskatchewan 
legislative internship program for the year 2002. It was 
delivered by the academic director for the program, Dr. Gordon 
Barnhart. 
 
I would like to advise the Assembly that Her Honour is here for 
Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 12:22 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 82  - The Representation Act, 2002 
Bill No. 83  - The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of 

America, Local 5890, Collective Bargaining 
Agreement Act, 2002 

Bill No. 304 - The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Amendment 
Act, 2002 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:25. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would, on the conclusion of my remarks, intend to 
move an adjournment motion. And because I made a rather 
lengthy speech on this motion when . . . just a few short months 
ago, I promise the House that I’m going to be very brief today. 
 
And I know we’re all anxious to get home to our families. 
We’ve got a little bit of weather happening as is wont to happen 
in Saskatchewan on occasion. And it’s great to see the snow 
because we sure can use the moisture. 
 
I want to say thank you to a number of people who helped this 
session run and help us function as members of the legislature. 
And so I want to thank all the Legislative Building and the 
Legislative Assembly staff for the hard work that they do, not 
only during session but throughout the year. 

And I want to thank, on behalf of my colleagues on this side of 
the House, and I think on all of our behalves, our constituency 
assistants, the caucus office staff, the ministerial staff, the 
Executive Council staff, for their hard work during this rather 
lengthy eight-day session. 
 
I’d also like to thank all the members of the Assembly who 
work so hard and were very dedicated to their constituencies 
and to this place, and for the debate that took place during the 
last eight days here in the Legislative Building. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the most important part of the 
remarks that I want to make today. I want to take this 
opportunity to wish you, and all members of the Legislative 
Assembly and their staffs, a very Merry Christmas, a safe and a 
happy holiday. 
 
And I just want to close by recognizing the untimely passing of 
our former colleague Rudi Peters, because I really think it does 
help us to reflect on what this season is all about, and the 
importance of our family and our friends. 
 
And I want to encourage all members to go home, spend a little 
time relaxing, and getting to visit with their neighbours and 
with their families. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded by the 
member from Cannington: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, that you’ll stand adjourned to the date and time set by 
Mr. Speaker, upon the request of the government, and that 
the Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven 
clear days notice, if possible, of such a date and time. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Government House Leader in wishing seasons 
greetings, Merry Christmas, Happy New Year to all the 
members, the staff of both the caucuses and of the Legislative 
Assembly. And as well, Mr. Speaker, to wish Merry Christmas, 
Happy New Year, and a safe holiday to everyone across 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am pleased to 
have this opportunity on behalf of myself and David Karwacki 
to wish all my colleagues in this House, the staff, and indeed 
the people of Saskatchewan the very best of the holiday season. 
Now that the session is over, this indeed can become a season 
of peace and joy and goodwill. 
 
And I wish all the very best I say to my colleagues and to all the 
people of Saskatchewan that this will be a time, as the 
Government House Leader said, of gratitude and reflection, and 
warmth and joy and love for each and every one of us as we 
gather with friends and family and remember all the blessings 
we have in this life. And I wish all the very best of the season to 
each and every one of you. 



December 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3057 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the motion I would also like to 
thank all members for their participation in the session, and 
wish everybody a very, very Merry Christmas and a happy 
holiday. It has been moved by the Government House Leader 
that this House now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:30. 
 
 


