















































Hansard: June 26, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2345 
 June 26, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to present a petition on behalf of 
constituents of mine who would like to see the Humboldt 
territory operations office for Saskatchewan Housing Authority 
remain in Humboldt. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Saskatoon and the city of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens in the Northeast who are 
concerned about the high cost of prescription drugs. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Tisdale, Porcupine Plain, and Rose Valley. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Spy 
Hill, Regina, and Langenburg. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition, reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 

and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from the 
Rocanville and surrounding area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
dangerous condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of citizens of the province regarding very 
expensive . . . the drug costs and the deductible in our province. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people in the 
community of Indian Head. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of southwest Saskatchewan concerned with the state 
of the hospital in that community and the government’s 
commitment to a new one. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 

 
The petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities 
of Hazlet, and Vanguard, and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
for people opposed to possible reductions to services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum of 24 acute care, emergency, and doctoral 
services available as well as lab, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to the 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Craik, Medicine Hat, and 
Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition regarding the boundaries of the new regional health 
authority. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
regional health authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
regional health authority. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Bulyea and Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with commercial fishing on 
Besnard Lake. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nation representatives to 
bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation and 
to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
centres of Meadow Lake, Zenon Park, Bjorkdale, and 
Brampton, Ontario. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 7, 11, 23, 59, 132, 165, and no. 169. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the Legislative Assembly, 19 grade 7 students from the M.J. 
Coldwell School in my constituency, and they are seated in 
your west gallery. 
 
And they are accompanied here today by their teacher, Cheryl 
Mantei, and chaperones Bert Muench and Glenn Mantei. 
 
And I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of meeting with this 
group a little earlier for a photo and a brief visit, and they’re 
now going to take in a part of question period and then have a 
tour of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So I’d ask all the members to offer this wonderful school group 
a real warm welcome. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 
very special guest in the east gallery — a long-time friend of 
mine, Mr. Bob Stephan. 
 
Bob and I were fighter pilots together, and Bob is a former 
commanding officer and team leader of the Snowbirds. And 
he’s now an Air Canada pilot on a short stayover here in 
Regina. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Bob to the 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, an important person in the life and work of Regina 
Wascana Plains, my constituency assistant, Tammy Watt, who 
is accompanied today by a student willing to do work in the 
constituency during the summer months. 
 
And I believe Carly is still young enough not to be too 
embarrassed about me telling you that she celebrated a birthday 
this week as well. 
 
I would ask all members to give a warm welcome to the two 
young women seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, today in the 
Speaker’s gallery we have three special guests who are 
representatives of the Legislative Assembly staff. Today there 
were several staff from the Legislative Assembly who received 
their Long Service Awards. Most of them are on the job right 
now and I would like to mention each one of them and 
introduce the people who are at the gallery. 
 
First of all, recognized today for 10 years in financial services 
was Leisa Peebles; for 10 years Sergeant-at-Arms, Merv 
Kealey; 15 years in Hansard, Linda Roberton; 20 years in 
Hansard, Sharon Baldwin. Twenty years in broadcast services, 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

 

Kerry Bond; 20 years in broadcast services, Ihor Sywanyk; and 
20 years in broadcast services, Gary Ward — and they were the 
original three people who set up the system. 
 
Now in addition to that the people that are with us here today in 
the Legislative Assembly in the Speaker’s gallery, and I’d ask 
them to rise when I mention their names, from . . . in financial 
services for 15 years, Marilyn Borowski; in the Legislative 
Library for 15 years, Gina Abel; and in the Clerk’s office for 20 
years, Monique Lovatt. 
 
Now all of these people are ones that help the Assembly 
function and I would ask all members to convey their 
congratulations through our three special guests to all of the 
Long Service recipients today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Legislative Assembly Employee Long Service Awards 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
had the distinct pleasure of attending a special ceremony that 
was held in this very room. I shall also add that this ceremony, 
Mr. Speaker, is an annual event here in the legislature, and it’s 
one that the official opposition is always pleased to take part in. 
 
This morning’s ceremony recognized the long service of 
legislative employees who have attained career milestones. This 
year 10 recipients received awards for their long-time service in 
their positions here in the legislature. 
 
Receiving awards for 10 years of service are Merv Kealey from 
the office of the Sergeant-at-Arms and Leisa Peebles from 
financial services. 
 
Recognition for 15 years of service went to Gina Abel from the 
Legislative Library, Marilyn Borowski from financial services, 
and Linda Roberton from Hansard. 
 
Twenty years of service honourees are Sharon Baldwin from 
Hansard; Monique Lovatt from the Clerk’s office; Kerry Bond, 
Ihor Sywanyk, and Gary Ward from broadcast services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition I would like to 
take this opportunity to extend our sincere congratulations to all 
recipients of Long Service Awards. Your years of service and 
dedication have ultimately led to many contributions being 
made, not only in your respective departments but for the 
betterment of all Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with you and the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, in 
paying tribute to the members of the Legislative Assembly who 
are recognized today for their long service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think it’s worthwhile pointing out that their 
value to the Assembly is illustrated by the fact that many of 
them cannot be in the gallery to be recognized because they’re 
working as we speak. I dare say the legislature functions just 
fine if one of us is absent for a moment or two, but not them. 

They are essential and they deserve the recognition they’re 
given today, and more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that it takes many hands to 
make an organization function. We know that without the 
library, without the Legislative Assembly offices, without 
Hansard, without our security officers, and without our 
broadcast services and the moguls there, the performances of 
our duties would be infinitely more difficult. 
 
At the risk of singling out one set of employees, I think we 
should all recognize and perhaps marvel at the fact that Gary, 
Ihor, and Kerry have worked together for 20 years in that little, 
dark, claustrophobic camera room and making sure that we all 
look movie perfect — or maybe near movie perfect, Mr. 
Speaker — and more to the point never publicizing those rare 
occasions when we flub our lines or miss our cues. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is fortitude and I am in awe of them. 
 
It was a pleasure for me to work closely with them as Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, as you will know, and on behalf of the coalition 
members I want to say thank you to the Long Service recipients 
and all Legislative Assembly employees for their assistance in 
our exercise of parliamentary democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Special Anniversaries 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a day for 
anniversaries today. I’m pleased to rise in this Assembly today 
to ask all members of the House to join with me in recognizing 
two very special anniversaries. 
 
The first anniversary is a very important one in that it 
recognizes our colleague from the constituency of 
Battleford-Cut Knife. He was diagnosed with leukemia just 
over a year ago and we on this side of the House are extremely 
thankful that he is with us today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — During the past year the member 
underwent two gruelling and very exhausting rounds of 
chemotherapy to combat his leukemia. He lost considerable 
weight and at least one of us picked it up, Mr. Speaker. But 
although, through it all he continued to do his duty as an elected 
official of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t imagine anything more devastating than 
a serious personal illness that would cause an individual to let 
some work-related things fall by the wayside. But the member’s 
duties did not suffer. We applaud him for his dedication and his 
sheer determination. 
 
The other anniversary, Mr. Speaker, is one that the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Battleford-Cut 
Knife was extremely proud to have been a part of. Even as he 
faced this most personal challenge he was determined to leave 
his mark. 
 
On June 26 . . . Mr. Speaker, today, June 26, marks the one-year 
anniversary that the official opposition defeated the government 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

in a 26 to 22 vote on the Economic Development . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, that vote is a sign of things 
to come as we are confident our next defeat of the government 
will be at the general election. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

Expansion of Digital Cellular Service 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the title 
of this member’s statement is: previously unserved areas to 
receive digital cellular service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel Mobility announced the expansion of 
digital cellular service to the areas of Lestock, Punnichy, 
Kelliher, Norquay, Debden, Beechy, Canwood, Montmartre, 
Central Butte, Blaine Lake, and Elbow within the past year. Mr. 
Speaker, residents and business owners in these areas will soon 
have the powerful wireless advantage of digital cellular service 
in their communities. 
 
SaskTel Mobility continues to expand high quality digital 
cellular service in Saskatchewan’s rural communities where its 
competitors choose to boldly not go. And we hear daily, Mr. 
Speaker, members of the opposition presenting petitions asking 
for expansion of this service which competitors won’t get into. 
 
Up to $15 million will be invested this year by SaskTel 
Mobility in bringing digital cellular service to more 
Saskatchewan communities. In addition, by next year, our 
digital cellular service will completely overlay today’s analog 
cellular network with more than 90 per cent of Saskatchewan 
population will have access to digital cellular service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s several advantages of digital cellular 
service over analog but there are probably too many to mention 
in the time that I have left. With digital cellular service, SaskTel 
Mobility offers mobile office solutions allowing customers to 
access all sorts of good information. 
 
This is good news for Saskatchewan and, in particular, more 
good news for rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mrs. Lucy McRitchie Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Saturday, June 29, friends and family of Mrs. Lucy 
McRitchie will be joining together in celebration of her 100th 
birthday. 
 
On May 23, 1902, Lucy Campbell was born in Iowa. Twelve 
years later, she moved with her parents to Canada where they 
settled in Rouleau, Sask. In 1925, she was married to Stanley 
McRitchie in Rosetown. In 1929, they moved to Blue Spruce 
where they farmed there up until 1946 when they moved to 
Nipawin. Mr. and Mrs. McRitchie had four children. 

Mrs. McRitchie now resides at Pioneer House in Nipawin and 
she maintains an extremely busy life, Mr. Speaker. She is active 
in the church, enjoys playing cards, and is involved in many 
other activities. 
 
One other thing that might keep her a little busy, Mr. Speaker, 
is the fact that she has 11 grandchildren, 19 great-grandchildren, 
and 1 great, great-grandson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that Mrs. McRitchie is at home watching 
right now, and because I won’t be able to be there on Saturday, 
I would like to say Happy Birthday, Mrs. McRitchie. I would 
ask all members to join me in congratulating Mrs. Lucy 
McRitchie in celebrating her 100th birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Attractions Canada Awards 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a line from 
that movie that says if you build it, they will come. Well that 
certainly applies to tourism in Saskatchewan which is, as we 
know, one of the fastest growing industries in our province. It is 
growing, Mr. Speaker, because the people involved in that 
industry are working to create and improve the kinds of 
attractions that bring tourists, and their work is being 
recognized nationally. 
 
Attractions Canada is a national information program that’s 
designed to heighten Canadians’ interests in their own country 
by highlighting Canada’s many attractions of cultural and 
educational value. 
 
This year Saskatchewan has finalists in each of the five 
categories at the Attractions Canada competition which was 
recently held in Edmonton. Five more reasons for all of us to 
take in more of our province this summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The attractions are: the Allen Sapp Gallery, the Gonor 
Collection in North Battleford; the Bredenbury Lights which 
won first prize in the Exceptional Community Involvement 
Category and Programs; our own Saskatchewan Museum with 
Megamunch and mega more; the Motherwell Homestead 
National Historic Site; and last but not least for where the 
Premier in the past has been known to park his bus in the 
summer, Buffalo Pound Provincial Park, one of our many 
beautiful provincial parks. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, five more reasons for us to hit the road 
and check out our wonderful province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pamela Wallin Named as Consul General in New York 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to stand 
today to congratulate Pamela Wallin who was raised in Wadena 
in my constituency. Pam has been given the honour in 
becoming Canada’s consul general in New York City. 
 
Pamela has always given her family and her rural upbringing 
credit for her success in life, from being the best known and 
most respected journalist in Canada to being a business owner 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

 

and an author. 
 
She’s interviewed prime ministers and presidents and never 
backed down when tough questions need to be asked. She 
speaks often of her love for her family and her community. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the affection is returned. 
 
The town of Wadena named a street after her, and just a couple 
of years ago they put on a Pamela Wallin roast, the best kept 
secret in Canada. The local paper did updates and advertising 
for weeks before the event. But in order to keep Pam in the 
dark, the editor printed a special edition that only went to her 
and that deleted any information about the event. The town 
managed to shock Canada’s best known interviewer. 
 
Pam underwent surgery for cancer last year and is fully 
recovered. Her positive attitude will continue to make Pamela 
Wallin an important part of Canada’s success. 
 
Good luck to you, Pam, in your new job. We know you’ll 
continue to make Wadena and Saskatchewan and Canada very 
proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Plans for Economic Growth 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, its very well known that the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow Saskatchewan and that 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And that the NDP has a plan to shrink 
Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s plan to 
shrink Saskatchewan is working. 
 
In the first quarter of this year, we suffered a population loss of 
over 1,800 people and this was the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the first 
quarter of this year, Saskatchewan’s population dropped by 
over 1,800 people. That’s the 14th consecutive quarter that 
Saskatchewan has seen a population loss. Mr. Speaker, all of it 
under an NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP continuing to drive people out of 
this province? Why doesn’t the NDP have a plan to grow 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition seems to 
assume that if he says he has a plan, that he has a plan. Well he 
took his plan to the people of Saskatchewan and we know the 
turnout at the meetings that the people were invited to, to 
review the plan — four, six, zero, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is important now that we’ve I think reached 

the end of the session . . . now that we’ve come to the 
conclusion of this session it’s important not to talk so much 
about future plans, but let’s just look at what we’ve been able to 
accomplish as a government in this session alone. 
 
I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to give me enough time 
to review this, but I’ll start. In this session the development of 
an ethanol policy that will lead the province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a leading ethanol policy. 
We’ve created in Saskatchewan now the generation of 
electricity from wind — first time in the history of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the month of May we 
saw 11,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, you want to talk about a 
plan for rebuilding this province? In this budget year alone 700 
kilometres — 700 kilometres — of paving and reconstruction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a plan. In this 
session alone $1.2 billion for education and $100 million for 
educational capital for the future. That’s a plan in progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day the 
NDP and our Premier mistakenly tells people what a great job 
they’re doing. Mr. Speaker, yes mistakenly telling people that 
they’re doing a great job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they were right, if the Premier was right, why 
are so many people leaving this province? No matter how you 
look at it the NDP are failing and we see it every quarter. Mr. 
Speaker, in the last year Saskatchewan’s population dropped by 
6,000 people. In the last three years our population has 
decreased by 15,000 precious Saskatchewan people that have 
left our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s policies are not working. 
Saskatchewan’s population continues to drop. What is their plan 
to stem the tide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, now that we’re coming to 
the end of the session, I think it’s important that we look at — 
we look — at exactly what has been accomplished in this 
session. The Leader of the Opposition asked me the question, 
I’m very happy to respond. 
 
In this session another balanced budget — another balanced 
budget. 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, outside of the important 
work done in the tobacco tax issue, no general tax increases in 
this budget — unlike Alberta, British Columbia and other 
provinces. Continued reduction in personal income taxes in this 
. . . respect to this budget. And, Mr. Speaker, Moody’s 
investment house of New York City takes a look at this budget, 
takes a look at the work and the plan of this government, what 
do they say — credit upgrade Aa3 to Aa1, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this session, Mr. Speaker, $10 million new dollars for our 
municipalities and a brand new Cities Act. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
plan that’s in progress. That’s a plan that’s being implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen in this session consumer protection 
legislation; we’ve seen expansion of the Internet services to 
rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is not a plan, this is work 
underway. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there is one thing that’s dropping faster than Saskatchewan’s 
population and that’s the NDP’s polling numbers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And you know what, Mr. Speaker, that is 
good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — That’s good news because it means, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan is going to start to grow instead of 
shrink. It means Saskatchewan’s going to start to have hope 
instead of hearing excuses from that government. Mr. Speaker, 
it means that Saskatchewan people will come back to our 
province instead of leave our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier cannot get 
around the numbers. Mr. Speaker, their plan for Saskatchewan 
is failing because people are leaving this province. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier cannot even stand up in the House and recognize 
why they are failing. Why doesn’t the NDP recognize how far 
short they’ve come on behalf of serving Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition wants to 
talk about polling numbers. I know he probably looked at a 
sheet of paper which said New Democrats at 66. I think he had 
it upside down — it was 99. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there are one or two left — 
there are one or two left — in this province who will carry the 
message of doom and gloom wherever they go. The one or two 

are mostly gathered right over here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to encourage the Leader of the Opposition 
on Friday of this week to attend to an event in this city where 
we are welcoming to Saskatchewan new Saskatchewan 
residents in large numbers, celebrating the fact that they’re here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, some of us will remember 
a little cartoon that used to appear in the funny papers on the 
weekend, a little cartoon called “Li’l Abner” — “Li’l Abner.” 
 
Now there was a fellow, Mr. Speaker, Li’l Abner, a little fellow 
that wandered around, had a black cloud over his head all the 
time — Joe Btfsplk. Joe Btfsplk. The only Joe Btfsplk I meet in 
Saskatchewan is seated right across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel’s Investment in Cable Television 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we raised a 
concern about this NDP government’s investment — going to 
be a $65 million investment in cable television. And by the 
admission of the Crown officials, this is a very, very dangerous 
and risky investment that they’re making on behalf of 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post and The StarPhoenix reported 
Mr. Ching, the CEO (chief executive officer) of SaskTel, as 
saying that he believes the multimedia investment will be 
popular and eventually — eventually — generate a profit. 
 
My question to the minister responsible for SaskTel is this: 
when does the NDP expect this venture to be profitable? What 
is their target date for this investment to be profitable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be 
pleased to answer on behalf of the government members, and I 
have a question for the member from Swift Current. When is he 
going to get — when is he going to get — on the same song 
sheet as the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this guy here says, the Swift Current fellow says, 
you shouldn’t do investments outside of the province; you 
should keep to your core business. 
 
And I want to quote from the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
on John Gormley’s show this morning: 
 

These Crowns want to grow and they’re restricted by the 
status quo. 

 
He wants to release the shackles so they could expand beyond 
the boundaries of this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got the leader from Swift Current 
talking one story and the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
talking another story, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

 

What we’re doing is clear. Our policy is clear. We’re going to 
allow these Crown corporations to grow so they can bring 
profits home to Saskatchewan, so that we can keep low rates in 
insurance and in telephones and in power. We’re going to have 
these corporations as healthy entities in spite of everything they 
say on the other side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Hon. Minister of Industry is answering questions on this 
issue, and it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker, because he sits on the 
board of the Crown Investments Corporation. And what he just 
. . . is stood in this Assembly and failed to answer a basic 
question. Before he approved $65 million of taxpayers’ money 
being sent on cable TV, as a member of this board, it’s his duty 
to know what the target date would be for this particular venture 
to be profitable. That’s what he should stand up and say. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, though it shouldn’t surprise us that he 
doesn’t know the answer, this is the first House Leader in the 
history of House leaders that can’t count to 27, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So I’ll give him another chance. He sits on the 
board of Crown Investments Corporation. Before you . . . 
Before he approved the expenditure of $65 million taxpayer 
dollars on what they say is a risky venture, what target date for 
profitability did he get from SaskTel officials? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member from Swift Current, I do sit on the Crown Investments 
Corporation Board, and I want to tell that member that I’m 
proud to serve on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible) . . . the finest economic development . . . (inaudible) 
. . . that this province has seen in the last 60 years. 
 
The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party this morning on 
Gormley’s show said, they’ve done a great job. You know what 
they’ve done? They’ve provided telephone service and power 
and cheap insurance, that’s what he said. 
 
This guy gets up and says they’re money losers, they’re no 
good, they’re a millstone around the people of Saskatchewan’s 
neck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one guy in Swift Current gets it right, one guy in 
Swift Current gets it right and I’m going to quote from the 
Swift Current Booster, the southern . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member has 
15 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I must correct myself. 
I was so excited I said this morning, but actually it was March 
13. So I missed . . . But the facts remain, Mr. Speaker. 

But that member, that member’s got to know what people are 
saying about his leadership — The Southwest Booster: 
 

. . . what I see is an intellectual vacuum at the head of the 
(Saskatchewan) Party and a bunch of headless horsemen . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it shouldn’t surprise us that the only 
House Leader in the history of House leaders who couldn’t 
count to 27, who lost the vote on his own budget, could get 
March 13 and today mixed up, Mr. Speaker. March 13 and 
today — very, very close dates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue underlying this issue of their 
investment in cable television — and he does sit on the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) board; he 
will have been privy to the decision to spend this much 
taxpayers’ money investing in this very risky venture. 
 
The other issue, the other issue is that SaskTel already owns, 
already owns over 1 million shares of Persona, a cable company 
already operating in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the question to the minister, to the government, to the NDP, 
is this: when this cable TV system is finally unveiled by 
SaskTel, when it’s rolled out and when it is competing with 
other private cable companies, are they going to sell their 
investment in Persona, sell their $15 million investment? Or 
will the NDP compete against themselves, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I understand 
that the Saskatchewan Party are having a difficult time to listen 
to anything but themselves. But if they would just give me a 
minute what I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, is that all of the detail 
that comes before Crown Corporations, that member has every 
right to ask as a member of the Crown Corporations Committee. 
And they will give him, sir, all of the detail he requires. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan, 
though, do understand that there are differences of opinion 
within the Saskatchewan Party as it relates to the operations of 
the Crown and as it relates to other issues that come before this 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of them support the development of ethanol 
and some of them don’t. Mr. Speaker, some of them support the 
initiatives we’re doing as it relates to SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) and the choice for insurance and some 
of them don’t, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, some of them want to 
see these Crowns grow and some of them don’t. 
 
And I just want to give you one final quote from the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party and he says, SaskTel, SaskPower are 
not structured in a way that they will grow well outside of 
Saskatchewan. So he wants to grow them outside of 
Saskatchewan. The member from Swift Current doesn’t want 
to. Mr. Speaker, they should get it together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what Don Ching 
also told reporters about this investment yesterday. He said it’s 
very dangerous and a very risky investment on the part of 
taxpayers. And he said it’s conceivable that SaskTel could, 
quote “stub its toe” on the $64 million deal; that this was very 
dangerous and a very risky investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan hear that this 
government is not only going to be competing against other 
cable businesses and other cable co-ops, and they’ve spent 64 
. . . will spend $64 million on a risky scheme; and then hear the 
CEO of SaskTel say well it’s conceivable that we’ll come back 
with nothing, we’ll have blown the money, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
have stubbed our toe; I could tell that party opposite that the 
people of Saskatchewan are looking forward to the day when 
they will stub their toe booting them out of office, Mr. Speaker. 
It will be much more pleasurable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The question to the minister is this. The question 
to the minister is this. The government already owned $15 
million worth of a cable company. He sits on the board of CIC. 
They already owned $15 million of a cable company, why in 
the world are they going to compete with themselves? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take an 
opportunity to tell that member what people around 
Saskatchewan are saying about him and about his party. And I 
want to quote from The Southwest Booster, June 15, 2002. 
 
And it starts by saying: “Brad, thanks for biting,” and I quote. 
And then it goes on to say, and this is the own person, guy’s 
opinion. He says: 
 

It may be just me, but what I see is an intellectual vacuum 
at the head of the (Saskatchewan) Party and a bunch of 
headless horsemen who will be slashing at anything they 
can find. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what they are doing. This one slashes 
at investments that SaskTel and other Crowns make. And this 
guy said it’s just fine, the leader of the Saskatchewan Party said. 
And I want to quote what he said again on the open line show: 
 

These Crowns want to grow and they’re restricted by the 
status quo. And he’s going to release the shackles so they 
can expand beyond the boundaries of this province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they should sit down, have a caucus meeting, 
decide what their policy is. Their plan to grow this province is 
to be on both sides of every issue until they’re defeated in the 
next election again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it took the minister, it 
took the minister till the fourth question, but he’s finally getting 
a little grumpy. We can understand why he’s grumpy, Mr. 
Speaker. Consider their record this session. 
 

There was the fudge-it budget, there was the attack on seniors 
that they had to backtrack on, they managed to mess up the 
development of the ethanol industry, there was the privacy 
scandal, the surveillance scandal, one of their ministers had to 
apologize, another they had to fire, Mr. Speaker. No wonder the 
House Leader’s grumpy, he’s had the worst session in history, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But that doesn’t excuse, it doesn’t . . . Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn’t excuse the fact that he needs to answer this 
question. The government owns $15 million of an existing 
cable company in Saskatchewan. They’re spending another 65 
million taxpayer dollars to try to get into the cable business 
through phone lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: are they going to sell their 
interests in Persona when this thing’s rolled out, this cable TV 
project, or is the NDP going to compete against themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the 
House Leader for the government is happy. I want to tell you 
why. I want to tell you why. Because in this session, Mr. 
Speaker, we were able to introduce and pass ethanol legislation, 
the first of its kind in North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And we were able to introduce, 
supported by the cities, The Cities Act, and we’re going to have 
that as law. We were able to introduce amendments to the farm 
land securities Act, and we’re going to have that as law. We 
were able to introduce a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re going to have that as law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And what I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, as well, I want to say that we were able to define 
policy from a government perspective, something which they 
couldn’t. And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, all I want to 
say to that member, to the Leader of the Opposition and his 
colleagues, that all they’re going to get for sitting on the fence 
on these issues is slivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dismissal of Health Department Employee 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. It is being reported today that an employee 
of the Department of Health has been fired for violating 
security policies of the department. This employee who is also a 
landlord reportedly accessed Department of Health databases to 
look up personal information on a former tenant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this Assembly how and when 
this department breach of policy was discovered, and what 
process was there followed to investigate the situation, and 
when the department terminated this employee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the Health department 
security is of top priority. It always has been and it always will 
be. Any employees who come to work in that department are 
very clearly advised when they start that there are some rules 
around the Health department that are very, very stringent and 
that if there are breaches of those rules then they will no longer 
have a job. 
 
And so that’s what’s happened in this particular situation. This 
situation arose a number of weeks ago. It, basically the 
employee was suspended within days of knowledge of the 
situation. It was investigated and she ended up being relieved of 
her job two days ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP said in this particular case no personal health information 
of this individual was accessed by the employee. However this 
does raise the larger question of the overall security of the 
personal health information of Saskatchewan people. The NDP 
government is well into the process, in fact tens of millions of 
dollars into the process, of establishing a provincial health 
information network with SHIN (Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network). 
 
This network will contain all of the personal health information 
of every Saskatchewan resident and this network will allow the 
sharing of this information. Yet to this date, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP has not proclaimed the privacy Act they developed to 
ensure the proper use of SHIN and protection of the health 
information that it contains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this government not proclaimed the 
health privacy information legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the Health department, 
there are a number of databases but none of them have the kind 
of personal health information that the member is talking about 
because within the kind of system that we’ve got there’s 
database security related to the various different pieces of that. 
Now what we have been working at very carefully together 
with all of the jurisdictions in Canada including the federal 
government is to set out the kinds of priorities, the kinds of 
databases, and how those will be protected. 
 
I’m very proud to say that we in Saskatchewan are the leaders 
as it relates to health protection of information and that one of 
our staff chairs with the federal government the initiative 
around the whole Health Infoway to make sure that we do have 
a system that is appropriate before we actually collaborate the 
information. 
 
We’re going to continue to work that way, Mr. Speaker, 
because we want to be very careful and be very concerned 
about people’s health information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Department of Health employee breached security policies, was 
caught, and dealt with appropriately. However other 
government employees are alleged to have shared confidential 
information with people outside of their department and they’re 
at home with pay. The only difference between this Health 
employee and others appears to be an RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of who has access to personal 
information of Saskatchewan people that is kept by the 
government is very much a topic of much debate in this 
province. Yet we still have no answers from the NDP as to how 
secure all of the government databases really are and what 
tracking systems are in place to monitor how, when, and by 
whom personal information is accessed and used. 
 
Today we hear of yet another breach of security, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s starting to become a very alarming, repetitious problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the NDP investigate and release the 
appropriate use of databases in their government to make sure 
that these abuses are stopped? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, in the middle of all this alarmist behaviour, I would 
like to point out that we’re talking about 8 employees out of 
15,000 and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As is appropriate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I’ll just 
remind the members — because it’s been a while since I 
answered this question — that employees have an employee 
oath of office. There are conflict of interest guidelines. There is 
an acceptable use policy for information technology. And 
there’s a Freedom Of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act. 
 
This issue was not about employees doing what they’re 
supposed to do; it was about individuals doing what they’re not 
supposed to do. And as was appropriate, when the information 
was brought to light, action was taken based on facts — not on 
supposition and fearmongering and kangaroo courts. And that’s 
the way we do things properly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 387, 388, 390, 391, and 392. 
 
The Speaker: — Answers to questions 387, 388, 390, and 391, 
392 have been tabled. 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll convert for 
debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 389 converted to motions for debate 
returnable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 79 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you’re aware the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture has recently provided this Assembly with a report 
recommending amendments to the farm ownership provisions 
of The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 
 
This government is strongly of the view that our farmers and 
our farm land are without doubt among the most important 
resources we have in the province. For this reason, changes to 
farm ownership legislation must be well considered and made 
with care so that we can grow our rural economy and ensure the 
continued vitality and security of our rural communities. 
 
With this Bill, based largely on the recommendations of the 
standing committee, the following persons were to have no 
ownership restrictions respecting ownership of farm land: first, 
individuals who reside anywhere in Canada for at least 183 
days in the year; secondly, Canadian citizens, regardless of 
where they reside; thirdly, agricultural corporations, 
corporations that are engaged in farming and are majority 
owned by Canadian resident farmers; and fourthly, 
Canadian-owned entities, that is corporations and other similar 
entities with 100 per cent Canadian ownership that are not 
publicly traded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government supports these changes as an 
important but incremental relaxation of the existing farm 
ownership restrictions. The Saskatchewan ownership rules will 
be now more in line with those of Manitoba and Alberta, 
thereby ensuring our continued competitiveness for new 
agricultural investment. 
 
By recognizing Canadian residents, Canadian citizens, and 
Canadian-owned corporations, we’re seeking to stimulate the 
Saskatchewan economy in the manner that it was most 
supported by the majority of the consultees to the standing 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d note that this Bill in no way removes existing 
rights for non-Canadian residents and non-Canadian entities. 
The rules for non-Canadian owners remain at 10 acres for both 
individuals and non-Canadian corporate entities. 
 

In addition, the Bill is careful to confirm that existing 
exemptions previously granted by the Farm Land Security 
Board are not affected, so that no one will be required to divest 
property as a result of this Bill. Mr. Speaker, the Farm Land 
Security Board will continue to have the ability to grant 
exemptions to any person who’s subject to restrictions under 
this Bill on any such terms and conditions as the Farm Land 
Security Board considers appropriate. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
members will know that the Farm Land Security Board is at 
arm’s length from the government. 
 
The Bill also contains housekeeping amendments to remove the 
northern administration district from the operation of the Act 
and to address certain procedural issues for the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to growing the 
Saskatchewan farm economy in a responsible manner. It’s our 
view that extending the existing legislation to recognize 
unrestricted ownership for Canadian residents, Canadian 
citizens, and 100 per cent Canadian-owned entities is a 
responsible step in this direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to respond to the second reading of Bill No. 79, An 
Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 
 
This Bill has been really talked about, I think, in the province 
for many, many years. I believe the legislation that restricted 
farm ownership came in in about 1974, and ever since that time 
there have been people talking about how that really has held 
back, we feel, the growth of the province. 
 
It was perhaps an experiment that you could call . . . say that it 
started in 1974 and they’d experiment on restricting the people 
that could own property in this province — farm land property 
in this province to only people in Saskatchewan. And we look 
in the year 2002 and see how has that experiment worked, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s failed and it’s failed miserably. 
 
You look at the statistics just recently — 14 quarters in a row, 
the population of this province has dropped. Now I’m not 
saying by opening up and not having any legislation in this 
province restricting farm land ownership, it may have turned it 
all around completely. But it’s one of the puzzles that has been 
missing in this province for decades, Mr. Speaker — for decade 
after decade — and the last 10 years under this NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it does open it up. It does open up land ownership, 
but only to a certain extent. 
 
There was a committee struck, a bi-party committee struck to 
look into the land ownership question. They produced a report. 
They spent many, many, many hours of work talking to a 
number of the members, when they would be meeting in the 
evenings after session and many mornings to get all the 
presentations put to the committee and then produce the report. 
 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

 

And there was much discussion and debate, I am sure, in that 
committee. Because as the minister mentioned in his second 
reading, his second reading, he said that the government 
strongly agrees with the change in this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that minister wasn’t at the committee 
hearings and I wasn’t at the committee hearings. But after 
talking to a number of our members that were at the committee 
hearings, it is not strong support from this government on this 
legislation. That government is divided over this legislation and 
divided deeply, Mr. Speaker. That caucus is divided deeply 
over this basic issue that we think is a basic element to growth 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly know that a lot of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
it does have deep division in the NDP caucus, Mr. Speaker. 
And I will agree. The members are yelling from their seats 
saying that there is division in the province. Not everybody’s 
unified on this subject, not at all — not anywhere close. But if 
you can find a subject that they are 100 per cent unified, I’d like 
to know it. It takes leadership from a government that pulls this 
province along, and that’s what we haven’t seen from this 
government for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation has been needed in this province 
for many years. Mr. Speaker, this legislation was put in place as 
a private member’s Bill that could have been introduced over 
the last five or six years, that would have moved this province 
forward. But as a consequence, Mr. Speaker, the government 
failed to move on the private member’s Bill put forward by the 
opposition. They failed to move on that and finally have raised 
the courage to put together a all-party committee to look into 
the issue. And as a result we see this legislation. 
 
(14:30) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit on how does this 
legislation mirror what was decided on, on the all-party 
committee. Does it mirror what the all-party committee had 
heard from the number of delegations that came in? Does it 
mirror any of the recommendations put forward by that 
committee? Does this legislation mirror all the 
recommendations put forward, voted on by the committee, 
voted on by a committee with a majority vote suggesting 
changes that needed to be put in this legislation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And some of those legislative changes that were needed, that 
were put forward by this all-party committee, are not seen in the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good first step, but, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
good first step on about a 100-yard dash. It falls far short, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we think . . . and it was voted on, again, 
by a committee that was . . . had majority of government 
members. I think that’s very important for people to realize, that 
the majority of this committee was made up of government 
members. 
 

So what happens is we go through this committee and they put 
forward recommendations, voted on in the committee by a 
majority. Now if the government was so against the 
recommendations, wouldn’t have they had their members lined 
up and voted against it? But that’s not what happened. Mr. 
Speaker, the recommendations were passed in the committee 
and it came to this legislation, and where are the 
recommendations in the legislation? Nowhere to be found. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now I will talk a little bit about what this Bill 
does. It opens up the ownership for Canadian citizens. You 
know, to me I guess when I think of that, it almost boggles my 
mind to think that we’ve gone over the last 18 years in this 
province where we have — 28 years in this province — where 
we haven’t allowed people from out of this . . . out of 
Saskatchewan, Canadian residents, the people from out of this 
province to come and invest in our province. 
 
I just find that absolutely amazing. When you think of the 
number of people that we’ve exported from this province, but 
by golly, I don’t want them to come back and invest in our 
province — no way. You know we have built walls around this 
province. 
 
Many, many times we hear from the other side, well it’s . . . you 
know there’s an attitude problem in our province. Do you know 
what develops attitude problems? It’s legislation that was put in 
place in 1974 that have built walls around a province that have 
kept people out. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it seems to work like a one-way 
valve — a one-way check valve. People can go out but we sure 
don’t want them investing back into our province, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s what that legislation has done. 
 
So it seems almost bizarre to me that we had legislation in this 
province that wouldn’t allow Canadian citizens to invest in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I would applaud the government 
that they’re certainly moving in that direction. 
 
Another . . . they allow that certain corporations to invest in 
property, but corporations that are not publicly traded. In other 
words, major corporations that are not publicly traded can no 
longer . . . cannot — couldn’t before — but cannot invest in our 
province and buy property. 
 
When you look at our neighbouring provinces, Alberta and 
Manitoba, they have . . . their legislation allows that to take 
place. They have legislation that allows publicly traded 
corporations to buy land in our province . . . in their province. 
But not in this province. 
 
And the member is saying, quite correctly, farm land, 
agriculture land. You bet it’s agriculture land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the recommendations put forward by the committee 
though was to open it up to foreign investment, to let foreign 
investment come in and purchase land, purchase lands greater 
than 10 acres which is currently in place. If a foreign investor 
came into the province currently and into the future, wants to 
invest in our province, the most that they can buy is 10 acres of 
land, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

When you look at a number of intensive livestock operations, 
when you look at a number of agribusiness ventures that are . . . 
we’re feeling need to happen in this province, they are unable to 
come into this province if their project is going to need more 
than 10 acres of land, unless they somehow get around the 
loopholes or through the loopholes that this government has put 
in place. 
 
What the recommendation, what the farm land ownership 
recommendation voted on by the committee, voted on by the 
majority of members of this committee, have said that we 
should open it up to 320 acres. We should open it up to 320 
acres. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately we don’t see that in the 
legislation. There is no big corporate farm that’s going to invest 
in Saskatchewan for 320 acres. They’re not going to compete 
against me or any other farmer in our province to take over the 
province for 320 acres. 
 
But what it does do is open it up if they want to come in and 
develop an intensive livestock, whatever it may be that needs 
more than 10 acres. And right now we’ve shut the door on that 
unless they go through the farm land ownership which is . . . 
review committee which is still going to be in place. But what it 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Farm Land Security Board, I’m 
corrected, and thank you. Farm Land Security Board, which is 
still in place. 
 
But, you know, Mr. Speaker, we have heard many, many times 
over and over again — and I know the government has heard 
this same thing — is the more roadblocks you put in the way, 
the more hurdles that people have to jump over, the more stones 
you throw in the crick, the sooner it’s going to be blocked up. 
 
And that’s exactly what is happening with this. We had a 
chance to open it up, to let money flow, to let capital flow, but 
unfortunately the government didn’t take that step and didn’t 
move on to allow for foreign investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill does certainly correct some 
miscalculations of the ’70s, when we felt that we could close 
the borders to everything in this province, that we could keep 
everybody out of this province and protect ourselves from the 
big, bad world out there. And, Mr. Speaker, that has failed 
horribly in this province. 
 
We have talked in this House over the last three weeks or four 
weeks about the agriculture issue, about the trade issue, about 
farm safety net issue, about the ag framework that is being 
developed between this government and other provincial 
governments, and the federal government, Mr. Speaker. We 
have talked on that over and over and over again. This piece of 
legislation doesn’t change all that but it does help change an 
attitude. It help puts together the pieces of the puzzle that have 
been so sorely lacking under this NDP government and in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, opening it up to Canadian citizens . . . and I know 
I’ve had people on both sides of the issue come and talk to me, 
many of them — many farmers in the area that I farm in, 
neighbours will talk about it. And some are in favour and some 
are not. 

But, Mr. Speaker, generally — generally speaking — the 
people that are not in favour are concerned that it may drive the 
price up. It may drive the price of farm land up which, you 
know, when you think about it, is that so terrible? Is the land, 
agriculture land in our province . . . if the price is driven up 
because of competition for investment, is that so terrible? 
 
Or do we continue to build walls around our province, continue 
to limit the amount of capital coming into our province, and 
continue to protect ourselves from the world outside — is that 
the option? Is that the better option? And frankly I don’t think 
so. Mr. Speaker. 
 
By opening it up and allowing people to invest . . . And yes, if I 
want to buy a half section that I’ve had my eye on right next to 
me — the north half of section 22, I’d sure love to buy that half 
— and if I have to compete against somebody coming in, so be 
it. But also what that does, Mr. Speaker, is it makes the other 
three and a half or four quarters or sections, whatever it might 
be, it increases the value of those too. 
 
If the quarter or the half that I’m wanting to buy right next to 
me all of a sudden shoots up in price because of foreign 
investment, it also increases the price of my land too. All of a 
sudden my asset value, my net worth, is increased accordingly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s such a bad, bad solution, 
bad consequence through legislation like this, Mr. Speaker. I 
know many people that have asked me — many, many people 
— and I think you could talk to . . . I know of members on the 
other side that are no longer there any more that have been 
certainly buying a lot of farm land and friends of theirs buying a 
lot of farm land. Certainly a fellow that has been mentioned in 
this House many, many times, owns a consulting company 
that’s pretty close to the government, has bought a number of 
sections right in our area. And I mean we all wonder why he’d 
be buying that land. It’s not bad farm land, but this . . . The 
other issue is, does he see something that we didn’t? Was he 
buying land knowing that perhaps the restrictions on farm land 
ownership would be opened up and increase the value of farm 
land? And I’m not sure if that’s the case; but I tell you, as far as 
a business move, it was probably a very good move — because 
I think it will. 
 
Will it drive it up a lot? I don’t think it’s going to drive farm 
land up a lot. But will it help? Will it take down the walls that 
we have put up around our province for the last 20 or 30 or 40 
years? You bet. It’s going to take down some of the walls, and I 
think it will help dispel some of the misconceptions, some of 
the poor attitudes, that people have of our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly we hear over and over again a number of 
people in our province talking about we have to — as the 
member from Athabasca I think mentioned — we have to up 
our attitude, Mr. Speaker. And I heard him mention that many, 
many times in the last session. He hasn’t said it quite so many 
times this session. But certainly we need to increase our attitude 
and the way we feel about ourselves. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a small piece, but this is one of the 
pieces of the puzzle that will help people look at our province 
and not say boy, they’re backwards there. You know, we have 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

 

enough issues in this province that people can look at and say 
gee, that’s kind of a backwards way of thinking in the year 
2002. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to say that this is one piece of 
legislation that’s changing, that may help people look at our 
province a little more positively and say, you know what? They 
aren’t trying to build walls. They’re not trying to keep 
everybody out so that they can have this sort of euphoria 
amongst themselves, which has never really happened. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, after the Leader of the Opposition mentioned 
today, 14 quarters of population decline. Unless we start willing 
. . . unless we start . . . Unless we’re willing to change — and 
this is a small piece of it — unless we’re willing to change, 
we’re going to continue to get what we’ve always got. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will move to adjourn Bill No. 79, The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act. Until we can 
consult a little bit further, I’d move to adjourn this Bill right 
now. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 72 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 72 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is an important Bill to the workers of 
Saskatchewan because it affects them during their working 
days, Mr. Speaker, and it may very well affect a good number 
of them when they’re no longer able to work, Mr. Speaker. 
Because Workers’ Compensation Board Act is about protecting 
workers, Mr. Speaker. It’s about providing workers that are 
injured on the job with some opportunities to carry on with a 
reasonable lifestyle after their injury, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) provides 
decent protection if you’re injured on the job for a temporary 
measure. So if you break your leg, there’ll be some 
compensation for you, there’ll be some rehabilitation, Mr. 
Speaker. And at some point in time you will return to your 
place of employment. 
 
All of this, Mr. Speaker, is paid for, not by the employees, not 
by the government, Mr. Speaker, but rather it’s paid entirely by 
the employers of this province, by the businesses of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. They have agreed to pay for this 
insurance, Mr. Speaker, in return for which they are not in a 
position then to be sued by the employees. 
 
So there’s benefit, Mr. Speaker, on both sides. There’s benefit 
to the employees in providing protection to those employees. 

There’s benefit to the employer, that he knows what his costs 
are going to be and he is not going to be hit all of a sudden, 
because of a catastrophic accident, with a huge settlement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But when you look at the Bill and you look at the operations of 
WCB, we have seen quite a number of problems, Mr. Speaker, 
over the last few years. We have seen that the employees feel 
that they’re not being treated properly; that they’re being 
pushed, Mr. Speaker, pushed through their rehabilitation 
programs, put into positions that may in their opinions be 
dangerous to their health or, Mr. Speaker, put into positions 
where the treatment regime forced on them is not necessarily 
appropriate to their condition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As you well know, my son was in Wascana Rehab for a year, 
Mr. Speaker. And that is also the location where a lot of the 
rehabilitation for WCB clients takes place. And so my wife, 
since she spent a lot of time there, had lots of opportunity to 
talk with and talk about the WCB claims that various 
individuals had and to hear their concerns and the problems that 
they were facing. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I remember her talking about one particular situation where a 
lady, Mr. Speaker, had been injured on the job, was taking 
rehabilitation for this — not a catastrophic injury but still a 
major injury, Mr. Speaker — and that she was going to have to 
take the rehabilitation regime for six months to a year. In that 
time period she became pregnant, Mr. Speaker, but there was no 
concern given to that fact and her regime was . . . she was 
forced to carry on with the regime that she had been given even 
though, Mr. Speaker, at that time she was five months pregnant. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there has to be some opportunity within WCB 
to make some corrective judgments — to change the regimes 
that the employees, Mr. Speaker, are placed under when it 
comes to their rehabilitation. There has to be consideration and 
taking into account the physical condition they’re in, the 
stresses that it’s placing them under, Mr. Speaker. And that 
doesn’t seem to happen. 
 
Employees, Mr. Speaker, that are injured on the job not only go 
to the local doctor — whomever that might be at the location 
where the injury occurred, as an emergency service — but they 
also then consult with their own family physicians and 
consequently, depending on the injury, Mr. Speaker, perhaps 
with specialists. Then it gets transferred over to WCB, Mr. 
Speaker. But there seems to be a disconnect between the 
medical staff with WCB and the client’s own medical 
professionals — their family doctor, their specialist, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I guess maybe it breaks down to where is the concern. The 
family physician and the specialists connected on that end are 
interested in that particular client. WCB though has two roles to 
play, Mr. Speaker — look after the client, ensure their 
rehabilitation, and also ensure the minimum costs for the 
corporation. And it seems, Mr. Speaker, in talking with a 
number of clients with WCB, that that concern has swung over 
to the financial side rather than the concern for the client, Mr. 
Speaker, in too many cases. 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

And so you run into a problem that there’s inappropriate 
treatments being forced onto WCB clients which may actually 
be injuring them physically because of the stress and the 
workload that they’re placed under. WCB has what they call a 
program of working yourself into condition. And so they put 
you under a load in the sense of make you exercise a good deal 
so that you’re forcing those muscles and those bones, Mr. 
Speaker. And in some cases they’re forcing them too much and 
they actually, the patients are regressing rather than 
progressing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet there seems to be no place for that employee to appeal 
those kind of decisions. How do you get this situation corrected, 
Mr. Speaker, when the treatment being forced on you by the 
doctors, who have supervision over you, don’t agree that it’s 
actually harming you? 
 
And if you complain, Mr. Speaker, if you say no, I am not 
going to do this because it’s harmful to me, now all of a sudden 
you become a difficult case, you refuse to follow the treatment 
orders placed before you by WCB so they cut you off of the 
program. 
 
Very, very similar, Mr. Speaker, to what happens with SGI 
clients under the no-fault insurance program. Because they are 
similar programs. SGI no-fault took their model, Mr. Speaker, 
from WCB and the way they operated. And there seems to be a 
disconnect between the client and the client’s family physician 
and the corporation’s physicians. 
 
And somehow, Mr. Speaker, that needs to be corrected. And I 
don’t see that happening in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I don’t see 
that happening. 
 
One of the other items that came to my attention having talked 
to a number of people over at Wascana Rehab, was how the 
funding is paid out, Mr. Speaker, for people who are WCB 
claimants. They get 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker, of their salary up 
to a maximum. 
 
Now it’s not through their own fault that they were injured, Mr. 
Speaker. So what’s the justification for telling an employee that 
because you’re injured on the job you’re only worth 90 per cent 
of what you were when you were fully employed? I’ve never 
heard the government come up with a justification for this, as to 
why that happens. Why because you’re injured are you forced 
to take a 10 per cent reduction in your salary? 
 
Well the ex-minister is saying something but I didn’t quite 
understand what he said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 
only if you’re a farmer, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, there 
are farmers who are part of WCB and pay their dues and their 
premiums as they are supposed to pay them. But their 
employees also, Mr. Speaker, are deducted by 10 per cent if 
they’re injured. 
 
And it doesn’t matter whether you’re a farmer, whether you’re a 
truck driver, whether you’re a bag person at Safeway, or a 
government employee, you’re all going to lose 10 per cent of 
your salary if you’re injured in the workplace. And yet there’s 
no justification for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the salary as it’s paid out. 

The government pays salary in compensation, Mr. Speaker, at 
the 90 per cent, and then they deduct from it what they consider 
to be the normal and natural deductions. They deduct EI 
(Employment Insurance) premiums; they deduct Canada 
Pension Plan premiums; they deduct income taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, and then they pay the net to the employee. 
 
Now you would say well that . . . You would normally say 
that’s fair. That’s what that employee would have been earning 
had they still been on the job. So that’s paid to the employee. 
And the employees in most cases believe that to be a fair 
situation, except perhaps the 10 per cent. 
 
But then . . . So then, Mr. Speaker, what happens is that 
employee recovers. So they may have been off for six months; 
they may have been off for a year; they may have been off for 
two years. Now they recover and they want to go back into the 
workplace. Well maybe their job is still there, maybe the 
company they worked for is still operating and therefore they’re 
able to go back to work. Maybe it isn’t. In Saskatchewan there’s 
a good chance that they’ve moved to Alberta and it’s no longer 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In that case, Mr. Speaker, that employee should have an 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to draw Employment Insurance. You 
know he’s been . . . they’ve been paying into . . . That client’s 
been paying into it, let’s say for two years, because it was 
deducted from their pay, Mr. Speaker, from WCB. As far as the 
employee is concerned it’s been paid. But what happens is, Mr. 
Speaker, WCB actually never transfers the money from WCB 
to Employment Insurance or to Canada Pension Plan, or indeed 
even to the tax department, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the employee can’t get unemployment insurance because the 
premiums were never paid. The employee has lost those two 
years of Canada Pension Plan because the money was never 
paid. 
 
Let’s say the employee goes back to school, Mr. Speaker, and 
now has a tax credit available, an educational tax credit that 
they could claim against the income tax that was deducted from 
their paycheque. But, Mr. Speaker, there was no money paid in 
income taxes. It was deducted from the employee but never 
paid. And so they have a tax credit, Mr. Speaker, against which 
they have no income to charge. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are some inequities in WCB. And these 
very same inequities, Mr. Speaker, take place in SGI, that the 
employee who has a catastrophic injury and will forever be on 
either WCB or SGI, it has no impact. But for the employee who 
will be returning to work, the fact that the EI, CPP (Canada 
Pension Plan) and taxes were not paid can have a major impact 
on their life. 
 
So who pays then, when that employee cannot find employment 
after recovering from their injury? Do they go on welfare then, 
because the government has taken their EI money and their CPP 
money and not paid it to those appropriate corporations? 
 
Where do they go for assistance? Does WCB step forward and 
say, well we’ll cover you for an extra X number of months 
because we didn’t pay your unemployment insurance? We 
deducted it but we didn’t pay it to the corporation. 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

 

What happens to those employees? Who looks after them? 
When they’ve recovered from their injuries and have no 
opportunity — their employment no longer exists — who looks 
after those employees? That’s some of the questions, Mr. 
Speaker, that has not . . . that have not yet been answered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at WCB for the last number of 
years in this province, you see a corporation that has been not 
well managed. A corporation, Mr. Speaker, that lost $69 
million. This is an insurance company, Mr. Speaker, that deals 
with the people of Saskatchewan only. It’s not like they’re 
insuring buildings in New York, Mr. Speaker, or ships on the 
ocean that are sinking. They’re simply insuring the people, the 
workers of Saskatchewan. And yet somehow or another, Mr. 
Speaker, they managed to lose $69 million because they didn’t 
do their actuarial work. 
 
Every insurance company, Mr. Speaker, has actuaries in their 
employment. People who take into account all of the factors 
available — ages of people, the work they’re doing, how 
dangerous that work is, what are the chances and opportunities 
for injury in those areas, how long do people live, how long are 
they going to be in need of WCB protection? All of those items, 
Mr. Speaker, are calculated in. They calculate in the costs of 
medicines and the consumer price index, how prices are going 
to change, up or down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every insurance company has actuaries in their employment 
that calculate these things and then take that calculation and 
transfer that over to premiums for the people they’re insuring. 
In this case, those premiums go on the employers for the 
employees that they have hired. 
 
Every place, Mr. Speaker, has an actuary except WCB, Mr. 
Speaker. Oh well, they consulted with them once a year to see, 
you know, if things were adding up. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t add up by the tune of $69 
million dollars. That’s a large, large oops, Mr. Speaker. But that 
is an oops that this NDP government is becoming quite regular 
at doing. They just brush those off, Mr. Speaker. They lose 
money in Crown corporations all the time and it doesn’t bother 
them. It’s routine now. You know, it’s like banging your head 
against the wall, Mr. Speaker — after a while you just get used 
to it and that’s what the NDP government is like. 
 
They’re used to losing money, so losing another $69 million is 
not a big thing for them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a big thing though for the employers of 
this province who are going to have to pay the bill to make this 
up. And it’s a big thing for the employees of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, if these programs do not provide them with the proper 
services. And they’re counting on these, Mr. Speaker, to protect 
them if they’re injured on the job, just as the employer is 
counting on WCB to protect that business from an employee 
that is injured on the job. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you have to take a look. Last year, with that 
loss of $69 million, who was the management of WCB? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it turns out that WCB’s CEO is none other 
than John Solomon, defeated NDP MP (Member of 

Parliament), Mr. Speaker; served one term as a Member of 
Parliament in Ottawa, and prior to that, served in this House, 
Mr. Speaker, for I believe two terms, two terms — served for 
two terms, Mr. Speaker. He served one term as, I believe, as a 
Member of Parliament and served two terms, I believe, in this 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at his service in this House, he 
was here when Roy Romanow was elected premier in 1991; sat, 
Mr. Speaker, in the back benches; was the head of the Crown 
Corporations Committee, Mr. Speaker. And I guess that’s what 
qualified him, Mr. Speaker, to be the CEO of WCB. So, Mr. 
Speaker, he became used to the idea, I guess, of Crown 
corporations not having the ability to consistently make a profit 
and simply transferred that expertise then over to WCB, Mr. 
Speaker. Since there seems to be no other outstanding criteria 
that would have made him the CEO, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been in the works for a long 
time. There has been a need for changes to WCB for about 10 
years in this province. And finally the NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker, did get around to doing something about it. Four years 
ago they held, they put together a committee to do a review on 
this. And now four years later we’re getting the results of that 
committee. 
 
And that again is typical of the NDP. They take ages, Mr. 
Speaker, to look at something and then they bring it to the 
House and try and drive it through quickly before people can 
have a chance, Mr. Speaker, to have a look at the Bill and to 
consider it and to give it the proper consideration that it’s due 
because of the need that the workers and employers of this 
province have in protecting themselves with WCB, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well just getting to the next part of it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, one of the items that WCB does provide assistance 
with and is worthwhile, Mr. Speaker, is provides educational 
assistance for injured workers. This is very worthwhile. It gives 
an injured worker, while they’re still injured, an opportunity to 
improve their circumstances. 
 
But it’s not done without a cost to the employee, Mr. Speaker. 
What happens is that the employee is given the opportunity to 
participate in an educational opportunity such as a year of 
technical school training or perhaps a year of university in 
exchange for which, at the end of that time period, Mr. Speaker, 
they will no longer be a WCB client. 
 
They will have accepted that they have now received their dues 
and have been rehabilitated and that their training has qualified 
them, not necessarily to return to the job that they were at 
before because perhaps the injury they suffered does not allow 
them to do that, Mr. Speaker, but it allows them to move on to a 
different kind of employment. 
 
And so that is a very good program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when you look at WCB over the last 10 years, over the last 
number of years, Mr. Speaker, you see some serious problems 
developing. We talked about the $69 million loss, now where 



2360 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

did that occur, Mr. Speaker? What drove that to happen? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that drove that to happen was the 
increase in administration over the last six years — a 48 per 
cent increase, Mr. Speaker, in administration alone. 
 
Now you wonder, Mr. Speaker, are we suffering an epidemic of 
injured workers in this province that we need so many more 
people in the system to look after them? Or is there some other 
reason? Have wages gone up so much in those departments that 
it means a 48 per cent increase in salaries, Mr. Speaker? I don’t 
think so. I don’t hear too many people in government service 
saying that they’ve got a 48 per cent increase over the last six 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s the reason for it? Well perhaps one of the reasons would 
be that SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) has been raising the costs of their buildings. 
Shuffling money around, Mr. Speaker, so that it ends up in the 
government coffers. 
 
We’ve seen the government drain a number of funds this year to 
try and balance their books, which they failed at, but they tried, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is perhaps another one of the other areas 
where they were bringing people through SPMC and raising the 
costs of the buildings for that WCB would be charged for and 
so picking up additional money then for the government. 
 
We see that the staff numbers though have increased 
dramatically. Now that’s one of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that you 
have to question. Are we having an epidemic of injuries that we 
need new people looking . . . in WCB to look after them? 
 
A 21 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. What’s the reason for that? 
A 21 per cent increase in the number of employees at WCB. Is 
it are we hiring a whole bunch more accountants to find out 
why we lost $69 million? Are we finally getting around to 
hiring an actuary to look after the company’s interests? I don’t 
think so. Or if it is, this just happened. 
 
But what happened in the previous years that caused a 21 per 
cent increase in employment in this area? And I would have to 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, without a corresponding increase in 
productivity. Because the employees certainly don’t seem to be 
any happier with it, and the employers certainly don’t seem to 
be any happier with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the problems that we see with WCB, Mr. Speaker, that 
is driving up the costs is the inability of WCB clients to get 
timely diagnoses of their injuries. Because, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan each and every person, either because of illness 
or because of injury, faces a huge waiting list to get into 
diagnostic services. 
 
You’re looking at six to nine months to get in for an MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging). CT (computerized tomography) 
scans, Mr. Speaker, are not timely. And so all of this drives up 
the cost to WCB. It’s injurious to the worker because the 
worker has to suffer with that injury for a long period of time 
without treatment, and that means that the treatment to recover 
from the injury is going to take that much longer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I do know that both SGI and WCB were taking some steps 
to correct that situation. They were transferring their clients, 

Mr. Speaker, to Alberta to utilize the MRIs and CT scans 
available there, paying private medical facilities to look after 
WCB and SGI clients. So Saskatchewan dollars are going to 
Alberta to look after the medical conditions of Saskatchewan 
employees, clients of Saskatchewan’s Workers’ Compensation 
Board, because this government can’t run a proper health care 
system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact it amazed me one day last summer at the Riders’ game to 
hear the Edmonton MRI advertising, come to Edmonton for 
your MRI, suppliers of MRIs to the Saskatchewan Roughriders 
and SGI. What is the Saskatchewan government doing, Mr. 
Speaker, when they can’t even provide medical service to their 
own corporations? They can’t provide medical service to SGI 
clients. They can’t provide medical service to WCB clients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a telling indictment on this government, that 
they have to send the clients of Saskatchewan’s own WCB out 
of this province for medical diagnosis. And they talk about a 
two-tiered health system, Mr. Speaker. Their own corporations 
are running two-tiered health care, paying for it, with the profits 
going out of this province, Mr. Speaker. And the members 
opposite have no concern over that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other issues that need to be 
debated on this particular Bill. I know that a number of my 
colleagues want to raise these issues; they have their own 
personal cases that have come forward to them that they wish to 
bring forward. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 57 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we just finished talking about the WCB Bill, and the 
automobile accident insurance Bill is quite similar. They both 
deal with no-fault, Mr. Speaker, in that a person is injured, Mr. 
Speaker, and then has to deal with the government’s system of 
rehabilitation. 
 
Now this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, is unique. This particular 
Bill is unique in all of North America, Mr. Speaker. It may very 
well be unique in the whole world, Mr. Speaker, in that it tries 
to put two different insurance programs all in the same 
wrapping, Mr. Speaker — tries and runs them together side by 
side. 
 
We have, prior to 1995, Mr. Speaker, an automobile insurance 
policy program in this province that was known as the tort 
system where the individuals injured had the right to sue those 
at fault for pain and suffering, for rehabilitation costs, for 
damages, for all of those kind of things that you would need to 
carry on your life, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2361 

 

In 1995 the NDP government brought a new piece of legislation 
to this House stating that we were doing away with the tort 
system because it was too expensive, Mr. Speaker. The clients 
who were injured under the tort system were spending too much 
money on lawyers, Mr. Speaker — that was the government’s 
argument. 
 
In reality, Mr. Speaker, it had very, very little to do with 
lawyers, and a whole lot to do with transferring the costs of 
rehabilitation from clients . . . excuse me, from the corporation, 
from SGI, onto the clients. It was going to save the government 
$80 million, or so they claimed, Mr. Speaker. Well at the end of 
the day it didn’t save the corporation any money but clients did 
suffer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government brought this Bill in on May 28. 
This is a very large Bill, Mr. Speaker, dealing with two entirely 
separate concepts of automobile insurance, two entirely 
different concepts in one Bill, Mr. Speaker. They brought this in 
on May 28. They brought it up again, Mr. Speaker, for second 
reading for the very first time when the minister stood in his 
place to explain what this Bill was about and how it was 
supposed to work, brought it forward, Mr. Speaker, on June 7. 
 
Now today, Mr. Speaker, on June 26, June 26, we’re debating it 
again. We’ve had an opportunity now, Mr. Speaker, to debate 
this about four times. And there’s a lot of things in this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, that needed to be changed — that needed to be 
changed in the no-fault side of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a group in this province called the 
Coalition Against No-Fault. And they looked at the insurance 
program that the government had brought in and said, this isn’t 
working for clients; we think we can design a better program. 
So the government . . . excuse me. So no-fault . . . The Coalition 
Against No-Fault brought forward their plan, calling it the 
premier option, which melded together both no-fault and the 
tort system. And that has happened, Mr. Speaker, across North 
America. 
 
When Saskatchewan makes this change, if it happens, Mr. 
Speaker, it will be following a trend that has been set by every 
North American jurisdiction that went to the no-fault plan; that 
they would try it for five, six years, and that they would move 
away from it after that. And that’s been the reality of it. 
 
That’s not when they walk into this thing. Oh no, it’s going to 
be the best thing since sliced bread. But the reality has been that 
every jurisdiction that has gone to no-fault has moved away 
from it shortly thereafter and gone to a melded system of 
no-fault and tort. Some have gone all the way back to tort, Mr. 
Speaker. None have kept no-fault the way it was originally 
implemented. They have all moved away from it. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And what the Coalition Against No-Fault did with their premier 
option was take a look at the other jurisdictions and what had 
happened in those locations and saw the melding of the two and 
made recommendations, put forward a report to recommend to 
government, and they made their presentations at the 
government’s travelling road show on how they would like to 
see this done. And they brought forward a melded insurance 

policy, Mr. Speaker, taking the best of no-fault and the best of 
the tort system. 
 
But that’s not what this Bill is all about, Mr. Speaker. It’s about 
a choice between going for no-fault and going for tort, but you 
can’t have the best of both. You can have the worst of both, but 
you can’t have the best of both, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, when you look at this, the government is giving us 
the opportunity in the House to try and learn a little bit about 
this Bill — very little opportunity, Mr. Speaker. But the 
question has to be, what opportunity will drivers have to learn 
about this Bill and make the choices that they need, the 
information that they need to make the choice: do I take 
no-fault or do I take tort? 
 
You need a lot of information, Mr. Speaker, to make that 
decision. The little bit of information that the government 
provided us in his presentation, went nowheres near providing 
the information that people need to know. 
 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker. Somebody is 
walking down the street. A car comes up on the curb and hits 
them. What insurance policy does that pedestrian have? Are 
they under no-fault and therefore receive no compensation for 
pain or suffering, no compensation for the loss of their dreams 
and hopes and aspirations? Or are they under the tort system 
and have the ability to sue that driver and the driver’s insurance 
company, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What choice does that pedestrian have . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Saskatoon Eastview says 
I’m right in all three choices. You have a choice. Well, you 
have the choice before the accident, Mr. Speaker, or a choice 
after the accident? 
 
Because if you’re a driver, if you’re a driver, you have to 
choose before the accident. You have to choose when you buy 
your insurance. When does a passenger, or when does a 
pedestrian get to make a choice? When does it happen, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Is that the first thing they’re going to do when they wheel you 
into the hospital? Sign here, which one you want. Don’t worry 
about the broken neck; we’ll fix that up later; pick your 
insurance. You know, those are the kind of questions that the 
minister needs to be able to answer, Mr. Speaker, and has not 
talked about that at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a whole lot of things that need to 
happen before this Bill can pass. We need a lot of answers on 
this Bill. 
 
One of the things though that the government has brought 
forward in this piece of legislation is they’ve slipped a little 
extra piece in, Mr. Speaker. It’s really nothing to do with 
automobile accidents. Not at all, Mr. Speaker. Not at all. 
 
You know, this is sort of like an Americanism for the NDP 
where you slide a whole bunch of little extra pieces in on a Bill 
that you hope people are going to pass because I want my little 
piece. Well that’s what they’ve done here, Mr. Speaker. 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

They’ve slid a little extra in on this particular Bill. 
 
And it deals with drivers’ licences, Mr. Speaker. It’s got 
nothing to do with accidents. It’s got nothing to do with 
automobile accident insurance, Mr. Speaker. It’s got to do with 
acquiring your driver’s licence. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what the government was proposing to do is if 
you’re a good driver, if you’re a good driver long enough, we’ll 
give you a discount. Other jurisdictions do that all the time, Mr. 
Speaker. If you have a good record, we give you a discount 
because that’s what the actuary figures out. He figures out what 
percentage . . . what’s your chance of having an accident with 
the following criteria. And if you fall into that criteria where 
you’re not as likely to have an accident, we can charge you a 
lower rate. 
 
So now SGI is coming out with a variable rate based on various 
criteria determined by SGI and you’re never going to know 
exactly what the criteria is, but one of them is no accidents, no 
convictions of driving penalties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if you can get away with that for seven years . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Speeding’s okay. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Oh, one of the MLAs says that speeding 
is acceptable. I’m not sure how speeding can be acceptable, but 
it doesn’t go against you I gather, Mr. Speaker, on your 
insurance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they have slid this little piece into this Bill. 
And they’ve been running around the province, Mr. Speaker . . . 
just remember this, Mr. Speaker. They brought this Bill in on 
May 28. They talked about it first on June 7. This is the 26th. 
So it’s 19 days ago they brought this huge Bill in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they slide this little extra piece in and now they say, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to have this passed by July 1 to implement it, 
Mr. Speaker. Have to have it by July 1. All of a sudden, as of 
noon today, Mr. Speaker, they’re in a panic because they 
slipped this little extra piece on to this Bill and now they need 
to have it passed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a solution for them. Never let it be 
said that this opposition does not come forward with good ideas 
and never let it be said, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not willing to 
co-operate with the government when they are prepared to take 
one of our good ideas. Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to see an 
amendment come forward on this Bill making the discount for 
good drivers retroactive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — We’re prepared to offer that proposal to 
the government, Mr. Speaker. Take this idea: retroactive 
implementation of the discount, Mr. Speaker, to July 1. 
 
This is the government, Mr. Speaker, that has no problem in 
deeming certain dates to have happened. You don’t even have 
to do that, Mr. Speaker. You don’t have to deem it. You just 
make it retroactive to July 1 and everybody qualifies at that 
point, Mr. Speaker. So there’s no problem, Mr. Speaker, in 

dealing with that little piece of the Bill that they tried sneaking 
in. 
 
And what that does, Mr. Speaker, is allows us the opportunity 
to debate this particular Bill that’s been before this House a 
very short time, a very complex Bill — 101 pages, two-sided, 
closely typed, Mr. Speaker, two-faced paper, Mr. Speaker — to 
allow the members of this Assembly to debate and gain an 
understanding of what this particular Bill is all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is like no other in North America. It 
deserves to have careful consideration given to it, to protect the 
interests of all people in Saskatchewan — not just drivers, Mr. 
Speaker, not just the insurance company, Mr. Speaker, but 
everyone who may come in contact with a vehicle needs to be 
protected from this insurance Bill, Mr. Speaker. They need to 
know and understand exactly what they’re going to be doing 
when they go and buy automobile insurance when this Bill is 
implemented. 
 
They need to know what would happen under all potential 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker, all of the implications; are you 
better off with no-fault for a minor injury; are you better off 
with tort for a medium injury; are you better off with no-fault 
for a catastrophic injury; or is everything completely reversed, 
Mr. Speaker? When is it worth your while to be able to sue and 
when do you need to have no-fault insurance? Or is there a 
circumstance, Mr. Speaker, where one is always clearly better 
than the other? The government has not come forward and said 
any of those answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need the opportunity and the time to study this Bill and time 
for the government to explain what is proper about this Bill. We 
need an opportunity for people like the Coalition Against 
No-Fault to gain an understanding of this Bill and how is it 
going to impact their . . . people that are already been injured 
and people who will be injured in the future. 
 
We need an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 
Saskatchewan need an opportunity to be able to consult with 
experts in the medical fields, in the legal fields, and in the 
insurance fields to gain an understanding of this unprecedented 
type of insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, lots of problems with the current 
no-fault scheme. The problems with it, Mr. Speaker, include not 
enough protection for rehabilitation — not enough funding, Mr. 
Speaker. For those people who are up in years, I think there 
probably would have been enough. But for those people who 
are younger, the protection under the past no-fault insurance 
plan was not sufficient, Mr. Speaker — that needed to be 
changed. 
 
And I’m glad to see, Mr. Speaker, that the government did 
include in that an increase in protection. And I think that is 
going to be welcome by all current people suffering under the 
no-fault insurance plan, clients of the no-fault insurance plan. 
The fact is, the government in this particular Bill is already, Mr. 
Speaker, making that retroactive — going back to the original 
date of injury of those clients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So changing one more little piece, Mr. Speaker, in here and 
making the date for the discount for good drivers retroactive to 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

 

July 1 is not a major change. Retroactive to July 1, 2002, would 
only be fair, Mr. Speaker, given the amount of time that this 
government has allowed this legislature to look this Bill. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask the government, will you consider that 
amendment? We’ll even allow the government to bring that 
amendment forward as a House amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — We won’t even demand the credit for it, 
Mr. Speaker. So yes, if the deputy, if the Deputy House Leader 
for the government wants to claim the idea, he can have it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So, Mr. Speaker, do the right thing. 
Include this little retroactive amendment in there to help this 
Bill through, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would 
move we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Status of the Artist Act/ 
Loi sur le statut de l’artiste 

 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my left, Angie Gélinas, deputy minister; to her left, David 
Debono, president and CEO of SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network); behind Angela, Bruce Medhurst, 
senior policy analyst. Beside Bruce, Peggy Brunsdon; and 
behind Bruce, Emile St. Amand, director of sports and 
recreation. And beside Emilie, Elizabeth Kalmakoff, senior 
policy analyst. 
 
And I think I neglected to mention that Peggy Brunsdon is the 
manager of provincial heritage resources and Bruce Medhurst is 
a senior policy analyst. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to 
the officials and Madam Minister. 
 
Before we get into the specifics of Bill 73, I just find that 
there’s a lot in this Bill that is very, very vague and very much 
— I’ll just outline some of my points right at the onset here and 
then get into the specifics of them — but it’s very vague and it 
doesn’t have any real teeth to the Bill at all that I can determine. 
 
So before I get into the specifics, could the minister please 
outline just a bit of the background behind the reasons for this 
Bill and this proposed legislation that’s being brought forward. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much for that question. 

I think the best way to describe this is the arts community has 
been very impatient for this legislation to come forward, and yet 
at the time when we sat down to review the possible legislative 
options the repercussions are actually fairly large of some of the 
choices one might make under the framework proposed here. 
And we felt uncomfortable with proceeding with some fairly 
major initiatives without more consultation than had taken place 
on this in the past. 
 
So because the arts community was very anxious to have the 
commitment in writing that we were going to proceed with the 
work that needed doing, we’ve constructed a Bill which 
empowers us to proceed with the work and creates an 
expectation and a commitment that the work will follow and 
that in subsequent legislative sessions, when the appropriate 
level of consultation has happened and that we really 
understand the repercussions of the law that we would be 
making under this framework, that we would then proceed to 
flesh out the specific parts of the Bill. 
 
But people did not want it to just slide away without a 
commitment. So this is actually at the urging of the arts 
community that we’ve taken the first step to create a framework 
for the work that’ll happen over the next several years. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And it’s 
my understanding that this Bill kind of parallels the federal one 
that was introduced and passed, I believe in 1992. I mean that’s 
10 years ago that we finally got around to doing something 
that’s similar to it. 
 
Will, in fact, this Bill be easier in interfacing with the federal 
Act? And if it is, can you expand on it? Because as I understand 
the federal Bill also, it really doesn’t have any substance to it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think in a way this question illustrates 
the response that I gave to the first question. 
 
There’s really two status of the artist Bills that exist in Canada. 
One is the federal and the other one is Quebec and they are both 
quite different. Quebec’s is quite extensive in a number of 
areas. The federal Bill is a little more general, but still and all, 
they actually have a body that’s established at the federal level 
to certify artist groups that are organized as essentially 
bargaining agents under that Act. 
 
So we felt that before we proceeded either with the federal 
model or the Quebec model, we would wait for the review that 
. . . the federal government committed in their Bill to do a 
review which is currently going on of how that legislation is 
functioning. So we thought it would be useful to wait for the 
outcome of that review. 
 
But also to compare it to the Quebec Bill to see which blend of 
provisions or something new that we may create as a made in 
Saskatchewan solution would be the most suitable to 
accomplish the goals that the artists hoped for under this 
framework. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Just 
going through the Bill . . . And I know I spoke to some of these 
issues the other day, but without answers to it, rhetorical 
answers, that I myself might read into it. 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

So I’d just like to pose some questions on the specifics of the 
Bill. Section 3 — the legislation refers to the many important 
and valuable contributions artists . . . contributions of artists to 
the cultural, social, economic, and educational enrichment of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I agree with all of that. They do make an extremely huge 
contribution to all of the cultural, social, economic, and 
educational enrichment of the province. But what I’m 
wondering, if you might explain how this particular section was 
included in the Bill. 
 
They do add an awful lot to the province. We know that today. I 
don’t really realize . . . or don’t really think that we need it into 
the Bill to say that. 
 
And is this on par with what other trades or occupations have in 
their legislations? Do we have to go through every piece of 
legislation that refers to any specific job and suggest that 
they’re providing an awful lot of contribution to the culture, 
social, economic, and educational enrichment of this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would have to have someone do a 
review of some of the other professional Acts. 
 
But I have to say that this is . . . One of the important parts of 
this Act — and I thank you for reminding me of it — is that it 
does bring a status to artists who . . . I think sometimes, 
although people value artists, they seem to think of it as a hobby 
sometimes and not a profession. 
 
And so this is really to elevate the work that professional artists 
are doing to a professional level, a professional — and I don’t 
mean at a professional level in terms of what they’re doing, but 
people’s recognition of what they’re doing — to elevate it to 
that level. 
 
But we could check into whether similar clauses are included. 
 
But I have to say that it was very important to the arts 
community that this affirmation be there. Because even though 
you feel that we value the work of artists, and so do I, many 
artists feel undervalued. And so it was important to them and 
they were involved in having that particular wording in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
guess the reason I pose this question is that we have people 
involved in other aspects of professional sports in this province. 
Do we have specific Bills that are saying hockey players 
provide a huge cultural importance? 
 
We’ve got curling teams that have won national and world 
honours for this province. Do we have a Bill that says that they 
have provided an awful lot of social, economical, and 
educational enrichment of the province? 
 
I know I stay very close to the rodeo, call it a business if you 
wish, which is a sport. Have we ever mentioned in a Bill in this 
province the value of a rodeo contestant — what he or she does 
for the enrichment of culture in this province? 
 
And I’m just curious as to why all of a sudden we have just 
singled out artists as somebody that we have to include in a Bill 

to satisfy — and this is why I’m at a loss — satisfy what? They 
said they’d like it in a Bill. 
 
And what I’m suggesting is, if all of these other sports entities 
and cultural entities are mentioned in a Bill, if we have to 
include the whole gamut of the Bill that’s in front of us today 
with every other aspect of cultural, recreational, sporting 
personnel within this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Let me put it this way. I think first of 
all that if we were to include it in every Bill that all people are 
valued, that wouldn’t be a bad thing. And so if other people felt 
that was important to include that, then perhaps we could have 
an omnibus Bill that spoke to the value of all the professions in 
this province. 
 
I guess the second thing I would say is a lot of legislation that is 
passed by government is not just because it’s what government 
wants or what government thinks. It’s because it’s what the 
community that that legislation serves wants or thinks. 
 
So I would just have to say that this legislation, in its 
framework state, is very much a reflection of the expressed 
feelings and needs and desires of the community that this Bill is 
addressing itself to. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’ll let that be known to all of the other 
organizations and see if they can introduce a Bill that would 
allow your government to have another bunch of Bills, if 
another session does come up in the fall or whenever, that it 
would be a chance to introduce some more Bills of very little 
significance. 
 
In, Madam Minister, in section 4, my interpretation is that the 
minister responsible, in this case yourself, will be given some 
fairly broad and sweeping powers and I just have a little bit of 
unease with this section. And knowing the individualistic nature 
of artists, I think that they might be a little bit uncomfortable 
with this as well. 
 
Could you explain . . . expand on this section actually, section 
4? Could you expand on us . . . on the section for us with your 
assurances that micromanagement will not be part of this Bill? 
And we know it’s been done in other areas and it’s just . . . it 
would provide some assurances that the intent is not to 
micromanage the artistic community. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Anything that we would proceed with 
under the powers of this Bill would be the result of the work 
done by working committees on the respective areas identified 
in the framework. It would go through all the normal review 
processes and then it would come to the legislature for 
discussion. So there’s nothing really automatic here. 
 
This really just empowers me to proceed with work that needs 
to be done. And we don’t intend to do any of this work separate 
from the organizations and agencies that were expressing a 
desire to have a Bill that enabled this work to go forward. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Parts of 
section 5 . . . when I first picked up this Bill, it was section 5 
that probably caught, caught my eye first off. And when it 
refers to the rights of artists to free speech and freedom of 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

 

artistic and cultural expression and the rights . . . right of artists 
to be fairly treated by government and society, that catches your 
attention right away because the very first thing that came to my 
mind is, is that not already covered? Is this not something that’s 
covered under the Charter? 
 
And when I look at this, it’s again . . . it’s almost like a 
rhetorical statement and we could have Bills that are very, very 
thick if we put in all of the things that are included in other Bills 
and legislations. So my question, Madam Minister, is why is it 
deemed necessary to put articles like this within the Bill that are 
already included in the Charter? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it’s history that requires this 
kind of a clause to be in here. I think most artists believe that 
it’s their obligation to push the envelope in society. And 
pushing the envelope can often create situations where there’s 
people who would work to censor what artists are doing. And 
certainly history has shown that in many political changeovers 
that have taken place throughout the world, repression of 
artistic and cultural expression has often been one of the key 
features of changes in political regimes. 
 
And certainly we’ve had discussions in the past regarding 
purchases made by art galleries, works displayed, films shown, 
about whether or not there is a freedom of speech here. 
 
So really what this is, is again reflecting back to a Bill being 
crafted to represent both the public interest and the interest of 
the people who are wanting the Bill. This just reaffirms that we 
do see artists and creative people as having a special role in 
society and that’s to help be on the leading edge of thought, of 
challenging thought, and of being expected to be people who 
challenge the status quo — not merely being people who 
reproduce exact likenesses of reality. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, as far as I can 
understand it, this is still all included in the Charter the right to 
free speech. When you suggest that artists have a propensity of 
pushing the envelope, and some of their artistic views may not 
be — if they’re pushing the envelope — they might not be held 
in the highest regard. Is this Bill going to in fact change that? 
 
And I would suggest this Bill can’t change that because I don’t 
believe it can override the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
So again, I’m a bit at a loss why we would include all of the 
Charter articles within this Bill as a repeat of it. And we suggest 
the pushing the envelope . . . I mean we in this Chamber have 
the right to free speech and yet we have restrictions also. One 
might not call it artistic impressions maybe, but we are 
restrained from what we can say. 
 
And so if artists feel they’re restrained from whatever they’re 
. . . what their expressions are or their speech are, society is 
restrained from their right to speak, free speech, in certain 
aspects. So I’m again just at a little bit of a loss why we would 
include that. 
 
But I’ll just go on to another part of section 5 of the various 
rights, for an example, to form associations and to form 

advisory bodies and to enjoy the same economic and social 
benefits that are available to other workers in Saskatchewan. 
Again, wouldn’t these rights be included in the Charter? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You know, this is a difficult one 
because what you are technically worth and what people believe 
they have to pay you can be two very different things. I think 
what this really is, is an expression of the desire to be 
compensated in proportion to the investment of time and 
education and effort that goes into perfecting their craft, 
whatever it may be. And even though they may have the right to 
the same economic and social benefits, it’s often not the belief 
of others that they need to pay them anything. 
 
And I mean, it’s not much different than when a small, 
independent contractor does a job for somebody and the person 
says, well, I don’t really like that so I’m not going to pay for it. 
People are wanting some standards regarding how they would 
enjoy some of the same economic and social benefit that other 
workers do. And right now, I would say that creative workers 
are largely excluded from safety net provisions other than 
welfare, from pension provisions other than on the rare 
occasion that they would get paid enough to purchase an RRSP 
(registered retirement savings plan), I guess they could do that. 
 
But I think what we’re looking here is to set some standards. 
Now those may not always be followed, but they would start to 
present a guideline, and in some instances, more than a 
guideline depending on how it’s incorporated into policy and 
practice. But at least, at minimum, a guideline for what’s an 
appropriate level of compensation for people engaged in these 
types of activity. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Madam Minister, when we talk 
about pay and worth it’s always an interpretation, especially 
when you get into the artistic aspects of artistic work because 
one person’s treasure might be another one’s non-treasure or 
garbage — so that’s always an interpretation. 
 
And so to include that, I think it’s going to be extremely, 
extremely difficult because it’s art. Whether it’s in the music or 
whatever, it is still, it’s still subject to interpretation by those 
that are going to purchase it or partake in the artistic event. 
 
But it’s our understanding that within the community, artistic 
community, there’s already a number of unions and 
associations. And I guess . . . Has there been an increased call 
for more of them? For more unions and associations? Is that 
really the nature and intent behind this particular subsection? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s true that there are many 
associations. There are a very few unions. But I think this does 
speak to the employer/employee relationship. We’re not talking 
about suggesting that if you buy a particular piece of art you 
should be paying a particular amount. 
 
But often people who work in this area are independent 
contractors who work with various employers, whether that’s a 
bar owner who may or may not decide to pay them at the end of 
the evening; sometimes it’s a government who’s contracting 
with creative people to do media or advertising work; 
sometimes it may be artists that are being engaged for public 
performance, for private performance. And the fact of the 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

matter is, is sometimes it’s technicians that work in this area 
who are being engaged to work. 
 
And I would have to say that it’s a big question mark at this 
point how much of this would be establishing a principle or 
whether it would go further than that to establishing an actual 
payment regime. 
 
For example, I’ll just give you an example — and I don’t know 
whether this will ever go there or not but I think it’s a good 
example. In some areas I believe in Holland when part-time 
workers work, they work through a part-time agency and the 
employer contributes to that agency a portion of pension; you 
know, their worker . . . their occupational health and safety 
protection; their workers’ comp I guess would be the best way 
of putting it; their . . . any benefit plans. 
 
So instead of each individual employer having to do that 
directly with the employee, it goes through their temp agency 
and then that person actually builds up a pension, actually has 
some safety net built on the labour that they’ve actually been 
doing. 
 
Now that’s one model. I don’t know if that’s a model that 
would work and I don’t know if there’s only limited areas 
where it would work. But there’s no doubt that as independent 
contractors these are very vulnerable people. I could give you 
example after example of artists and professionals who work in 
this area who have become ill and are just destitute. Their 
families are destitute. 
 
And I think we need to find a way to create a little more 
economic security through better practices in terms of the 
relationships, the economic relationships, in that community. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Madam Minister, I don’t disagree 
with that. But independent contractors — and I think we look at 
independent contractors as artists is what we’re looking at in 
this Bill — I would suggest there’s independent contractors in 
the business area of this province that really have a serious 
problem also that we’re not addressing, because they’re moving 
out of the province because of other situations that’s being 
developed by the policies of this government. 
 
But now we’re doing it for the artistic community, so I think it’s 
something that we need to look at for a little broader field 
within the whole. When you talk about independent contractors, 
it’s far more reaching than just the artists. 
 
But just carrying on on that, and I don’t want to belabour all of 
this, but it seems like so much of this is already included, and I 
just want to make reference because it is in the Bill. 
 
Section 5(h) says . . . makes reference to: 
 

the desirability of making artistic works available to the 
public. 
 

Well in my view, artistic work is available to the public. I mean 
that’s why artists have their profession or their trade or 
whatever you wish to call it. So by putting it into a Bill that says 
the desirability of making it available to the public, how will 
this policy . . . how will this Bill make things different for 

what’s already in place today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think there’s two ways to answer that 
question. There’s a question of artistic works being available to 
individuals. But when you say the public, you mean perhaps in 
a public building like this. Up on the third floor we have that 
beautiful mural that was likely a contracted artwork. It’s a 
public work — it’s not for sale to you personally; it’s for the 
beauty of our community and for the improvement of our 
quality of life by having these kinds of things around us. 
 
So for example, the city of Regina has a policy where a 
percentage of all their capital investments goes towards, goes 
towards purchasing of artworks for public buildings. There’s 
also the question of what we do with our other public areas like 
schools and just generally to make art a part of the public realm, 
not just the private realm. 
 
In the olden days, art was the purview of the very wealthy. This 
is a statement that art should be the purview of the public, not 
just the very wealthy, and that in order to do that, there has to 
be a public commitment to it, not just a private commitment. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, it 
gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and to our members 
and guests in the House today, friends of mine that have just 
arrived in the city. I’d like to introduce Earl, Willie, and Joel 
Lieske from the city of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 
 
Earl and I go back a long time. We used to ride Triumph 
motorcycles together and that would probably have something 
to do with the T-shirt he’s wearing there. So I would like to 
acknowledge their presence here. They’re just visiting for a few 
minutes on their way through to Calgary. 
 
And I’d like you to recognize them and welcome them to the 
House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Status of the Artist Act/ 
Loi sur le statut de l’artiste 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for your 
answer to that but I don’t know if I really got the question 
answered. 
 
By making artistic works available to the public . . . And I 
understand what you’re saying — how are we going to do it? 
How does this Bill going to do that? Is it going to be injecting 
funds? Is it going to . . . is there some way that we’re going to 
just magically pass this Bill and all of a sudden everything’s 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

 

available to the public? I think not. 
 
So by just phrasing that in the Bill, I personally can’t see how 
it’s any different than what we have today. Is stuff available to 
the public — you mention in this building? Yes it’s available to 
the public today. In schools? Yes it’s available to the public. 
 
So I don’t know what is different or if there’s a plan that you 
have that’s substantially different that says magically now 
we’re going to make this available to the public. And I’m just 
wondering if you can expand on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess in the formation of public 
policy you start with an objective, what this policy’s trying to 
accomplish. From there perhaps you outline a series of 
principles on which you’re going to base any policy that’s 
developed. 
 
What this does here is articulate some principle saying, if we 
are developing new policy in the arts area, these are the things 
we want to take into consideration. And I think that happens in 
every area of policy development, that principles are articulated, 
and then as you go down your list and say, well, has this policy 
accounted for this, has it accounted for that? 
 
Because you know we may think that these things are all around 
us and take it for granted, but the fact of the matter is, quite 
often, when I talk to parents who have moved here from other 
provinces, they’re amazed at the wealth of program resources 
that are available to children in Saskatchewan, both within the 
schools and outside the schools, which have been the victims of 
cutbacks in many other areas. And what this does is that it 
outlines some principles about what we value, what we care 
about, and what we think should be part of a good arts policy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I think that was my point. It all is 
available, and I agree, it’s available now. We have a wealth of it 
here right now. But what the Bill is doing really doesn’t change 
that. But if you suggest that it’s going to be a framework for the 
future I can understand that although it doesn’t quite say that. 
 
Section 6, Madam Minister, talks about the government 
undertaking with respect to artists and their work with specific 
reference about promoting within government — within 
government — the working conditions of artists. 
 
Why just within government? Shouldn’t the rest of the people 
be informed of the working conditions of artists and why is the 
phrase just, within government — could you explain that 
please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think 6(c) gives you a little more 
fleshing out of that notion. The government often — and not 
sometimes directly, sometimes through a subcontractor — 
engages artists in production of commercials, production of 
creative work for publications, sometimes as part of events that 
are held. For example when we’ve been here in the legislature, 
we’ve had people from the symphony playing. 
 
And what this says is that good behaviour starts at home. And 

that in our relationship with artists we agree to abide reasonably 
with what’s considered to be appropriate compensation in those 
areas. 
 
And the organizations that now exist, the professional 
organizations, do have what they call scale, which identifies 
what they consider to be an appropriate level of compensation 
for different services provided by artists. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Again just for confirmation — and I’ve 
carefully read part (c) also — but abiding by the scales, now is 
this something that the artistic community has agreed to? 
Because if it’s only within government, surely we’re not going 
to have the whole artistic community come under the auspices 
of, within government. 
 
So would there not be an air of unfairness if somebody is within 
government and has . . . there’s a scale or that they, the 
government’s, obliged to and somebody could be downtown at 
the casino doing the same work and not to the same scale. I 
think we’re . . . would we not be creating such a difference there 
— it’s not applying to all? And that’s why the concern — 
within government — is bothering me. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m tempted to have a little fun with 
this. 
 
The fact of the matter is we could have a minimum wage for 
artists that applied to the whole community. But every 
employer sets their own wage rates. And at this point in this 
whole process, we’re not going further than what this Bill 
articulates. Because I said, we’ve got the working committees, 
we want to consult both with artists, with the employers that 
engage them. 
 
What we’re doing right now is just making sure that within our 
organization, the compensation that we set is fair and 
reasonable and in keeping with what those associations have 
identified. And of course that doesn’t mean that you just . . . 
that the sky is the limit. But what it means, that you . . . that you 
deal with reasonable scale agreements that have been set. 
 
And it would be no different than us setting a compensation 
level for a clerk 1 or resource officer. But we’re not the ones 
determining what those should be. It’s the professional 
associations themselves that put forward what they think a fair 
compensation is and where . . . and, if reasonable, we would 
certainly abide by those. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — You may have partially answered this, 
but I’m going to ask it anyway because I’m just going on with 
section 6, section 6(d). And it says the protocols respecting 
working conditions previously established by relevant artist 
associations representing the interests of artists shall be 
respected, honoured, and abided by in good faith by the 
government. 
 
The implication there is we don’t do that now. We don’t respect 
them in good faith. I mean, that’s just by implication that one 
could read into that. But it also seems like it’s a very, very 
narrow focus. I’m just wondering what the reason behind that 
one also is and if past events necessitated this or, if so, is there 
an example that you could relate to us as why that would be 



2368 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well you know, in a way, this 
highlights the vulnerability of workers because in the absence 
of a union it really has to do with whether the employer decides 
to pay you the money or not. And what we’re saying here is 
that, even where there is no union agreement, we still want to 
be a good employer, because you’ll notice that this whole 
section of the Bill is the government’s undertaking. So it’s 
saying that we as an employer of artistic people would want to 
be a good employer and even if there is no union with those 
particular employees, we still will undertake to be a good 
employer. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I guess that’s the dichotomy in it for me 
is because we’re putting that in the Bill saying we will be, by 
inference that says we haven’t been. And it just seems odd to 
me that by putting it in, it like I say, it seems like we have not 
been in the past. 
 
Section 7, Madam Minister, refers to advisory committees. And 
I note one of the first things it’s . . . it says is the minister 
“may.” And that was a . . . that was a very catchy word right off 
the bat also. 
 
And when I spoke to members of the artistic community, they 
like the idea of the Bill. But they had to also agree that there’s 
nothing to the Bill. It’s flowery. There’s . . . there’s absolutely 
no substance at all. It’s standing up and saying nice things about 
the artistic community, but there’s no meat to it at all. So when 
it says, “The minister may establish one or more advisory 
committees to investigate and report” that doesn’t say a heck of 
a lot really. You may or you may not. You might investigate or 
you might not. 
 
So there’s absolutely no substance. In other words, Madam 
Minister, I can’t see that there’s any commitment here at all. 
There’s no timeline, there’s no time frame, if you wish, there’s 
nothing that’s definite. There’s no obligation because it all rests 
on the word, may. If there was really a focus on this Bill for the 
artistic community, one simple word change in this whole Bill 
would make it entirely different and it would be the word, shall. 
 
And I’m wondering if you have discussed this; if you have 
looked into the possibility of strengthening this Bill with the 
word, shall. And I would go on one step farther because even 
with the word, shall, the minister — if you just use my word in 
there — the minister shall establish, it still doesn’t really have 
much meat to it because the minister shall establish, and there’s 
no time frame. 
 
You could go on for years and years and years and say yes, 
we’re going to establish one. I mean we hear that on numerous 
occasions that something’s going to happen and even Royal 
Assent to Bills already been passed. And some of them . . . I 
just was reading here a couple of days ago that some have been 
eight years and they haven’t received proclamation yet. 
 
So this particular one, I’m wondering if the people that put this 
Bill together looked at using the word, shall, instead of, may, 
and putting a timeline on it — say one year — we will . . . And 
you still are not really committing to an awful lot because, we 
shall within one year appoint an advisory committee to 

investigate. And then there’s some meat to it. 
 
And right now I don’t see any meat to this at all and I’m 
wondering if you’d like to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess a couple of things. One is, if I 
don’t set up these committees then I’m going to send you to the 
arts alliance meeting next year not me, because I’ll get eaten 
alive if the committee’s not up and running. 
 
But I’ll just mention that we are in the process right now of 
developing the advisory committee, and we believe that it will 
be formed and the terms of reference established by the fall of 
2002. So I’ll be expecting you to be pestering me if you don’t 
see an advisory committee announced in September of 2002. 
 
But I will say that normally timelines aren’t put in Bills, and 
that’s a matter of the relationship, I guess, between the 
government and the community. And we ignore those 
obligations at our peril. 
 
But I would say that there’s a lot of very big issues in this list. 
As you can see, it’s got pension plans, education, taxation, 
Workers’ Compensation, safety nets, labour relations, collective 
bargaining. So these are a lot of big and weighty issues. Some 
of these things may be able to be done in a shorter time. Other 
things may take years to accomplish. 
 
So I think before we’ve even had any initial meetings of the 
advisory committee, it would be a little foolhardy to put 
deadlines. But I do think that the fact that we, as we speak, are 
developing the advisory committee, that we are making a 
commitment, and it will be in the record of Hansard that by 
September of 2002 the committee will be very firmly on the 
ground and we will be able to move forward on the work that 
needs doing. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And again 
I wasn’t looking at a deadline so much as a timeline. There’s a 
huge difference. And the word may and shall also is a huge 
difference because, again, there’s not a lot of substitute . . . 
substance to the Bill, even if you use the word shall in the time 
frame, because all you’re doing is establishing an advisory 
committee. So that’s not a deadline issue whatsoever. I mean 
that’s a timeline saying we will. But you have it on record now 
as September of 2002. So that will be accepted. 
 
Madam Minister, you touched on taxation in part of section 7 
and I also wanted to touch on that taxation of artists as part of 
the policy. And I’m wondering how this might be carried out. 
And again the . . . (inaudible) . . . of it because I am one that 
really likes the visual — if you wish, paintings. And if I buy 
one, how are you . . . how is the taxation system going to be set 
up to tax the individual that I buy a painting from? And I’m 
wondering how this being put in the Bill, what’s different about 
it, what’s different than that’s already in place? Or is it just a 
nicety in there and said, boy, we’re going to be . . . this is a fluff 
Bill but we’re going to be tough also because we’re going to tax 
them. 
 
I’m just wondering if you could expand on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Actually the federal government has 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

 

done a little bit of work on this already, and I think it has more 
to do with the averaging provisions of the Income Tax Act and 
whether they might allow artists a longer time period to bring 
income forward due to the irregular nature sometimes of the 
income. 
 
But I think in talking about the issue of taxation, there’s no 
foregone conclusion of what we are going to arrive at here. 
 
But certainly in all other areas of business, there are taxation 
regimes. In some places we have lower tax rates to stimulate 
activity in some areas. There’s a whole variety of ways we 
could look at this. 
 
And for example, we’ve granted some tax forgiveness to 
students at our educational institutions. I think it’s very difficult 
to know all what this could or might encompass. Here is only 
the indication of the desire to have the discussion. But I do 
know that the federal government has done a little bit of work 
on this. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The last 
number we’re coming to, section 8, refers to the regulations. 
And I guess it’s an obvious question that I have, since 8(b) says 
regulations may be made: 
 

(b) respecting any other matter or thing that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council considers necessary to carry out the 
intent of this Act. 

 
When I look at this Bill, it talks about respecting the many 
valuable contributions made by artists to society, and I don’t 
think there’s anyone that’s disputing that. The Bill talks about 
recognizing freedom of artistic expression and freedom of 
association. And we’ve debated that already. I mean that’s 
already there in the Charter. A Bill that gives no timelines, 
although you have since give a timeline with September of 
2002 for committee to start. And there’s not many specifics in 
the Bill, and yet it really concentrates everything to the minister 
of what you would like to do and the time frame. 
 
So you’ve kind of answered this in the start, but I guess the 
final question I would ask is what is the overall intent of the 
Act? Again, I think you may have answered that at the start, but 
the overall intent to me is quite vague even after going through 
the Bill item by item. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would say there’s two things that are 
important about this Bill. One is to — in not an informal way, 
but a formal way — bring the profession of artists into the 
public policy realm in a formalized way and have it identified 
as a real and serious part of the balance of different activities in 
our society. The second part is about economic security for 
people involved in this profession. 
 
So I would really say that it’s those two things. The 
commitment to public policy that values and expends public 
funds in the area of support for the arts, but also that looks to 
the economic . . . enhanced economic security of people in this 
profession. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Status of the Artist Act/ 
Loi sur le statut de l’artiste 

 
Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Chair: — . . . found on page 38 of the Estimates book for 
those that would like to follow along at home. And I would 
invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
know that my parents are sitting on the edge of their seats. 
 
We have the same officials that we had previously. Should I 
re-introduce them? Okay. Sitting beside me is Angela Gélinas, 
deputy minister; to my right, Emile St. Amand, director of sport 
and recreation. Behind me, Peggy Brunsdon, manager of 
provincial heritage resources; behind Peggy, Elizabeth 
Kalmakoff, senior policy analyst. Sitting beside Peggy, Bruce 
Medhurst, senior policy analyst; and to Angela’s left, David 
Debono, president and CEO of SCN. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Madam 
Minister, it’s a pleasure for me to be able to attend this 
particular session of estimates and ask a few questions of 
particular concern to residents and constituents of the Cypress 
Hills area. 
 
Madam Minister, I assume that some of this ground will have 
been traversed already in estimates, but not having been party to 
that, I’d like to cover some of that again. I’d like to direct my 
questions particularly to the cultural facilities grant program 
that is part of the Community Initiatives Fund. And, Madam 
Minister, would you provide for us information as to the total 
amounts of monies dedicated to that fund, the cultural facilities 
grant program for the upcoming fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The total allocation for the Community 
Initiatives Fund was six point . . . cultural facilities, pardon me, 
fund was 6.9 million over four years, and there’s still 500,000 
unallocated left in that 6.9 million. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, has the amount of money, the 
6.9 million been equally divided over the term, the four years 



2370 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

that you talked about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I have a list here of — and we’re 
just looking to see if we actually sent the answer over 
previously — but of 22 communities that received funding 
under the cultural facilities program, and these communities 
would add up to the total of 6.4 million. I don’t have on the 
information I’ve got the exact date that each community 
completed or expended their project, but I do have a list of all 
the communities and the amount they got. So I can read those 
into the record for you if you want. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — It’s not necessary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, could you give us some idea 
as to the variation in size of the projects? What the smallest 
project might be that you would have funded, and what the 
largest project might have been and the value of that project, 
please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The smallest one was in Foam Lake, 
who apparently can really make their money go a long way 
because they did a great deal with $1,200. And the largest one 
was the city of Prince Albert at 2.3 million. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, that represents a fairly wide 
variance, quite a substantial variance. And in view of the fact 
that there are grants as small as $1,200 as you indicated, does 
the criteria for those grants, given the substantial difference in 
sums, does the criteria remain the same for any project no 
matter what the size of the grant request might be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — So far the criteria has been the same in 
terms of matching funds for projects. Now some smaller 
communities and some poorer communities, particularly in the 
North, have said that the guidelines are too onerous for them to 
come up with the 75 per cent share of the project. So in the fall 
we’ll be meeting with the board of trustees and discussing 
whether in fact they feel there’s a problem with the guidelines 
and whether we should be revising them. 
 
And if you have input from your constituents on what people 
think would be more fair for a smaller community or a poorer 
community, certainly I think the board of trustees would be 
very open to looking at that when they review the criteria in the 
fall. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister. I think that reviewing those 
guidelines might be a helpful exercise frankly, especially for 
communities in small and remote areas such as the ones I 
represent, to be honest with you. And when I asked these 
questions, I did so on the basis of one particular project that I’m 
familiar with and it fell prey to or under the guidelines and, 
consequently, could not meet the criteria as they existed. The 
bar simply was too high for them. 
 
Now I’m referring specifically to the Eastend Community 
Tourism Authority’s grant application for the T.rex Centre in 
the town of Eastend. And while they had a very thorough and 
well-prepared application, they simply couldn’t meet some of 

the criteria. Now the funding criteria of 75 per cent, while it 
might seem acceptable — I guess it depends on the size of the 
project — but that wasn’t the number one issue with the 
Eastend group when they made their application. They realized 
when they sent the application in that they were well short of 
the 75 per cent funding. 
 
But the other criteria that stuck in their craw was the limitation 
or the size of area that your community is deemed to be the 
trading centre for. The grammar isn’t very good so I’ll go back 
and explain that. 
 
Your criteria now requires the community that’s getting the 
funding to represent a trading area of 4,500 people or more, and 
for a community the size of Eastend or any of the small rural 
communities, they are simply ruled out of this program on the 
basis of that criteria. The criteria as it stands would suggest, 
frankly, Madam Minister, that projects of cultural value could 
only be located in larger urban areas. It makes it impossible for 
any of these small communities to attain to any of these 
particular kinds of projects that many small communities are 
undertaking these days. 
 
And I guess what particularly bothered the applicants that I 
referred to was that in their application they included 22 letters 
of support for their application. Some of those letters of support 
came from an area well as distant as 200 kilometres. And even 
within the 200 kilometres, if you took all of the rural 
population, they couldn’t achieve the 4,500-person standard. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Now having made that point, Madam Minister, there was a 
letter of support in that application from the city of Swift 
Current. And if you took the population of the city of Swift 
Current and the rural municipalities around there, and included 
them as part of the trading area for Eastend, this application 
would have at least met that 4,500-person criteria. 
 
So would you, Madam Minister, say today that as part of the 
review process you would reconsider that criteria? Because 
whether people drive from Eastend to Swift Current or from 
Swift Current to Eastend to take advantage of the unique project 
that the community is developing there, it has merit and does 
approach a critical mass. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess I’ll respond in a couple of ways. 
One is, I’ve been out in that area and do think that the people 
there have been making a wonderful effort to build on the asset 
that they have there to create more of a tourism draw for that 
area. I mean, even the nice drive that they have that you take 
and they have all the different markers and the historic sites, 
they’ve been very proactive in developing. 
 
And I think I would have to say that you represent their issues 
very well. And certainly when the committee meets in the fall, I 
think they’re going to have to consider issues like tourism, like 
support. Because in my mind to have that centre there is not 
unlike having the Science Centre here. It provides a place where 
the children can go, study an aspect of science, heritage, etc. 
 
So your point is well taken and I appreciate you for reminding 
us of the need to look at those projects in a different way. And 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

 

certainly we’ll pass these remarks along to the committee that’s 
going to be looking at the criteria. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, thank you for your response. 
I think your willingness to reconsider the way the criteria is 
applied and maybe even the benchmarks involved with the 
application would be well received by not just the community I 
represent on this particular issue, but on several communities in 
my constituency and many others throughout rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There is a growing awareness of the need to work together in 
rural Saskatchewan. Where one community might have a 
project of one type, another community may have a project of a 
different type entirely. But if they can support each other, it 
creates a better working arrangement, a co-operative mentality, 
and certainly an opportunity for greater success in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I think that’s something your government 
has particularly talked about trying to achieve. 
 
Just as an aside, Madam Minister, if I recall correctly, the 
application was for an audiovisual system to make the theatre 
that exists in the current T.rex Centre more useable, more 
tourist friendly, more beneficial to anybody who wanted to use 
the facility for other purposes. 
 
And as I understand it, the Premier and some of his colleagues 
are going to be in Eastend visiting the T.rex Centre on July 19 
and it would have been nice to have that facility up to date and 
ready to roll. He would have . . . he would have enjoyed the 
presentation that they would have provided for him in the 
theatre. 
 
I’d just like to pass that comment along. You might want to 
kind of rush that application through so you can meet that 
deadline. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, last time 
we had estimates, we discussed SCN and there was a couple of 
issues that I neglected to discuss so I would like to do that now. 
 
I understand that the contract SCN . . . or the legislative 
broadcast services has with SCN has expired and we are 
operating on the ad hoc or on a day-to-day or week by week 
basis. And I’m wondering what . . . where the, the state of . . . 
or what the state of negotiations are with regards to the contract. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — A Speaker’s committee, bipartisan 
Speaker’s committee has been working on this particular issue. 
 
The contract doesn’t expire till December 31 and what the 
question is right now is really looking at different satellite 
providers to look at the costs and which satellite provider would 
be the carrier for the service. But I think people are optimistic 
that an agreement will be concluded before December 31. 
 
Two of the companies under consideration are, I think, 
StarChoice and ExpressVu. Yes. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I believe StarChoice currently 
does carry SCN. However, the video broadcast of our 
proceedings isn’t carried by that, by that service. And I wonder, 
is that part of the negotiations? Since a large part of my 

constituency doesn’t have access to cable and so on, and I know 
there’s . . . I’ve had requests from a number of constituents who 
have satellite service that they said it would be helpful to 
observe what we are doing in the Assembly. And I’m just 
wondering if that’s part of the negotiations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can confirm to the member that our 
goal is to make you a star and we’re going to try to make sure 
that the provider will carry that. It’s our intent to have that as 
part of the contract. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister. At the risk of 
perhaps unduly influencing the negotiations, I would prefer the 
star as a choice, Madam Minister. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
I don’t know if I’m going to have time to get into the sound 
stage because that in itself is going to be quite a large issue. 
 
So I think I’d like to start now and just . . . I have a few 
questions on the centennial student employment program. And I 
note there’s a significant decrease in expenditures on the 
program from 5 million last year to 3.8 million this year — a 
$1.2 million decrease. And I’m just wondering if you can 
explain the decrease — straight budgetary or what areas will 
actually see a decrease in funding from the student employment 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Over the past two years since this 
program was created, there’s been very close to 3,000 jobs 
created. Now last year we were able to provide 1,673 jobs and 
this year it will be 1,300. And it really was every department 
sharing the cost reductions. 
 
So there is nothing more — what would you say — nothing 
more dramatic at play than the need to draw down expenditures 
this year. And certainly it’s an area that we value very much 
and if funds are available, I would be very surprised if we didn’t 
bump that back up again. This is a one-year reflection of 
budgetary requirements. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It’s my 
pleasure, members of the Assembly, to draw to your attention 
the presence in the gallery of five guests, many of whom will be 
known to at least some members in the Assembly. 
 
First of all — I notice, Mr. Chair, they are joined by the 
Minister of Finance — but first of all, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce Mark Hanley, who’s the president of the Board of 
Directors of the Regina & District Food Bank. 
 
And with him is Mr. Ed Bloos, and many of the Regina 
members will know Ed. He’s been the general manager of the 
Regina & District Food Bank for many years and served the 
community of Regina with a lot of distinction. 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2002 

 

And he’s joined this afternoon by the assistant manager of the 
Regina & District Food Bank, Mr. Gord Barnes, who will also 
be well known for his service in this community. 
 
From Saskatoon, Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to draw to your 
attention the presence of Mr. Pius Sieben in the gallery, who 
has served as the manager of the Saskatoon Food Bank for 
many years and who will be retiring at the end of this month. 
 
And with him, next to him, to his left, Mr. Chair, is Bob Pringle 
who is, I think, well known to all members of this Assembly 
and who served this province with great distinction for 10 years 
in this Assembly; served as the minister of Social Services, 
served the constituents of Saskatoon Eastview over three terms, 
and is now the new manager of the Saskatoon Food Bank. 
 
These guests in the gallery will be meeting with representatives 
from the government caucus and later with members of the 
opposition caucus. And I know all members will want to join 
with me in extending a very, very warm welcome to these 
distinguished guests. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I also would like 
to welcome the representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Food Banks and I was wondering if the Minister 
of Finance was up there to get used to his new chair after the 
next election or if he was just up there greeting the people. 
 
Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I’m not certain whether I heard 
your answer — or if it was part of your answer — to the 
question. And I may have missed it, there was a little bit of 
noise going on. But the question: I understand the 1.2 million 
reduction, and how does that translate into number of positions 
or applicants? How many, how many . . . In terms of people, 
would it mean a decrease or if it is a decrease? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s always a little variability in the 
jobs because of the different job lengths and whatnot but it 
would be about 350 positions. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Overall 
from last year, what was the final result of this program? Do 
you get direct feedback from the departments that made use of 
it, and how many departments had made use of the program, 
and what kind of a feedback? Do you have any information on 
that for us? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would have to say that one in 
government often isn’t used to getting tonnes of mail thanking 
you for a particular program. But in this program here, we 
received a lot of letters from the community showing 
appreciation for the program. And anecdotally at one of the 
events we were at, a parent came up to me and said, you know, 

my child was pretty close to dropping out of school, but as a 
result of having worked in an interesting job related to their area 
of study, they’re going back to school with a renewed interest in 
the career that they had chosen. 
 
And I just want to make it clear that these are not . . . these are 
public sector kinds of jobs but they aren’t government jobs in 
. . . totally. Executive government has a portion. The Crowns 
are not involved in this but they do make an expenditure 
themselves on student employment. Post-secondary institutions 
qualify, urban parks and conservation areas, regional parks are a 
very large part of the program. Community based organizations 
are a large part of the program, the cultural organizations; and 
we do have a program that enhances access for students with 
disabilities as well and for students of Aboriginal ancestry. 
 
So there’s quite a range of employment locations and we . . . I 
think we distribute them quite evenly amongst northern . . . all 
the regions of the province — north, rural, east, south — and to 
make sure that all the students regardless of where they live in 
the province have an opportunity for quality summer 
employment. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. On the 
Web page of Culture, Youth and Recreation there’s a line here, 
and I’d just like to read this line and it says: 
 

Keep in mind that the program is intended to help students 
build careers in their chosen field of study or interest. 
 

And, Madam Minister, I know we talked about this last year 
and I wish to talk about it again. If an individual’s chosen field 
of interest is in the entrepreneurial sector, then they really don’t 
have the opportunity to go into it through this program. And I 
know that was addressed last year and it was not part of the 
program last year. 
 
I don’t know if it’s a part of the program for this summer; if 
there’s any positions in the private entrepreneurial sector for 
students to seek summer employment. If there is, great. If 
there’s not, can you explain why not. 
 
I think we’re losing a huge opportunity here by having them 
only in certain select departments; where in fact in keeping with 
the line on your Web site, “in their chosen field of study or 
interest,” we may be negating that if they’re not allowed to go 
into an entrepreneurial summer employment job. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think there’s two things I would say 
about that. There’s two purposes to the public sector portion of 
the employment. 
 
One is to ensure that students have high-quality employment 
experiences, but the other purpose is to deal with the fact that 
the public sector is looking at a huge flow of retirements over 
the next few years as the baby boomers retire. And this is also 
part of our objective as employers, to develop the next 
workforce that will be working in the various public sector as I 
mentioned — parks, community organizations, post-secondary 
institutions, etc. 
 



June 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

 

But the other thing is the federal government already has quite 
extensive programs for the private sector. And rather than 
duplicating what they’re doing, we believe that this is a 
complementary program to what the private sector has available 
under the federal program. 
 
So if, you know, oil revenues were to go crazy, I mean I 
suppose we could consider whether we wanted to supplement 
the programs. But the federal government actually does a pretty 
adequate job right now at supplementing jobs in the private 
sector. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Madam Minister, I believe they 
also do in the public sector, but that doesn’t preclude them from 
entering into the private sector with summer employment 
positions for students. 
 
And it seems to be very heavily one-sided on the public sector, 
and we do know that there’s an awful lot of students where their 
interests are not in the public sector and jobs specifically related 
to the public sector, that it’s more of an entrepreneurial nature. 
So we’re extremely heavy sided, in fact 100 per cent to zero. 
 
And I’m just asking again if there’s some consideration, if it’s 
not going to be for this year, would we look at the future of at 
least putting some degree of balance between the public sector 
and the private sector for youth employment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess I’d mention a couple of things. 
The vast majority of this money goes into the community. A 
very, a very small proportion of it is within government but it’s 
necessary that a portion be there because this is where some of 
the careers related to people’s post-secondary education will be. 
But the huge amount of it is in places like parks and community 
organizations. So that money is going out into the community 
that doesn’t have a huge financial capacity to provide this kind 
of work even though there’s a lot of valuable work that they do. 
 
Now, after having said that, I will say that I agree with you 
totally that it’s important for young people to have 
entrepreneurial opportunities. And I guess I will just have to say 
that I hope that over the next year we can look at what our total 
entrepreneurial package is for young people in the province, 
including a whole range of issues around what makes it easier 
for young people to be entrepreneurs. 
 
So I guess I’ll just make a commitment to you that that is a 
priority. I’ve been out in different towns like Gravelbourg and 
other places where they’ve been working hard at getting the 
young people involved in entrepreneurial activities. And I do 
think it’s important. But it hasn’t been specifically the focus of 
this program. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, during estimates last 
year I had asked a number of questions about this program and 
how the program was run, who was in charge, how it would be 
monitored, and a whole pile of questions related along that line. 
 
And at that time you indicated that you really had no way of 
knowing how well a student might be doing in the program 
because once he or she was hired by another department — and 
I believe you had said last year Crown and I know you referred 
to that the Crowns are operated a little bit different — but 

there’s no way of keeping track of how these students had done. 
It’s putting the money out and then just letting it go and not 
really being able to track it. 
 
Have there been any changes to the program this year so there’s 
a monitoring process, an ongoing monitoring process from your 
department how you can track the program on a continuing 
basis. Not after the year is over and then find out from 
somebody by a letter, say, oh yes, we had a good time and we 
made money. I’m wondering if you have a methodology of 
actually tracking it. 
 
If we’re going to put hundreds of students out in various parts 
and they’re gone, they’re out of our hands, but the money is 
coming from your department, I would think there should be 
some tracking mechanism from within your department that 
would say hey, how are we doing; is it working in your 
department; is there a transfer capability if somebody is not 
working. Is there somebody within your department that is 
doing the tracking? Or are basically they just given the money 
and the students are all lost in a maze out there and nobody 
from your department really knows what or where they are or 
what they’re doing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now one of the decisions we made 
early on in this program was to have the community 
organizations like the parks association, etc., actually 
administer their portion of the employment grant. So there’s a 
fair amount of responsibility devolved to the organizations that 
administer the money in terms of making the best decisions 
about what the most appropriate jobs are, where the greatest 
need is, where the best opportunity is for the students. 
 
But we also conducted an evaluation at the end of last year with 
the students and with the employers to determine how they felt 
the program operated. And as you know, the project got going 
in quite a rush the first year. And this year again, there’ll be 
evaluation and follow-up. 
 
I’m planning to go out and visit on a random basis some of the 
sites to see what the young people have actually accomplished 
there. I won’t warn them that I’m coming, so that they can’t put 
their best foot forward. I want to see what they’re actually 
doing when I go out there. But I’m sure they always have their 
best foot forward. 
 
And we do know for example, we had objectives in the program 
to ensure Aboriginal youth are hired, etc., we know all the 
numbers on that. And so there are several evaluative 
mechanisms. And we haven’t received any negative feedback at 
all from students or employers, so I would consider that in itself 
a good thing. But there are formal evaluative mechanisms. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 


