















































Hansard: May 09, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1283 
 May 9, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about 
the government’s intentions with respect to long-term care fees. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The first petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by citizens of 
Porcupine Plain, Somme, and Hudson Bay. Then I have a 
further 30 petitions, Mr. Speaker, signed entirely by citizens of 
Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition signed by the good people of this province who’ve 
been responsible for building this province, Mr. Speaker, and I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by seniors from Warman and from the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I present a 
petition from citizens of Saskatchewan who would like to see a 
comprehensive strategy to address assisting children of the 
child sex trade. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Rose Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan, and the prayer 
of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term health care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these signatures are from the fine community of 
Elrose and I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens who continue to be concerned about the 
proposed long-term care fee rate increases. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition today are all from the 
community of Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with care home fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the cities of Yorkton, 
Melville, and from the community of Theodore. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from the communities of Weekes and Porcupine Plain. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition signed by 
citizens concerned with the long-term care fees. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed by citizens of Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed fee 
increases for long-term care services. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Briercrest and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition concerning crop insurance premium 
hikes and coverage reductions introduced by the government 
this year. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
communities of Sceptre, Prelate, Leader, and Mendham, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the deplorable condition of our highways. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by many people in the Francis area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about the removable . . . removal of the deduction 
for prescription drugs. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Pangman, 
Regina, and Ogema. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens who remain concerned on the issue of long-term care 
fees and the increases in the province. And the prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the 
communities of Yorkton, Hudson Bay, Carrot River, and 
Mistatim, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the increased long-term care fees. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care service in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, the petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition this afternoon presented by the people of Saskatchewan 
who are very much concerned that the government is going to 
be gouging those who are most vulnerable in our society. And 
the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good people of 
Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increase in long-term care 
home fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

 

Signed by the good citizens of Yorkton and Melville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’ll 
be no surprise that I have a petition today with citizens 
concerned about Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its Highway budget to address the concerns of 
the serious condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Watrous, Young, and 
Manitou Beach. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned with the 
government’s plan to change . . . increase the long-term care 
fees. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Drake, Foam Lake, and Jansen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the long-term care 
fees. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Paradise Hill and St. Walburg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province that are concerned about the 
long-term care increase fees, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the 
community of Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan with reference to the 
long-term care who obviously feel it is not the right thing to do. 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by citizens of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 11, 18, 23, 24, 31, and 59. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I would like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the legislature, a group of 23 members of the public 
service that are in your gallery today. 
 
And this is part of a work experience program that goes on to 
assist people in understanding the various roles of both the 
elected and the public service people in our representative 
democracy. And today we have employees from the 
departments of Government Relations, Finance, Agriculture, 
Food and Rural Revitalization, Health, Industry and Resources, 
Social Services, Justice, Public Service Commission, 
Environment, Highways and Transportation, and the Legislative 
Assembly financial services branch. 
 
So I would like all members to join me in thanking them for all 
the good work they do, and welcoming them to the legislature 
— our place of work — today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to take the 
opportunity to welcome civil servants to the Assembly today. I 
hope you enjoy the proceedings; that it’s educational for you 
and interesting. And we look forward to meeting with you later 
on today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

seated in the west gallery are 49 students who are looking to see 
if they want to have politics as a life career when they graduate 
from grade 12. And I say this because these are 49 of the 
sharpest minds that I know. 
 
These are fine students from one of the finest schools in the 
finest city in this province. Mr. Speaker, they are students from 
Lakeview Elementary School, and they are accompanied by 
their teachers, Joan Block and Shirley Widenmaier. As well, 
Lois MacPherson and Mrs. Cooper are two-thirds of the 
chaperones. 
 
And there is also one very special chaperone, Ann Metz, who is 
the sister of the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
for Watrous. 
 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to welcome the 
students, the teachers, and the chaperones. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to join the member from Saskatoon Southeast in 
welcoming my sister, Ann. But I would also like to get one 
particular fine mind in that class that’s very special to my heart. 
And one of the students is Andrea Metz. And so if she could 
stand and wave, that would be wonderful. 
 
And if everyone would welcome her here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
introduction is joined today by the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone and Saskatoon Nutana in welcoming Wendy Manson 
from Conquest to the Assembly today. 
 
Wendy is a member of the Saskatchewan Farmers Union and is 
here today having met with me this morning, along with other 
farm groups from APAS (Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan) and the stockgrowers and the Saskatchewan 
Feeders Association and the Wheat Pool and the Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Safety Net Review Committee and SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and the 
Saskatchewan Rally Group. 
 
They’re all here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, or this morning, to 
talk about the agriculture policy framework and the significant 
trade injury that farmers in Saskatchewan are experiencing. 
 
And Wendy, of course, is someone who provides a great deal of 
policy direction on behalf of the Saskatchewan Farmers Union 
in helping us deal with this very difficult issue. 
 
So I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me today in 
welcoming Wendy to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce to 
you Mr. Rod Gopher of Saulteaux First Nation near North 

Battleford. Mr. Gopher is in the government gallery today. 
 
And he is working very hard on the issue of fetal alcohol 
syndrome, fetal alcohol effect, and trying to reduce the scourge 
of that on our society and working to reduce its incidence. So 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming him today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, the president 
of the Canadian Western Bank, Mr. Larry Pollock, who’s in 
your gallery. 
 
And he lives in Edmonton. He’s visiting Saskatchewan today, 
accompanied by Mr. Wayne Bamford, who lives in Calgary and 
is the vice-president and regional manager and also Ken 
MacDonald, who lives here in Regina and is the assistant 
vice-president and branch manager here in Regina. 
 
And I’ve had the pleasure before of meeting with these 
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, and I had the pleasure today also of 
meeting with them. And I know all members of the House will 
be very happy to know that they’re quite optimistic for the 
prospects for the province this year. And I’d like all members to 
join with me in welcoming these people here today. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
you may know and everybody in the Assembly knows that I’m 
one fantastic hockey player. But I want to introduce another 
fantastic hockey player in the government gallery and that’s the 
mayor of Buffalo Narrows and also chairman of New North, 
Bobby Woods. 
 
And His Worship Bobby Woods is here with the director, Al 
Loke, and of course Al is the CEO (chief executive officer) of 
Bobby’s organization. And I just want to point out then, Mr. 
Speaker, that he is quite a goaltender, but when it comes to me 
he’s unable to stop a beach ball. 
 
And I’d like to welcome His Worship to the Assembly as well 
as the CEO, Mr. Loke. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to add my greetings to Wendy . . . to 
welcoming Wendy Manson to the Assembly. 
 
And I want to introduce to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, 
to all members of the Assembly, Don Cody, who is, as I think 
all members will know, the mayor of Prince Albert. 
 
And I had the privilege of serving with Don in the Assembly for 
a term from 1978 to ’82 and we’ve become good friends. And 
Don, it’s very nice to see you here this afternoon. Join me in 
welcoming him . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

CommunityNet Expansion 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, from A through W, 
CommunityNet is growing in Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Yesterday it was Assiniboia. Today the Premier joined the 
students and staff at Weyburn Comprehensive School to 
celebrate its connection to CommunityNet. Soon 
CommunityNet will connect more than 366 communities, 834 
educational facilities, 310 health facilities, 86 First Nations 
schools, and 256 government offices, and provides 
opportunities for access to high-speed Internet for thousands of 
individual households and businesses. 
 
CommunityNet gives Saskatchewan people the tools needed to 
succeed in the new economy. It also creates an excellent launch 
pad to deliver improved public services. Soon programs like 
telehealth will allow doctors and patients to consult with 
specialists on-line. Students everywhere will gain expanded 
access to quality education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet is making high-speed Internet 
more accessible in rural Saskatchewan than in centres like 
Toronto, New York, and Los Angeles. Technology like this is 
the cradle of innovation and is leading to entrepreneurial 
opportunities. For example, NuTok technologies, an Internet 
firm started by a 17-year-old in Swift Current, is now talking 
with customers from all over the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, widely available access to high-speed Internet 
puts Saskatchewan people at the leading edge of a technological 
revolution and gives us — us — an advantage in the new 
economy. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melfort Doctor Receives Rural Service Award 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to be able to stand in the House today to tell you about a doctor 
who has been practicing medicine in Melfort for 37 years. 
 
In the past, he’s been honoured many times for his outstanding 
contributions to his profession, his community, and his faculty. 
Recently, Dr. Lionel Lavoie was honoured again when he was 
recognized by the Society of Rural Physicians of Canada. He 
was 1 of 64 doctors in Canada to receive a Rural Service Award 
for long-term commitment and contribution to a rural 
community. 
 
In an era when most rural communities have difficulties 
retaining doctors, our community has been fortunate to have a 
doctor who is not only committed to his profession, but is also 
seriously committed to our community. 
 
Dr. Lavoie has served on many medical association boards — 
locally, provincially, nationally, and internationally — and he 
has still made time to volunteer and lend his support to several 
of our community organizations. Because of his contributions 

on many different levels he has made a difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Members of the legislature, please join me in congratulating Dr. 
Lionel Lavoie on the receipt of this award, and in thanking him 
for the dedication to both his profession and to our community. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Catholic Education Day 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today a 
special educational event takes place in Canada and around the 
globe. World Catholic Education Day is noted annually as a day 
on which Roman Catholic schools across the world engage in 
some activity that celebrates their international associations. 
These activities take various forms from perhaps a prayer in the 
classroom, to engaging in an Internet hookup with other 
Catholic schools of the same name in several other countries. 
 
In Saskatchewan and in our communities, we are proud to 
recognize the contribution and the role that Catholic schools 
play in the lives of students in our 12 urban and 6 rural Catholic 
school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Catholic schools contribute a great deal to the 
scholastic, spiritual, and social aspects of life wherever they 
exist. 
 
I’m sure all members of this Assembly will join me in 
celebrating this day. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Two Saskatchewan Youth Receive Awards 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise in the House today to inform all members about the recent 
success of two Saskatchewan students. 
 
Two of our province’s brightest and best were recently 
honoured with 18 other young people at a national ceremony on 
Parliament Hill. The Toronto Dominion Bank Financial Group 
recognized Elizabeth Pryor of Hawarden and David Radie of 
Regina for their strong commitment to their communities. 
 
A member of the Saskatchewan Youth Orchestra, Ms. Pryor 
was instrumental in raising funds for a designated heritage 
building that was in need of repair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for Hawarden’s homecoming, Elizabeth 
researched the historical background of her village and dressed 
in historical dress and offered up public tours. 
 
David Radie has done extensive public speaking to raise 
awareness of Alzheimer’s disease. He has also been involved in 
fundraising for this worthy cause and has personally offered his 
support to those who are caregivers for Alzheimer’s patients. 
David knows first-hand how hard this can be as he helped care 
for his grandmother who also suffered from Alzheimer’s. David 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

was also involved in the successful lobby for getting an 
anti-Alzheimer’s drug placed on the province Formulary. 
 
These two students were recognized for their community spirit 
and hard work with the TD Canada Trust Scholarship. Elizabeth 
and David will receive full tuition to the Canadian college or 
university of their choice, and annual additional funds for living 
expenses, and guaranteed offer of summer employment at TD 
Canada Trust for four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to join with me in 
recognizing Elizabeth and David on receiving this prestigious 
scholarship. We sincerely hope that they stay in Saskatchewan 
to help us grow the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Receives National Award 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel recently 
received the National Award for Learning Technologies in the 
Workplace. The award is sponsored by the Office of Learning 
Technologies, Human Resources Development Canada, and the 
Conference Board of Canada. 
 
The award recognizes achievement in employee learning 
through effective use of learning technologies, and SaskTel won 
on the strength of three major corporate learning initiatives — 
e-learning, a home computer purchase program, and internet 
concession. 
 
Commenting on the award, SaskTel’s VP (vice-president) of 
human resources, Byron Pointer, stated that, and I quote: 
 

Developing a corporate culture that embraces technology 
enhances our ability to deliver the systems, products, and 
services that enable our customers to capitalize on 
e-business. 

 
Judging by the award, Mr. Speaker, the men and women at 
SaskTel have done a capital job in this regard. They have 
demonstrated very clearly that public enterprise is not standing 
still. Rather they have shown that Crown corporations like 
SaskTel are very much on the move. 
 
And SaskTel is on the move, Mr. Speaker. It’s a corporate 
leader with a solid commitment to community, customers, and 
employees. This last fact in particular led to SaskTel being 
named one of the top 100 employers in Canada as reported this 
past fall in Maclean’s newsmagazine. 
 
So to the hard-working men and women at SaskTel, please 
accept our congratulations and keep on embodying the ethos of: 
we shall learn, we shall adapt, and we shall lead. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ford/CAA Student Auto Skills Winners 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to recognize two constituents for their great 

work in last month’s 11th Annual Ford/CAA Student Auto 
Skills event held in Regina. 
 
Carl Dahl and Mike Unger of L.P. Miller High School in 
Nipawin finished second place, qualifying themselves for the 
nationals. 
 
Ten deliberate malfunctions were placed in a 2002 Ford Taurus 
for grade 12 teams from around the province to diagnose and 
repair. Mr. Speaker, Carl and Mike had little difficulty in 
solving the puzzle — driving a perfect car out of the CAA 
(Canadian Automobile Association) shop after about 45 
minutes. 
 
Estevan’s team finished just moments before them for the first 
place award and will be joining Mike and Carl at the nationals 
in Winnipeg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been suggested that a modern car is the most 
advanced piece of technology that a person will own. By 
creating competitions like the Ford/CAA challenge, Ford hopes 
to attract young technicians who are ready for the challenge of 
diagnosing and repairing today’s technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the eighth time that L.P. Miller High School 
has taken part in this event and it has placed first or second in 
six of them. Since the challenge was offered at a national level, 
Nipawin has sent students to four of the five Canada-wide 
events; tying for second in 1997, and first in 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join with me in 
wishing Carl and Mike the best of luck at the nationals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investiture Ceremony 
Order of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re all 
aware of the excellent and vital work done in our communities 
by the volunteers of St. John Ambulance. Their work in 
providing first aid services at public events, their training in 
first aid and CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation), their therapy 
dog visitation programs, these are just some of the things they 
do to improve the health, safety, and quality of life in our 
society. 
 
St. John was founded in Canada in 1882 and in Saskatchewan 
in 1911. What we may not know, Mr. Speaker, is that the roots 
of this fine organization date back to the early Middle Ages in 
Britain, and that St. John Ambulance is one of the oldest 
sovereign Orders of Chivalry in the British Commonwealth and 
is the oldest health and welfare organization in the world. 
 
This last Saturday I attended the investiture service ceremony of 
the Saskatchewan Council held in Moose Jaw. And the full 
name of this organization, Mr. Speaker, is The Most Venerable 
Order of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem. Its founding 
purpose was the care of the sick and injured, and throughout its 
near millennium of service, it has never lost sight of its original 
principle. 
 
The investiture ceremony is steeped in antiquity. Its purpose 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

 

now, as in the past, is to recognize and honour individuals who 
through their work from St. John uphold the motto of the Order, 
In the Service of Mankind. 
 
Our congratulations go to the 21 members from across our 
province who were recognized at the ceremony and our 
gratitude goes for the over 29,000 hours of volunteer work they 
perform in Saskatchewan in the last year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Long-Term Care Fees 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is for the Premier because it has now been 10 days since 
the Premier announced that he was putting the NDP’s (New 
Democratic Party) long-term care fee increase on hold. 
 
But we are still getting petitions and correspondence from 
concerned people about long-term care fees, because they are 
still worried about how much the NDP is going to increase the 
fee. 
 
People right across Saskatchewan heard the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle when he said that he believed that 90 per cent of a 
person’s income for long-term care fees was the right thing to 
do. Mr. Speaker, they want to make sure . . . people in 
Saskatchewan want to make sure that the NDP get the message 
while this policy is under review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier tell us whether or not the NDP 
has got the message or if the NDP still believe that hiking 
long-term care fees is the right thing to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
and his colleagues will find out that answer tomorrow. And I’m 
sure that he will be very interested to know what kinds of things 
that we are going to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government works with people, listens to 
people, attempts to develop policy that provides good health 
care, education, social services for the people of Saskatchewan. 
We’ll continue with that model because we know that it works 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
announced that this policy was temporarily on hold and then he 
said Department of Health officials would review the policy and 
that they would come up with some new options for the NDP to 
consider. 
 
Well we all know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP cabinet met on 
Tuesday, which should mean that by Thursday they should have 
made a decision. Mr. Speaker, we’ve reached the Premier’s own 
self-imposed deadline of 10 days to inform the people of 

Saskatchewan what the NDP is going to do about long-term 
care fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health tell the Assembly and 
the people of Saskatchewan what that decision is that we know 
that they have already made? Will he cancel the unfair fee hike 
proposed for long-term care users in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, earlier in the week the 
Premier said that this information would be provided tomorrow 
and I urge the member opposite to wait until tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously there is some concern, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier 
wants to sit on this decision and not announce it until tomorrow 
because we all know that the premiers and we know that 
opposition leaders are coming into Saskatchewan tomorrow to 
talk about a response to the US (United States) farm Bill that 
we can propose to the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s really not fair to the families of 
Saskatchewan who are worried about long-term care fee 
increases. Mr. Speaker, we believe that the Premier has made 
the decision and perhaps the news is not good — fees are going 
to increase. 
 
Can the Minister of Health assure us that when this 
announcement is made tomorrow it will not include a fee hike 
for long-term care users? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s only one more sleep. I 
think that everybody can wait. 
 
I guess . . . All I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that it appears that 
the basket of questions that those people have developed has 
gone empty and that they now have to ask us about things that 
we’ve announced we’re going to say the day before to see if we 
will actually maybe give them a little bit of hints about what 
we’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said that we’d say tomorrow what’s going to 
happen and they can wait until tomorrow to get the answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Quality Concerns at Last Mountain Lake 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Environment minister. As you well know, Last Mountain Lake 
is . . . my constituency runs along the west side of it. And I’ve 
had calls to my office and to up here about residents that didn’t 
know that sewage was being pumped into Last Mountain Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is: when did the Environment 
minister contact the mayors, the councillors, the residents, cabin 
owners of Last Mountain Lake and tell them that sewage water 
from Regina was being pumped into their beautiful lake? 
 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the 
members opposite that it is important when we’re dealing with 
public health safety issues that they should not be playing cheap 
politics. 
 
I’m going to again . . . Mr. Speaker, last April cottage owners 
contacted Saskatchewan Environment and Sask Water 
expressing concerns that the lake level was so low. They asked 
us to divert water from the Qu’Appelle River into Last 
Mountain Lake. We did that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that people understand . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina treats its 
sewage to a very high standard — not primary, not secondary, 
but tertiary treatment, the highest standard that is expected of 
cities. That treated effluent leaves the Regina plant, flows into 
the Wascana Creek, the Wascana Creek flows into the 
Qu’Appelle River. The Qu’Appelle River also receives water 
from Lake Diefenbaker. Eighty-six per cent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has expired. The next 
question. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Yes. The residents last April were concerned 
about the low levels of water and they approached the 
government. But they didn’t . . . at that time the government . . . 
it didn’t tell them that they would be using water from Regina’s 
sewage system to pump it up. They thought that water would be 
coming from Lake Diefenbaker. That was their understanding, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is this the NDP’s new water management strategy, is telling the 
residents of Regina to flush twice so Regina Beach can have 
water? 
 
So my question is: when did you tell them . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to restate his 
question through the Chair, please. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Environment minister. When did you . . . when did she tell the 
residents and the mayors, councillors that you would be putting 
sewage water into Lake . . . into Last Mountain Lake, not just 
straight water from Lake Diefenbaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, 86 per cent of the water in 
Qu’Appelle River comes from Lake Diefenbaker, 14 per cent of 
it comes from Wascana Creek and that includes the treated 
effluent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this whole issue arose as a result of some tests 
done by CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation). CBC 
results on one test show 1 coliform; on their second test show 
17 coliforms. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the drinking water objectives are zero coliform for 
treated drinking water. For contact recreational water, which is 
what we’re talking about, the standard is 200 coliforms, and for 
non-contact recreational, the standard is 5,000 coliforms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, absolutely the people of Regina Beach on Last 
Mountain Lake can feel very safe in doing their recreational 
activities this summer on the lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — A question to the Environment minister. Does 
she realize that Last Mountain Lake is a closed water system? 
You’re pumping in 14 per cent of sewage water into that lake. 
 
Has Sask . . . has SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management)/Sask Water did any long-term studies 
of what the effects of pumping that much sewage water into a 
closed water system and what the results and dangers could be 
down the road — five, ten years from now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well perhaps the member thinks that Last 
Mountain Lake is a closed lake but, quite frankly, it is often 
used flowing in reverse and going back towards the Qu’Appelle 
River to control flood for the farmers in the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize the CBC test results said 
maximum 17 coliforms per 100 millilitre. Mr. Speaker, two 
geese flying over that lake would create more coliforms than 
they got out of these tests samples. This water is very good for 
surface water. 
 
I want to emphasize again, as I said yesterday, no one should 
drink untreated water. It is imperative that we all become very 
much aware of the need to only drink treated water. But for 
boating, for swimming, this lake is a very good quality lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I agree with the minister that it is a good 
quality lake and the residents and mayors and councillors and 
cabin owners want to keep it a good quality lake, and that is the 
concerns with them. 
 
This minister and this government did not tell them that they 
would be putting 14 per cent of raw — or not raw — sewage 
water into that lake. They were not told. I talked to mayors 
today; they’re having a meeting tonight. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — My question is: when and if did you — a yes or 
no question — contact . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member please 
repeat the question. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — My question, Mr. Minister: when did she tell 
the cabin owners, the mayors, reeves, and residents of that lake 
that they would be putting 14 per cent of treated sewage water 
into their lake? Yes or no, did she contact them? 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving the 
member opposite time to clarify his question because, quite 
frankly, he was misleading the House beforehand. 
 
It is not raw sewage that is going into that lake. Treated 
effluent, treated effluent, treated to a gold quality standard 
leaves the Regina sewage treatment plant, flows into the 
Wascana Creek, from there into the Qu’Appelle River. The 
Qu’Appelle River gets water from Lake Diefenbaker and the 
Wascana Creek on a year-round basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is good quality water that is in Last Mountain 
Lake. As I said, 17 coliforms, that is certainly higher than our 
standard for treated water, but for contact recreational, the 
objective is 200 coliforms per 100 millilitre. 
 
It is important that we keep in mind that the issue here is public 
safety and properly treated drinking water, and the members 
opposite shouldn’t be scaremongering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Obviously the answer to my question is, she 
did not inform them of sewage water being pumped into their 
lake. 
 
I also want to ask her, that Terry Fleischaker . . . Yesterday 
government officials admitted that they tested the water in Last 
Mountain Lake and then they told Terry Fleischaker there was 
no problem with the lake water. But according to the results of 
the independent Saskatchewan Research Council test of the 
same lake, some parts of Last Mountain Lake have potential 
dangerous concentrations of fecal coliform and other bacteria. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Environment department officials tell 
Terry Fleischaker the lake water was safe when independent 
tests show that the lake has some extremely high levels of fecal 
coliform and other dangerous bacteria? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, this is very distressing. 
Because he will say one thing when he’s forced to put a 
question properly, and then try . . . he’s back to talking about it 
as sewage water. This is not sewage that is going into Last 
Mountain Lake. Treated effluent that is treated to a gold quality 
standard flows into the Wascana Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am aware that there will be the possibility of 
taking samples in that lake and getting high coliform counts. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because there are geese that land in that lake. 
 
Well, you know, perhaps the members opposite want to laugh, 
but two geese can create . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Mr. Brkich: — It has been tested over the years and these 
problems have not arosen, so I imagine there’s been geese 
around this lake for many, many years. 
 
Turns out that the Environment department official saw the 
results of the CBC water analysis two weeks ago. And the CBC 
also says the Environment minister refused to speak with 
reporters about the test results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Environment department officials conducted their 
own water analysis in February and they saw the CBC analysis 
in April. What steps has the minister taken to warn residents of 
the Last Mountain Lake area and users of the lake that the lake 
water may have dangerously high concentrations of fecal 
coliform and other dangerous bacteria? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say again, the 
department does regular, routine testing of the surface water in 
this lake. And as soon as the ice is off, we will be going back 
and we will be testing again. 
 
However, based on what we’ve seen about the CBC samples, 
people should not be worried about this surface water. If they 
want to drink it, they need to boil it and they need to disinfect it. 
But we’re not talking about drinking water here, Mr. Speaker; 
we’re talking about surface water. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this water . . . this . . . We have for years, 
Mr. Speaker, diverted water from the Qu’Appelle River into 
Last Mountain Lake at the request of the cottagers. Is the 
member opposite saying that he doesn’t want any more water 
from the Qu’Appelle River to be diverted into Last Mountain 
Lake? Is he saying he wants to have that lake level drop? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well I’ll tell you what the residents want, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t want sewage water being pumped into 
their lake. And no matter what the problem is, the NDP just 
keep telling you . . . people, everything’s just fine. 
 
You know, what’s the response of the NDP’s E. coli in North 
Battleford drinking water problem? Don’t worry, we’ll handle 
it. Sewage being pumped at Last Mountain Lake — hey, don’t 
worry. Don’t worry about it, everything’s fine. Well in the 
meantime an independent expert says he wouldn’t wash his 
hands in Last Mountain Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister release the results of the 
government’s analysis of the water in Last Mountain Lake? 
What level of fecal coliform and other bacteria did the 
Environment department officials find when they tested the 
water at Last Mountain Lake in February? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have those test results 
here with me in the House today but I can assure you that if the 
member opposite wants to see them, I will make them available 
for him. He is right. And I did tell, and my official, Mr. Joe 
Muldoon, did tell the media yesterday that in February there 
was a spike; that the coliform level was slightly higher. 
 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

Again though, Mr. Speaker, that water meets the objectives of 
our surface water objectives all across Saskatchewan. The water 
in Last Mountain Lake is of an acceptable quality for contact 
recreational use and general boating recreational use. The 
people of . . . who live along Last Mountain Lake should not be 
concerned about this. 
 
And the member opposite should not be scaremongering and 
trying to whip people up into a frenzy. As I said yesterday, it is 
important not to drink untreated water. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, officials told CBC Radio 
they didn’t test for dangerous bacterial levels in Last Mountain 
Lake because they didn’t have the right equipment with them 
that day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that her department 
never actually tested the lake water for bacteria. Another 
question to the minister: do you treat the water different . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I just ask the member to once 
more try to remember to keep his remarks to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is, to the 
Environment minister: did they test . . . In fact because they 
didn’t have right equipment with them that day, Mr. Speaker, 
will the minister confirm that her department never actually 
tested the lake water for bacteria? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, we test on a regular basis. 
The treated effluent that leaves the city of Regina sewage 
treatment plant is tested daily by the city of Regina . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — The city of Regina tests their treated 
effluent — treated effluent, Mr. Speaker, not sewage, not raw 
sewage, treated effluent — they test it daily. And they have to 
meet the guidelines that we have set for their operating permit. 
 
In addition, downstream from that, Mr. Speaker, we test on a 
monthly basis. And our tests, save for the one February test that 
showed a slight spike, our tests indicate that that water is well 
within the surface water quality objectives. 
 
The issue, Mr. Speaker, is public health and safety. The issue is, 
does this water meet the surface water objectives? And the 
answer, Mr. Speaker, is yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, as we all know, it’s a career 
limiting move for a cabinet minister to disagree with Frank 
Hart. First, it ended Janice MacKinnon’s 11-day stint with this 
government. 
 

More recently, the minister of Energy was shunted over to jails 
and prisons after he said that ethanol was being developed 
through a strictly private investment. He didn’t know that 
discussions had been going on for an entire year through a 
consulting firm with cosy ties to the NDP for a plan that would 
see tens of millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money invested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t just Ottawa that has problems with public 
relations firms run by friends of the government. 
 
My question for the Premier: why does he allow government 
policy to be set on the other side of the lake? How is it that civil 
servants can keep ministers in the dark about what’s going on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by 
saying I’m glad that the member from Battleford can, in fact, 
recognize a career limiting move. I would suggest to him, as a 
member of the Liberal Party in this legislature, he is an expert. 
 
What I want to say to that member as well is that government 
policy is set on this side of the lake. It’s set by members of this 
government and it’s set, I think, in a very positive and a 
proactive way. 
 
Now it isn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Swift 
Current comes in and misrepresents the facts as he has. Now 
it’s even rubbed off to his friend from Battlefords, to the point 
where he misrepresents the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The former member responsible for ethanol development made 
it very clear what our position is, that we would look at this on a 
case by case basis — which we will, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I was . . . I was present, I was 
present at the news conference in which Bill Boyd asked again 
and again and again, is this going to be public investment. And 
the then minister of Energy, now the minister of jails, said no, 
no, no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the government not look into potential 
investors besides the one proposed by the NDP’s polling firm? 
 
The government announced an ethanol strategy less than two 
months ago. Now that strategy has been reversed, apparently 
because its consulting firm of choice wants us to team up with a 
company that will invest in Saskatchewan, providing the money 
comes from the government. 
 
Why would the government abandon any hope of attracting 
investment to this province after a mere six weeks? If we invest 
80 million, who will be holding the real risk? Is it the 
government’s position that there is no hope of attracting 
investment to this province without sweetheart deals from the 
taxpayers? 
 
Or is the government only interested in investors who have 
been introduced to them by friends of the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to say 
on behalf of government members and behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan that the member from Battlefords might be 
effective in this House and in this province if he were to spend 
some of his energies trying to convince his federal cousins in 
Ottawa that we are fighting in this province one incredibly 
unfair trade imbalance created in the United States of America 
and in Europe. 
 
And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that his representation 
of the facts is somewhat flawed. Firstly we have not signed any 
agreement with any company. We are looking at investment 
opportunities, investors. 
 
And I want to say to that member, and to every one of those 
members opposite who seem to hate good news, we have an 
opportunity to develop an ethanol industry in this province. We 
have an opportunity to create job opportunities for Aboriginal 
people, for rural people; to create business opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people; to create an intensive livestock industry 
that will parallel anywhere else in the world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do it with them — with their 
support or without it — but I guarantee you it’s going to 
happen. Because the people of Saskatchewan want it to happen 
and we’re going to help them make it happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Saskatchewan Health Research 
Foundation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 43, The 
Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I notice one guest in the west 
gallery, Mr. Bill Reader, a long-time civil servant who has led a 
prestigious career in the service, now retired. Currently trying 
to, I think, bring some real direction to SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency). And he’s joined us this 
afternoon and I’d like to invite members of this Assembly to 
welcome Mr. Reader. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from North Battleford on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — By leave to introduce guests. 

Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues. I think many members of this House will remember 
Mr. Reader as deputy minister of Municipal Affairs, and now as 
president of SAMA. 
 
What they may not know is that he is also the backbone and 
guiding light of the Cochin theatre group, a position in which I 
know him better. And I would ask all members again to kindly 
join with me in welcoming Bill to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand today and respond on behalf of the government to 
written question no. 172. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 172 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Highway 
Traffic Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
This Act regulates road use in Saskatchewan. The proposed 
amendments to the Act will clarify some of the existing laws 
and make the Act more consistent and fair, while continuing to 
make our roads safer for all Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
The first group of proposed amendments I’d like to outline 
deals with the rules of the road. Regulations like these are 
needed to ensure safety and to promote safe and efficient traffic 
flow. The changes also eliminate confusion and enhance 
fairness. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The proposed amendment in this section will free up valuable 
police resources by limiting their involvement in reporting of 
traffic accidents. Currently individuals involved in a collision 
are obligated to report an accident to police, Mr. Speaker, if 
there is property damage in excess of $1,000, if anyone 
involved in the accident sustains an injury or there is a fatality. 
In short, the vast majority of motor vehicle collisions in 
Saskatchewan must be reported to police. 
 
Law enforcement in Saskatchewan have raised concerns 
regarding limited police resources and the time involved in 
collecting these accident reports. The proposed amendments 
will limit police involvement to collisions involving injury, 
death, hit and run, an impaired driver, or when vehicles have to 
be towed from the scene. 
 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

As a result, only about 25 per cent of the collisions will now 
have to be reported to police. We estimate that these reporting 
changes will make available the equivalent of 10 full-time 
police officers who will be able to be used more effectively 
throughout our province. While all accidents involving damage 
will still have to be reported to SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), eliminating a stop at the police station also means 
less red tape for motorists. 
 
SGI is working hard to improve service and this change will 
expand one-stop service for SGI’s customers by making the 
claim process more convenient. 
 
The next proposed amendment in this section adds an . . . adds 
an offence, I should say, for speeding in excess of 50 kilometres 
per hour over the posted speed limit. Concern has been raised 
that current fines are not sufficient to provide deterrents and that 
this high-risk behaviour places Saskatchewan motorists in 
jeopardy. 
 
In consequence it is felt that another fine level should be 
introduced for speeds in excess of 50 kilometres per hour over 
the posted speed limit. Saskatchewan’s new fine for travelling 
51 kilometres above the speed limit would be $379 compared to 
the old level which was just 197. This matches the fines for not 
slowing to 60 kilometres per hour when passing a highway 
worker or parked emergency vehicles. 
 
The proposed change arises from law enforcement’s concerns 
for road safety and deterrents and is another step towards 
improving the safety of Saskatchewan’s highways. 
 
The next proposed amendment to the rules of the road concerns 
the use of amber beacons or flashing lights. Presently the Act 
restricts the use of amber beacons or flashing lights on tow 
trucks, highway maintenance vehicles, snow removal vehicles, 
and other service vehicles to times when that vehicle is creating 
a potential hazard on our highway. As many other vehicles on 
the road also use amber beacons, the proposed amendments . . . 
or amendment I should say, adds the same restriction on using 
amber lights for all road users. Without specific restrictions on 
the use of these lights, abuse may occur thus reducing the 
effectiveness of amber lights in hazardous situations. 
 
Another proposed amendment is aimed at aligning legislation 
with current technology. Some vehicles are now equipped with 
video or computer displays. The concern is that these images 
distract the driver and create a safety hazard. 
 
The proposed amendments simply update the legislative 
provision dealing with television sets to indicate that these 
devices must be installed and used in a manner that avoids 
interference with the driver. The exception is where the video or 
computer use is designed to assist the driver. 
 
The last proposed change in this section details the removal of 
the exemption for seatbelt use when travelling at low speeds. 
Removal of all seatbelts exemptions is a key recommendation 
of the Canadian Council of Motor Transport Administrators 
national occupant restraint strategy which is aimed at increasing 
safe seatbelt use rates and reducing injuries and fatalities due to 
motor vehicle collisions. In line with this strategy, all 
jurisdictions including Saskatchewan have committed to work 

towards removing all of these seatbelt exemptions. 
 
In this . . . it is, I should say, recognized that certain industries 
such as garbage collection will continue to require the 
exemption. 
 
The second group of proposed amendments I’d like to outline 
involves the areas of driver’s licensing and vehicle registration. 
The changes will eliminate unfairness, red tape, and confusion 
regarding these two areas. 
 
Currently there is a discrepancy between the Euro licence and 
the Saskatchewan class 5 driver’s licence. The discrepancy is 
causing confusion for tourists. The proposed amendment will 
allow visitors with Euro licences to have the same privileges as 
Saskatchewan’s basic class 5 driver’s licence. This change will 
improve Saskatchewan’s reputation as a tourist destination by 
removing red tape for European visitors. 
 
The next proposed amendment aims to eliminate confusion 
regarding the registration of vehicles that are being towed. The 
change eliminates a loophole where trailers can be moved in 
certain instances without being properly registered. 
 
Another proposed amendment clarifies recent amendments that 
provide a seven-day grace period for vehicle registration if an 
individual sells their existing vehicle and purchases a new one. 
Current legislation allows for the use of the old vehicle’s plates 
on the newly purchased vehicle for seven days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The wording of the legislation contains a loophole that allows 
an owner to use a replacement vehicle that has very large 
differences in registration and insurance costs. The proposed 
amendment . . . amendments, I should say, clarify that this 
seven-day grace period applies only to a replacement vehicle of 
similar class, gross vehicle weight, and use. 
 
The following group of proposed amendments concern vehicle 
impoundment. First, pursuant to provisions in the Act, a peace 
officer who has reasonable grounds to believe that a vehicle is 
being operated by an unauthorized driver may impound that 
driver’s vehicle for 30 days. The proposed amendments add to 
the definition of an unauthorized driver. It will now include 
those individuals who are not able to operate a vehicle as a 
result of a 90-day administrative suspension and those whose 
driver’s licences are suspended as a result of certain prescribed 
offences relating to the sex trade. Enhancing the Act to allow 
for vehicle impoundment in these situations is further evidence 
of the hard work being done to make Saskatchewan a safer 
place. 
 
Currently those individuals who are unhappy with the 
impoundment of their vehicle may appeal to a hearing officer. 
The hearing officer has the authority to uphold the 
impoundment or in limited circumstances release the vehicle. 
 
Further proposed amendments provide a hearing officer with 
greater discretion when it comes to releasing a vehicle or 
shortening the period of impoundment. 
 
The final proposed amendment to the Act will work to reduce 
traffic and create safer neighbourhoods in those areas of our 
communities that are high traffic zones for individuals exploited 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

 

in the sex trade, Mr. Speaker. The proposed amendment 
establishes an offence for driving a motor vehicle repeatedly in 
an area frequented or known to be frequented by individuals 
exploited in the sex trade. This offence is based on 
recommendations of the Special Committee to Prevent the 
Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade. 
 
This concludes the outline of the proposed amendments found 
in The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2002. These 
amendments work to streamline and clarify the existing 
legislation and to make our roads safer for everyone in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act 
to amend The Highway Traffic Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this proposed piece of legislation, Bill No. 40, has 
some good points to it and it has some very bad points, Mr. 
Speaker. And it has some points that have good intentions but 
don’t fulfill those intentions, Mr. Speaker, and need to be 
changed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the first part, the what is perhaps good in this 
Bill, is the changes to allow people with driver’s licences from 
the European Union to operate vehicles in this province 
providing those licences are recognized by all members of the 
European Union, I think is good. We need to encourage people 
from Europe to come to Saskatchewan for tourism, for business 
purposes, and allowing them to utilize their licences and drive 
around our province can only benefit Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Europe — as opposed to Great Britain — at 
least they drive on the proper side of the road, which always 
concerns me when people from Great Britain or Australia come 
to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and utilize our roadways. I do 
have some concern that in a panic situation they may choose the 
improper side of the road, which is the one they are most 
comfortable in driving, the one they naturally tend to react to, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So a person coming from the European Union, however, is 
driving on the same side of the road that we do here in 
Saskatchewan; therefore, in a panic situation will drive on the 
proper side of the road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes that the minister is talking about 
making though, in relationships to accidents, I think, is 
seriously flawed. This is simply an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to — 
through other means — meet one of their campaign 
commitments which was to hire 200 new police officers. 
 
They have failed to meet that commitment, Mr. Speaker, 
through funding. So now what is going to happen under this 
particular piece of legislation, the minister says they’re going to 
free up 10 officers to carry out other duties — other than the 
traffic Act, Mr. Speaker. But that cost is going to be borne by 
the people who insure their vehicles through SGI which, Mr. 
Speaker, is every one of us that has a vehicle. 
 
Because what happens, Mr. Speaker, now that the police will no 
longer be investigating accident sites, the determination as to 

who is at fault — the right and the wrong of the situation — is 
going to be left up to SGI. SGI is not going to be investigating 
the accident site because the report is going to take place after 
that vehicle has been removed from that accident site to a 
location to be repaired, Mr. Speaker. So there will be no on-site 
investigation. 
 
But what does it matter to SGI? As long as someone is found to 
be at fault, they can charge one of the parties the penalty fees. 
So for SGI there is no loss. 
 
But for the individuals involved, the ones that have to pay those 
penalty fees, there can be considerable loss involved, Mr. 
Speaker. That loss, when investigated by the police, were an 
impartial body. They didn’t care one way or the other who was 
at fault. As long as the facts of the case were determined, those 
were reported to SGI and SGI then made the determination 
based on fact; who was at fault for the accident so that the 
charge — the penalty charges — would be laid against the 
proper person, the person at fault. 
 
In this case that’s not going to happen, Mr. Speaker, because 
there will be no third party investigations. And that is a serious, 
serious flaw in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
only being done to cover up the NDP’s failure to hire the police 
officers they stated they would hire under their election 
campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under section 94 dealing with the powers of police 
officers, dealing with the ability to stop motorists that the police 
may feel are involved in the prostitution trade, I think is flawed, 
Mr. Speaker. As we discussed the other day with the Minister of 
Social Services when Bill No. 2 was moving through this 
House, that there is a flaw in The Highway Traffic Act in 
allowing or in assuming, Mr. Speaker, that police officers have 
the authority and the power to simply stop a vehicle because it 
happens to be in the area that they or that Justice or that Social 
Services has designated as being a stroll area for child 
prostitution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve done a little investigation in this area with the 
help of the Law Clerk. And, Mr. Speaker, the police seem to 
have a problem, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with this area. And I 
have some quotes, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to put forward 
from a book called the Charter’s Impact on the Criminal 
Justice System, edited by Jamie Cameron, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Mr. Cameron goes on to state, and I quote: 
 

Territorial or spatial privacy has also received strong 
protection, as evidenced by the Court’s condemnation of 
perimeter searches, whether conducted at a dwelling or at a 
(place of) business . . . 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the courts are making it very clear what 
powers authorities such as police have, to do searches of 
persons either in their dwellings or in their places of business. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that also as well carries on to their vehicles. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, further on in this tome, is a section called “The 
Right to be Left Alone,” and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

The common law wisdom on the right to be left alone is 
simple and clear: 

 
Although a police officer is entitled to question any 
person in order to obtain information with respect to a 
suspected offence, he has no lawful power to compel the 
person questioned to answer. Moreover, a police officer 
has no right to detain a person for questioning or further 
investigation. No one is entitled to impose any physical 
restraint upon the citizen except as authorized by law, 
and this principle applies to police officers as to anyone 
else. Although a police officer may approach a person on 
the street and ask him a question, if the person refuses to 
answer the police officer (if a person refuses to answer, 
the police officer) must allow him to proceed on his way, 
unless, of course, the officer arrests him . . . 

 
Well that seems to be pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, that the police 
have no authority to demand information from a citizen out on 
the street. They can ask the question but they cannot compel the 
answer, and they cannot restrain that individual unless they 
wish to arrest them at that time. 
 
Which flies in the face, Mr. Speaker, of what the Minister of 
Social Services was saying the other day about Bill No. 2 — 
that The Highway Traffic Act allows police officers to detain, 
to question people, and extract evidence from them simply 
because they’re in a particular area of the city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the government needs to clarify that 
situation in this Bill and make sure that Bill No. 2 is included in 
the definition of the powers of police officers under The 
Highway Traffic Act to stop and question people. And that is 
not in The Highway Traffic Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this book goes on to say: 
 

This prohibition on “random virtue testing” places a 
significant obstacle in the way of arbitrary police intrusion 
into the lives of Canadians . . . 

 
The upshot of these cases has been that arbitrary detention 
is justifiable if an officer has stopped a vehicle to check the 
mechanical fitness of the vehicle, the insurance and licence 
of the driver or the sobriety of the driver. In light of the fact 
that vehicle stops tend (tend) not to be highly intrusive, the 
Court may have arrived at a justifiable conclusion. (May 
have.) However, the Court has forgotten that in the Charter 
era, its judgments, for better or for worse, serve as . . . 
(quasi-legal) guidelines, and, as such, the Court must 
consider the implications . . . (to) its decisions in future 
cases . . . 

 
The carte blanche granting of a power to stop vehicles, on a 
random basis, inexorably leads to the ability of the police to 
make pretext stops, in which they purport to be checking 
mechanical fitness, but are in actuality investigating crime 
on less than probable cause or reasonable suspicion (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
This seems to indicate that just because you had the pretext to 
stop a vehicle because they’re in a certain area, that you may 
very well not have a reasonable right, Mr. Speaker, to charge a 

person in that vehicle with a crime. And that if you did so, the 
courts may very well throw it out as having been an 
unreasonable stop at the time. 
 
It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Random stop programs must not be turned into a means of 
conducting either an unfounded general inquisition or an 
unreasonable search (Mr. Speaker). 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the legal text, the Charter’s Impact on the 
Criminal Justice System, seems to be indicating, Mr. Speaker, 
that the blanket powers that the police have under The Highway 
Traffic Act will not be sufficient to allow for the enforcement of 
Bill No. 2, Mr. Speaker, under The Highway Traffic Act. 
 
So what the government needs to seriously consider, Mr. 
Speaker, and do is include in The Highway Traffic Act that that 
Act applies to Bill No. 2, Mr. Speaker; Bill No. 2 which is the 
emergency protection of victims of child sexual abuse. If that 
particular Act is named under The Highway Traffic Act, Mr. 
Speaker, then that protection, those powers of police will extend 
to that Act. 
 
But failing to name that Act, Mr. Speaker, under The Highway 
Traffic Act, I think will have a serious implication in 
disallowing police to have those powers to stop and to 
investigate the possibilities of crimes being perpetrated under 
Bill No. 2, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I strongly suggest that before this Bill moves ahead, that the 
government go back to the drawing board and reconsider the 
text that they are placing under the wordings of The Highway 
Traffic Act here, Mr. Speaker, and that they include a reference 
to Bill No. 2, the emergency protection of victims of child 
sexual abuse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that would go a long ways to helping protect 
children in this province. And should the government fail to do 
that and their power . . . the powers of police be excluded from 
the protection of those children, I think will not be a positive 
note for this government. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 6 — The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
horned cattle Act, the amendment presented in Bill No. 6 to The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Act seem innocuous enough on the 
surface. And I would assume that on first reading, one might 
think that this should be given easy and quick approval. I think 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

 

that was the opinion of a number of the members of the official 
opposition when we first saw this. And I don’t believe that there 
has been substantive change in our view as to the contents of 
this Bill except for a few exceptions that I want to address this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I came to this part of the world, moved to 
southwest Saskatchewan about 20 years ago. And I took up 
farming with my brother. As part of the experience of moving 
from the city to rural Saskatchewan, we decided that having a 
few head of cattle around that small farm might be an 
advantageous addition. 
 
So we took our collective inexperience and bought our first 
eight head — eight head of cows. And we were on top of the 
world; these cows were our own — our very own — cow herd. 
They were the start of what was going to be a great herd, we 
were absolutely convinced. 
 
Well looking back on it, Mr. Speaker, it was a motley crew. It 
was a crew of eight cows that didn’t match in any way, shape, 
or form. We had brown ones. We had white ones. We had grey 
ones. I think we even had a black one in there. And while we 
were very proud of that small herd of cattle, Mr. Speaker, it 
wasn’t very long until we realized the reality of the cattle 
market. 
 
When we took our calves to market that fall and we had an 
equal variety of colours in that small calf crop, we learned very 
quickly that the buyers of cattle don’t take kindly to having 
individual calves of different colour come through the ring. And 
we suffered a pretty serious financial penalty because of that. 
 
We had to learn lessons of that nature quickly because we 
couldn’t afford to have to learn them over and over and over. 
But one of the things about the cattle industry, Mr. Speaker, is 
that if you don’t make the right management decisions, you 
don’t make the adjustments necessary early in your experience, 
you’re going to pay a significant price. 
 
One of the other lessons we learned very early, Mr. Speaker, 
was the importance of having your calves dehorned at 
marketing time. And as unpleasant as that experience is for a 
cow-calf operator in terms of dehorning the nubs or using paste 
on the newborn calves, as unpleasant as that experience is, it’s 
essential to the benefit of the herd in the long run to have that 
process undergone. 
 
We learned that after the second or third year, frankly, Mr. 
Speaker. But we learned the lesson because it cost us $2 a head 
on those dehorned . . . or those calves that we hadn’t dehorned 
the first year or two. And we learned the lesson painfully. 
 
Now when you only have 8 or 9 or 10 calves, $2 a head isn’t 
very much money. But if you’re alert and astute and 
conscientious, you’re going to take that kind of a penalty 
seriously and you’re going to make adjustments to your 
management style and your operation so you don’t pay that 
penalty again. 
 
Part of the, part of the changes introduced in Bill No. 6 is to 
take that $2 penalty that producers are charged for letting their 
calves go to market or their cows go to market with horns, and 

now charging — by law, not through regulations but as part of 
the actual Act — a $10 fee. And I just want to point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that a $10 fee is 500 per cent more than the $2 fee that 
has been charged historically for that very same problem. 
 
Now going from $2 to $10 may not seem like much, Mr. 
Speaker, but the reality is that a 500 per cent increase is 
significant and it’s onerous. And I believe that the organizations 
that came together to support this piece of legislation brought to 
us by the Minister of Agriculture were in agreement that $10 
per head was the right figure. It would be punitive enough to 
compel producers to make the necessary changes in their 
management style and to proceed with dehorning on a regular 
basis. 
 
While this fee was agreed on generally, as I understand it, by 
the various associations working in the cattle industry and by 
other agricultural associations generally, I want to make one 
point clear here today. These organizations, these groups come 
together to represent unique and special interests in their, in 
their industry. And they do a lot of good work to advance the 
cause of their industry. They take the issues affecting their 
industry very seriously, and they try to accomplish solutions 
that are workable and advantageous and will benefit everybody 
in the long run. Nobody disputes that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to point out today, very clearly, that the majority, the 
majority of producers in this province are not members of the 
organizations that were represented in this decision. While we 
would not dispute the ultimate value of this particular piece of 
legislation or the intention of it, I want to make it clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that far more producers in this province are not 
represented by these associations and organizations than are 
represented. 
 
And somebody has to speak for those individual producers. I 
was one of those independent producers who, at the early stages 
of our farming career, did not belong to these organizations. 
And there are many, many producers, in my constituency and in 
rural areas around the province, who are not members of the 
organizations that are represented as the supporters of this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
So I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that while there might 
some good purposes proposed here — some good intentions 
will be developed through this particular piece of legislation — 
there is, there is a large segment of our farming population that 
are going to be not just offended by these changes, but hurt 
financially by these changes. 
 
If you have 10 or 15 head of cattle going through the ring and 
the fee is $10 apiece, that represents a significant amount of 
money. If you have 100 head, and they’re penalized at $10 a 
head, that is a very significant amount of money. So I think that 
we need to, we need to balance off the interests of the industry 
with the interests of the individual producers. 
 
And the reality, Mr. Speaker, of this piece of legislation is that 
it’s so much like many other kinds of legislation that come into 
being. They’re advanced by . . . with very good intentions but 
they have a serious impact on many people down the line. And 
in this particular case, once again, it’s the end producer who 
bears the financial brunt. 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

There are some other elements in this particular Bill that cause 
me some concern, Mr. Speaker. I read through the Bill, I read 
through the explanatory notes, and on the surface, as I said 
earlier, there didn’t seem to be too much to worry me about this 
particular piece of legislation. But I have come up with some 
questions that arise as a result of this particular piece of 
legislation not being written clearly, or maybe being written 
inappropriately, or maybe being written by somebody who 
doesn’t understand the industry. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I’d like to refer you, Mr. Speaker, to item no. 3 on page 2 of this 
particular Bill, under the headline, “Deduction by dealer on 
purchase of horned cattle.” I’d like to read into the record some 
of the wording in this particular piece of legislation. Under that 
section it says: 
 

Every dealer who purchases horned cattle, (and then sort of 
as a sidebar) other than purebred cattle being purchased for 
breeding purposes, shall: 

 
First of all shall: 
 

purchase the cattle at the current market price for cattle 
which are polled or have been dehorned, and pay that price 
to the vendor . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, this wording does not reflect the realities of the 
marketplace. The reality of the marketplace, Mr. Speaker, is 
that when cattle come through the auction ring with horns on 
them or improperly dehorned, no buyer, no buyer pays the full 
price for that particular head of cattle as opposed to other cattle 
that might come through there. 
 
The cattle that come through with horns or improperly dehorned 
are penalized by the buyers. They are discounted by the buyers. 
The price paid for those animals might run 2, 3, 4, maybe even 
5 cents a pound less than equivalent animals without horns. 
 
So the person who owned those cattle is actually going to be 
penalized twice. He’s going to be penalized by the buyer of the 
cattle in the discounted price he’s going to receive for his 
animals, but he’s also going to be penalized by this legislation 
which is now going to charge him $10 a head. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the $10 a head as we talked about earlier is 
stiff enough, but when you’re penalized $10 a head plus the 
discounted value of the animal, that’s an exceptional penalty for 
anybody to have to pay. But the legislation, the legislation here, 
the wording of this legislation suggests that the buyer of the 
cattle, the buyer of the cattle will pay the market price. 
 
Now I defy this legislation . . . or this legislature to compel any 
buyer to pay more for something than he intends to pay. But the 
wording of this piece of legislation is very clear: the purchase of 
the cattle must be made at the current market price for cattle 
which, except for the polled or dehorned cattle, would be the 
market price. 
 
So I don’t think whoever wrote this piece of legislation really 
understood what they were saying, or the consequences of this 
particular piece of legislation. 

Now I go to the explanatory notes and I thought I might get 
some enlightenment as a result of this particular little 
conundrum that arises here. And it says here in explanation that 
this particular section is: 
 

To allow for the exemption of purebred cattle, (and to) 
establish the purchase of cattle at current market price . . . 

 
To establish the purchase of cattle at current market price — I 
don’t think this legislature can accomplish that, frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, in spite of what the law says. 
 
Moving on to section no. 5 . . . And I want to read this into the 
record too because I don’t find this clear at all, even having 
visited the explanation that accompanies the Bill. In this 
particular section, it talks about approved auction market and 
gives a definition as follows: 
 

. . . (An) ‘approved auction market’ means: 
 
(a) in the case of an auction market in Alberta, an auction 
market that: 
 

(i) is operated by a livestock dealer who holds a 
prescribed licence; and 
 
(ii) has entered into an agreement with the minister to 
deduct from the proceeds of sale of horned cattle and 
remit to the minister . . . 

 
Da da, da da, da da, so on and so forth. 
 
What this is suggesting is that this can only be charged by 
auction markets in Alberta that have entered into an agreement 
with the minister. What does it say about auction markets in 
Alberta that may not have entered into an agreement with the 
minister? Or does the provincial government, the Government 
of Saskatchewan have some ability to extend its legislative 
powers to all auction markets in the province of Alberta? I’m 
not at all clear on that. 
 
Moving on with this particular section, section 5: 
 

(b) in the case of an auction market in Manitoba, an 
auction market in which Saskatchewan inspectors are 
permitted to carry out inspection services on horned 
cattle that originated in Saskatchewan and that are 
delivered to the auction market for sale in Manitoba. 

 
So it sounds to me as though Alberta auction markets have to be 
. . . have to meet certain prescribed requirements with the 
province of Saskatchewan. But in the province of Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan is free to send inspectors to auction markets in 
Manitoba. And why is there this differentiation? I think that 
explanation ought to have been made at least in the explanatory 
notes. 
 
Going on with section 5: 
 

(2) Subject to subsection (3), no person shall deliver horned 
cattle to any point outside Saskatchewan . . . 
 

And this kind of bothers me, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not clear 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

 

at all. And I would really appreciate some thorough explanation 
by the people who wrote this legislation. 
 

. . . no person shall deliver horned cattle to any point 
outside Saskatchewan unless: 
 

(a) prior to transporting the horned cattle outside 
Saskatchewan, the owner of the cattle or the owner’s 
agent pays to the minister, or an inspector on behalf of 
the minister, the deductible amount . . . (of) each head of 
horned cattle to be delivered outside Saskatchewan . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, this basically is going to make it illegal, in my 
understanding, it’s going to make it illegal for cattle producers 
on the west side of the province, who might own land on either 
side of the province, to move their cattle from one province to 
the other. That’s not an uncommon occurrence in the 
Southwest. There are many producers who own land in 
Saskatchewan or lease land in Saskatchewan and have similar 
land right across the border in Alberta. But according to this 
piece of legislation, it would be illegal for anybody to transport 
their cattle outside of Saskatchewan without paying that horned 
cattle fee. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, transporting them sounds like loading them 
on a truck and hauling them away. But if I go to the explanatory 
notes for that particular section, the prohibition reads as 
follows, in explanation: 
 

No owner of cattle shall, by himself or by his agent, 
transport or drive on foot any cattle with horns to any point 
outside the province, except an approved inspection point 
in Alberta or Manitoba . . . unless he has remitted to the 
minister the amount mentioned in section 3 for each head 
of cattle with horns transported. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this basically rules out the movement of 
privately owned cattle to any point in Alberta or Manitoba that 
isn’t an auction market. And, you know, to make those fine 
differentiation points to any officer of the Crown that might be 
there to enforce this legislation would be pretty difficult. 
 
The legislation is clear. You can’t move cattle out by transport 
or on foot to any point but an auction market. What about 
moving cattle that a guy owns, a producer owns, on one side of 
the border to land that he might own on another side of the 
border? Or what about the possibility of moving it to . . . some 
animals to a bull test station or some place where they’re going 
to test animals for comparative weights? What if they’re taking 
animals to, well maybe to a bull sale or something of that 
nature? 
 
You know, this legislation brings about encumbrances to the 
agriculture sector that are unnecessary. They’re certainly not 
clear. And unfortunately for enforcement officers, if the 
legislation and the explanatory notes aren’t clear, how are they 
supposed to deal with these kinds of situations without 
inevitably making error that’s going to cost somebody a lot of 
time and a lot of frustration? 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the, I think, most pressing areas 
of confusion in this piece of legislation that need to be attended 
to. 

I would say, just looking at the whole issue again, that when a 
producer takes his cattle to a market, he gets the market price. 
The law now says that the buyers can’t pay less than the market 
price — which I’m not sure is enforceable in any respect — but 
when the producer gets his cheque after the animal has been 
sold, he’s going to be faced with deductions from his cheque for 
brand inspection fees; he’s going to have insurance fees 
deducted as well. There’s going to be the selling commissions. 
And now there’s going to be a 500 per cent increase in the fees 
charged for horned cattle. And on top of that he’s going to have 
to pay GST (goods and services tax) on the commission of the 
sale of those cattle. So by the time the producer gets his net 
cheque, there’s going to be a lot more money missing from that 
sale than he anticipated. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t seen any increase in fees in 
any area that even approaches the 500 per cent mark, with the 
possible exception of the nursing home fee increases that we 
heard about, about two weeks ago but . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well maybe crop insurance too. But we have a 
500 per cent increase in the fees being charged to these 
producers, and while the objective may be laudable, while the 
intentions might be good, the impact for many independent 
producers will be fairly serious. And I want to go on the record 
today, Mr. Speaker, as having supported their concerns as well. 
 
I have a couple of other questions I want to ask in connection 
with this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. I noticed 
the Act is going to have, as part of the process, the appointment 
of the horned cattle producers Act advisory committee. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I just read through the list of organizations and 
associations that will be part of the Horned Cattle Purchases 
Act Advisory Committee. It includes groups like the National 
Farmers Union, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders’ Association, 
the Dairy Association of Saskatchewan, the Stock Growers’ 
Association in this province, the Western Cow-Calf Producers 
Association, and one non-voting representative of the minister 
— somebody that the minister gets to appoint gratis to this 
board. But there’s another organization that’s listed here which 
I find peculiar. It’s the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as I know, there is no such organization as 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture. There may have 
been at one time but to the best of my knowledge there is now 
no such organization. 
 
Now I know there were amendments made to include new 
groups to this particular advisory Act, but who is the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture? Is there a 
representative that the minister can provide us the name of for 
this particular group, that will sit on this? I’m beginning to 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, if this isn’t a freebie for the minister to be 
able to appoint a second member to this committee. 
 
However I would like that clarified. I would like that particular 
group identified. And I’d like to know how, if that group no 
longer exists, how they managed to make it to this particular 
list? Since there were amendments made to include other new 
groups, why was this one, this defunct group, not removed from 
the list? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other, one other question I have to ask is: in 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

the definitions of this particular piece of legislation, a fund is 
defined as the Horned Cattle Fund, established under section 6. 
Now you know, I think we’re all reasonably familiar with the 
Horned Cattle Fund and we suspect that some of the money has 
gone to a variety of good purposes. We take that on faith, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I do think that we need to know more clearly what the 
Horned Cattle Fund is all about today: what its purposes are, 
what functions it tries to fulfill, how many researchers are 
sponsored by it, how many dollars go to organizations such as 
the Beef Information Centre — those types of endeavours that 
are . . . that have been funded and probably still are funded by 
the Horned Cattle Fund. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, one of the things I’m slightly suspicious 
about today is the fact that the Horned Cattle Fund has been 
running low on resources. And maybe part of the reason for 
moving that $2 fee to $10 is to help accelerate the funding 
levels for the Horned Cattle Fund. Maybe they decided that they 
just didn’t have the resources. 
 
But the other possibility that has occurred to me, Mr. Speaker, 
is that maybe the government ran so short of funds in their 
budget this year that they borrowed money back from that 
Horned Cattle Fund to underwrite some other endeavour. And 
now they have to replenish that particular fund with this highly 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
member if they would take their replays of question period to 
behind the bar or someplace so that we could hear the member 
clearly here. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve only raised, you know, two or three concerns 
about this particular piece of legislation that I think are 
legitimate concerns. 
 
And I think if the Bill had been written properly, a lot of the 
language that is very confusing in this particular piece of 
legislation would have been either written in more simplified, 
plain English, or it may have been written in a way that there 
would be no question about the intention of this particular piece 
of legislation. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But it clearly, it clearly is inappropriate. It tries to accomplish 
one thing — one thing —and it fails at doing that. And the thing 
that they were trying to do was increase the fees for this 
particular deduction, and on the other hand streamline and kind 
of clarify the way this particular legislation would affect 
producers. But it’s failed on all counts. 
 
Now I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the groups that we have 
talked to — the various producer groups and other cattle 
organizations that have provided input to this particular piece of 
legislation — have virtually unanimously supported the 
increase to $10 per head for non-dehorned cattle. That has been 
generally accepted among all the groups. And while I made my 
opposition to that quantum leap clear earlier in my comments, I 
think that nothing would be . . . nothing would detract from that 

particular intended benefit if we moved gradually to that $10 
rate. 
 
And I have talked to a number of independent producers, people 
who are not members of these organizations, and even a number 
of people who are within the organizations that supported this 
Bill, and suggested to them that instead of making one big jump 
from $2 to $10 a head, that we move possibly from $2 to $5 for 
one or two years until the message is sent, and then at a third 
year possibly go to the full $10 rate. I think, I think what would 
be achieved is exactly what is intended by this particular piece 
of legislation without the punitive, onerous impact that this 
might have on many independent producers. 
 
So having made these points, Mr. Speaker, I would move that 
this Bill go ahead, proceed to Committee of the Whole. I’m 
sorry, Mr. Speaker, I’m in error. I defer to the critic for 
Agriculture. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
general — as the member from Cypress Hills said — the intent 
of the Bill we agree with, which the intent is twofold in the Bill, 
from my understanding. The problem is, is that sometimes the 
intent of something and the detail are not always on the same 
page. 
 
And I won’t go through all of the detail that we have questions 
about, or concerns, because the member from Cypress Hills did 
so very, very well. But I do want to add a few things and that’s 
that I quite agree with including the Saskatchewan Cattle 
Feeders on the Cattle Purchases Act Advisory Committee. And 
I believe this is in a positive amendment which I shall have no 
problem supporting. 
 
In his initial explanation of this Bill, the Minister of Agriculture 
stated that this allowed for an update on the organizations that 
advise him, and that’s why I believe it’s a very good thing that 
we add the cattle feeders. And there’s probably a number of 
other groups that could be added, because I think our minister 
needs as much advice as he can get. 
 
Another provision in the Bill, however, that has been raised by 
a few members on this side of the House that has caused some 
concern, and that’s by the point that the fee that will be charged 
for dehorning cattle at the point of sale is going from $2 to $10 
all in one leap. And that is a 500 per cent increase, and that is 
definitely a concern to some producers and a concern to 
ourselves on this side of the House. 
 
Some producers have voiced their opinion to us that they feel 
that this is rather a drastic increase to go from . . . basically a 
fivefold increase all by the stroke of one piece of legislature. 
 
We realize that the fee has remained at $2 for a number of 
years, and we’re not questioning the need for some sort of 
increase. The $2, I’m not even sure of the history, the exact 
history of it, but I know it has been a great number of years that 
the $2 has been in place and never been increased. So I guess 
the question is, do we need to increase it by 500 per cent? 
 
The stakeholder associations and the cattle industry have been 
lobbying the producers within their own industry to dehorn 
cattle when they are calves. And to a degree their efforts, Mr. 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

 

Speaker, have had some results. I think there are a lot less 
horned cattle going through the market rings today than there 
were 20 years ago. And I do believe that we have to keep 
moving in this direction. And I know the stakeholder 
associations and the cattle industry definitely feel that we must 
keep moving in this direction and they would like to see it move 
at a more rapid pace than it is. 
 
The reasons that they’re giving us is that the horns on cattle 
create a great cost to other cattle producers who have their 
livestock in the same feedlot or the same market ring or in the 
same shipping vessels as non-horned cattle because there’s 
damage to the other producers’ livestock caused by the horns 
searing the other animals. There’s damages to the hides and 
there is bruises on the meat. So it’s fairly costly if you’ve had 
an animal damaged by one that has horns. 
 
And there’s also a cost of time and money that we have to take 
into consideration because . . . And the industry incurs this cost 
because there is time and labour that’s needed to dehorn the 
animals once they hit market weight and they wish to have them 
dehorned at that point. 
 
When a feedlot or a large rancher puts a number of animals 
through the chutes, they vaccinate and they brand. And this 
procedure just takes a matter of seconds and the animal’s 
through the chute. But they said that the time is increased quite 
considerably if they also have to dehorn the animal. So they 
find if there’s a number of horned animals coming through the 
chutes, that it’s quite costly and labour intensive to them. 
 
The other thing that I think that we should have to consider here 
is the humane element in this issue. And it is known that it’s 
quite considerably more dramatic and dangerous to the animal 
if it needs to be dehorned once it’s reached market weight, 
rather than being dehorned as a calf. So that is another thing 
that I think we should really consider and do support this Bill in 
its intent. 
 
So though there can be no question that we recognize the 
importance of dehorning the cattle for the cattle industry of this 
province, we also have to be mindful of how the actual Bill is 
worded and so that it serves its purpose without causing all sorts 
of other rules, regulations, and inhibitions to the industry. And I 
think that’s where we need some clarification and that 
clarification, Mr. Speaker, a number of the issues like I had 
mentioned before, was pointed out by the member from 
Cypress. 
 
And so we will be looking for some clarification on all those 
points and so we will be more than happy to pursue that in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 12 — The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak on Bill No. 12, The Farm Financial Stability Act. This 
speaks to the livestock associations and the livestock loan 
guarantee program that was established in 1984. And these 
associations were empowered to borrow money from financial 
institutions in order to purchase feeder and breeder cattle on 
behalf of their members. And a part of the loan guarantee was 
the government’s guarantee of up to 25 per cent of the loan in 
case of a default. 
 
The feeder loan guarantee has been and will continue to be a 
very important part of the livestock industry and the growth of 
the livestock industry in this province. And it’s essential that we 
make sure the loan guarantee program is looked after and kept 
up to date on all the laws concerning the banking industry and 
as well as the tax side of the farming and livestock industry. 
 
As someone who has used the feeder loan guarantee, and a 
number of my constituents use it, it’s very beneficial to the 
industry as I’d mentioned. 
 
When a person wants to use the feeder loan guarantee, they 
have to join the association. So initially the member has to 
apply to the association to become a member and the board of 
directors vote on whether to accept that member . . . that person 
as a member. 
 
When they . . . part of that process is they get a credit check. 
They ask the bank that the loan guarantee program deals with, 
or the local association deals with, to do a credit check on that 
individual. And both the board of directors and the bank that the 
association deals with, makes a decision on membership based 
on the viability of the member’s financial situation and past 
lending practices. So there’s a number of checks and balances 
in the system right now that attempts to protect the loans when 
they’re taken out. 
 
And of course when a loan is taken out, whether it’s in the 
feeder or the breeder side of the association and the loan 
guarantee program, the cattle that are being purchased have to 
be free and unencumbered. 
 
And there’s a process involved in that. The cattle have to be 
purchased through a licensed dealer or through an auction 
market or a livestock sales establishment that is also a licensed 
dealer, and so that there are no other encumbrances placed on 
the cattle and the cattle are free and clear. And so the loan 
would be given out to the individual or to the feeder loan 
association. So if there were any problems, they would be 
addressed at that point by going through a licensed dealer. 
 
Now this Bill is clarifying who is the owner of the commodity 
— who is the owner of the cattle. In the past the feeder loan 
association basically held . . . was a trustee of the cattle and it 
was accepted that the individual actually was the owner of the 
cattle but the association was the trustee of the cattle. And this 
practice was accepted by everyone — the legal community as 
well as the banking community. 
 
And in case of a default there was a process to take place. 
That’s . . . the assurance fund is there . . . (inaudible) . . . the 
feeder side 5 per cent of the value of the animal was to be put 
into the assurance fund and 10 per cent is to put on the breeders 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

side of the association. And in case of a default, that assurance 
fund would be used to pay off the potential liability to the bank. 
 
And of course, the members of the association, if there was still 
money outstanding, would have the opportunity of helping to 
pay off the debt of one of its members if they chose to. If not, 
the association would be wound up and that’s when the . . . after 
the bank had taken legal action against the individual who was 
owing the money and could not recoup it, then the government 
guarantee of 25 per cent of the . . . basically the loss of the loan 
would come into effect. 
 
Now we have seen that through various legal actions and 
decisions by the courts that the banking community has now 
been able to seize cattle from an individual with a feeder 
association brand on to pay off an individual’s debts that are 
unrelated to the feeder association. And in some cases, cattle 
that are actually owned by other people have been seized to pay 
off that particular individual’s unrelated debts. And this has put 
the whole feeder loan guarantee program at risk and this is 
something that is not acceptable. 
 
This Act really speaks to changing, to clarify who owns the 
commodity in the producer association. And now with this Act, 
the ownership of the cattle will be the feeder association and not 
the individual. So that issue hopefully will be dealt with by this 
Act. 
 
(15:30) 
 
But an unintended — I believe an unintended — consequence 
of this change is concerning the tax implications and . . . of the 
individual that is using the feeder association and the 
implications it has on that individual’s farming and ranching 
practices. 
 
And as we know, the agriculture community is on a cash basis 
when it concerns the taxation department. And so, producers in 
the past have been able to use . . . to purchase cattle and to use 
that as an expense in their operation and thus deferring potential 
tax liability to another year. 
 
And as we know, in agriculture there’s many ups and downs, so 
in a year that there is profits you’re able to defer the tax liability 
to another year when the tax situation . . . well, when profits 
aren’t as adequate or possibly even money has been lost in 
farming in future years. So it is a great benefit to the agriculture 
community and the livestock producer to have that option. 
 
Now this Bill is . . . I’m afraid that this Bill has taken that 
option away from livestock producers. Now the feeder 
association actually owns the cattle and the individual does not 
own the cattle. So when it comes time to purchasing cattle in 
the fall one of the aspects of purchasing cattle, naturally is to 
make money, but also the tax implications have to be taken into 
account as the year draws to a close. 
 
And this is something that the producer associations have 
looked at and they felt that having to deal with the ownership 
aspect was the most urgent one, and I have to agree. It really 
has put the whole loan guarantee program at risk because of the 
fact that the courts have allowed banks to seize these 
association cattle to pay off debts of an individual. 

But I believe that the government needs to look into this Act 
and its consequences as far as the taxation side of the equation 
and see if the concerns about ownership also changes the fact 
that an individual cannot use these cattle as an expense in their 
farming operations which is, maybe not an immediate concern, 
but it certainly is a concern that has to be dealt with at some 
point. And I believe people need to know before the end of the 
year where they stand on that very important issue. 
 
As I had mentioned before, the feeder loan guarantee has been 
very important and hopefully the government is considering 
expanding the feeder loan guarantee to include other people that 
. . . other than individuals, and expand it to business and 
corporations and feedlots where they can have the ability to 
borrow multi-million dollar amounts of money to purchase 
cattle. Because in Saskatchewan it’s a great potential, the 
intensive livestock operation, particularly the feedlot industry, 
has great potential for job growth and investment in this 
province. And this is certainly one way that would help that 
industry along in its desire to grow. 
 
Saskatchewan certainly has the adequate resources as far as 
pasture land, water, and the producers in this province to grow 
the cowherd and also develop the feeding industry. And along 
with the feeding industry comes the potential of expansion in 
the packing industry which will create jobs in all the sectors and 
really broaden the tax base and develop more . . . increase the 
jobs in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we see in this Bill, as in many other Bills that 
the government has brought forward, that there’s a shift from 
actual legislation into regulation. And we have raised this 
concern many times before and will continue to raise this 
concern. Removing issues from the legislation and putting them 
into regulation takes away the right of the members of this 
House to scrutinize such changes on behalf of the constituents. 
 
And this is a concern we’ve had with a number of Bills that the 
government has introduced in the past and we will continue 
bringing up those concerns, because we do not want to take 
really the right of the people away when it concerns legislation 
and changes to the . . . to many areas in the province in the 
agricultural community and elsewhere. 
 
So basically, as I was saying, this really . . . this Bill only 
changes the . . . or clarifies who owns the commodity. And it’s 
all fine and dandy to have that change, but I’d really like to 
impress upon the government the need to clarify the tax 
implications. And a lot of producers know if there is a change in 
the tax implications of . . . because the clarification of the owner 
of the commodity, that they do communicate to the livestock 
industry that there is a potential tax liability in the future. 
 
And I will be raising these concerns as we ask questions in the 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government Deputy House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to raise a point of order. 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

 

The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to 
review Hansard of Tuesday, May 7, as well as Crown 
Corporations Committee Hansard of Tuesday May 7. And I 
want to bring to your attention an issue to ask for your ruling 
under the guidelines related to protected persons. 
 
I will refer you, Mr. Speaker, to Beauchesne’s, section 493 — 
Protected Persons — and refer you specifically to subclauses 
(3) and (4), the relevant parts which say this, that: 
 

(3) The Speaker has traditionally protected from attack a 
group of individuals commonly referred to as “those of 
high official station”. The extent of this group has never 
been defined. Over the years it has covered senior public 
servants . . . (and then some others, Mr. Speaker). 
 

It’s the senior public servants specifically to which I refer. And 
I then also refer you to clause (4): 
 

(4) The Speaker has cautioned Members to exercise great 
care in making statements about persons who are outside 
the House and unable to reply. 

 
The issue I ask you to rule upon, Mr. Speaker, has to do with 
what I believe to be an attack on the credibility of the president 
of the Crown Investments Corporation, Mr. Frank Hart. And I 
refer to a statement by the hon. member from Swift Current 
who, in question period on May 7, said, and I quote: 
 

. . . Mr. Hart also said that the NDP will be picking the 
winners and losers. Apparently they’ve already picked a 
winner — a company from Denver, Colorado. Mr. Speaker 
. . . 

 
In referring to decision making around ethanol plants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that flies directly in the face of Hansard from 
Crown Corporations Committee meeting just a matter of — it 
would have been about three or four hours earlier. And I refer 
you, Mr. Speaker . . . the Hansard I refer to for the member of 
Swift Current is page 1230. 
 
I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to the Crown Corporations 
Committee, pages 444 and 445, if I may read those into the 
record, Mr. Speaker. On page 444, Ms. Harpauer asks the 
question, I’m quoting: 
 

We’ve received information from Regina that indicates that 
perhaps a company has been given exclusive rights. So has 
CIC given anyone exclusive rights with an investment or 
involvement with CIC in building ethanol plants? 

 
That’s the question. 
 
Mr. Hart says, “No, we have not”. I repeat, Mr. Speaker: 
 

No, we have not. We’ve been asked to invest exclusively 
with some investors, but we have not committed to doing 
that. 

On page 445 Ms. Harpauer continues: 
 

The information that we have suggests that you have 
entered into a five-year exclusive agreement with 
OmniTRAX Broe Industries of Denver, Colorado to 
produce ethanol in Saskatchewan, and the agreement calls 
for (a) massive government loan guarantees. Do you agree 
with that or deny it? 

 
Mr. Hart: 
 

We have not entered into an exclusive agreement with 
OmniTRAX. We’ve had discussions with them about that. 
They’ve agreed to invest with a number of other investors 
in the province and have asked us to be a partner, but we 
have not signed any inclusivity arrangements with them. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I draw that to your attention because Mr. Hart was 
very, very clear in response to the questions on that subject in 
Crown Corporations on the morning of May 7. In the House 
here, in question period then just three or four hours later, the 
member for Swift Current then represents the comments of Mr. 
Hart by saying again: 
 

. . . Mr. Hart also said that the NDP will be picking the 
winners and losers. Apparently they’ve already picked a 
winner — a company from Denver, Colorado, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 

 
I suggest to you, sir, that what the hon. member from Swift 
Current is doing is attacking a high-ranking official who is 
unable to defend himself in this House by directly challenging 
his credibility. And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that you would 
find that the hon. member is out of order and would ask him to 
withdraw his statement and make an apology to the House, and 
I would suggest as well it would be appropriate that he would 
make an apology to Mr. Hart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, if I may reply. I look forward to 
your ruling on this item. I believe that one of the roles of the 
opposition party is to, in any committee and particularly in the 
Crown Corporations Committee, is to question the government 
officials. And if this particular Crown corporation head is there 
to be asked questions, that it is totally within our right as 
opposition to ask that person questions, and I don’t see where 
there is any concern with asking that particular member, 
particular individual, questions about the Crown that that 
individual is in charge of. 
 
And as far as later on speaking in terms of picking winners and 
losers concerning another company, it was referred to a 
company from Denver that may or may not be related to the 
question that was brought up in Crowns. I understand that it’s a 
. . . it was a company that was totally unrelated to the question 
that was in Crowns. 
 
And I would like to just ask the Speaker to take that into 
consideration when he rules on this point of order. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. First of all, I’d like to 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

thank the member for Moose Jaw — order — member for 
Moose Jaw North for raising the point of order and for the 
response from the member for Redberry, the Opposition Deputy 
House Leader. 
 
Members, in listening to the arguments that are presented, I see 
two issues. First is a dispute as to the accuracy of factual 
information, or of the facts as it was presented both in the 
House and in the committee. 
 
I would like to advise the House that it is not up to the Speaker 
to judge on the accuracy of any statements that are made and 
those items that are always up for debate. And that is really the 
main purpose of this Assembly, and that is to debate issues and 
eventually that the facts should come out as close to the truth as 
any person can judge. 
 
The second issue is the issue of protection of members of the 
public or members of the . . . civil servants in this particular 
case. Specifically, I would like to refer members to a couple of 
references. 
 
The first one is on page 151 and that is of Beauchesne's 6th 
edition where it . . . and I quote, item . . . from section 493, item 
3 . . .(3): 
 

The Speaker has traditionally protected from attack a group 
of individuals commonly referred to as “those of high 
official station”. The extent of this group has never been 
defined. Over the years it has covered senior public 
servants, ranking . . . (officials and) armed services . . . 
diplomatic representatives in Canada, a Minister who was 
not a member of either House, and the Prime Minister 
before he won a seat in the House. 

 
And (4): 
 

The Speaker has cautioned Members to exercise great care 
in making statements about persons who are outside the 
House and unable to reply. 

 
(15:45) 
 
And in a very similar statement in Montpetit and Marleau, 2000 
Edition, from page 524: 
 

. . . Members should avoid as much as possible mentioning 
by name people from outside the House who are unable to 
reply and defend themselves against innuendo. 

 
Members of the Assembly, the Speaker of this Assembly has 
traditionally been very, very strict — I guess that was the word 
I want to use — in applying this when it comes to officials such 
as the Lieutenant Governor, judges of courts of law. However 
when it comes to . . . And members outside of the civil service, 
members of the public who may be completely unable to have 
anybody defend them. 
 
However when it comes to issues of policy where members of 
the civil service are involved, there have been numerous 
precedents in this House where the names of individuals have 
used. Perhaps has not been the best. Perhaps it would be better 
to use the titles of these individuals. Nevertheless they have 

been used in the past. The main caution that I would give on 
that is that no personal slurs or no attacks of the individual 
person be referred to. 
 
However when it comes to matters related to policy, I believe it 
is the function of the minister to defend the policies and that 
that would include the persons who are implementing those 
policies on his behalf. Therefore the point . . . I do not consider 
the point well taken. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister responsible to 
introduce her officials, and if she wishes, make a brief 
statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
being the second time we’ve been here, I’ll just bypass making 
a statement. 
 
But I’ll recognize with us today, Angie Gélinas, the deputy 
minister; behind her, Jill McKeen, executive director of policy 
and planning; and beside the deputy, David Debono, president 
and CEO of SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network). 
 
To my right, Emile St. Amand, director of sport and recreation; 
behind him, Peggy Brunsdon, manager of provincial heritage 
resources. 
 
And I’ll turn right around behind myself, Melinda Gorrill, 
director of corporate services, and behind her, Bruce Medhurst, 
senior policy analyst. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And 
welcome, officials, and to the minister. 
 
I just want to start off on a little bit different note today from 
where we left off last time. And you may understand in a few 
questions of where I’m . . . where I wish to go with this. 
 
But I guess, Mr. Chair, my first question to the minister would 
be related to youth. And I’ve spent a little bit of time on the 
Web site trying to find out the youth issues of the province and 
where the Department of Youth is going and what actually is 
being done and if there’s an expansion from the Web site that I 
actually hit on. And I will say unequivocably that I’m not the 
greatest person on the computer and maybe I have missed 
something. 
 
So I’d like to ask the minister what involvement her department 
has in youth issues, in addressing youth issues. Is it all 
encompassing or is it piecemeal? Is it part issue . . . Or if she 
could just explain exactly what the Department of Youth 
dealing with youth issues entails? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much for the question. 
There’s really two perspectives that we have. One of them of 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

 

course is to manage all of the programs in the Culture, Youth 
and Recreation and heritage sectors, but keeping in mind the 
role that all of these sectors play, both in the development of 
youth in the province but also the opportunities for youth in the 
province. 
 
And in some program areas, we have a direct responsibility; in 
other program areas, we have a responsibility to work with 
other departments. An example I could give you of that is in the 
role of culture and fitness in the schools, for example. We work 
with the people involved in the Role of the Schools report 
follow up and how we make sure that children in schools have 
access to the appropriate opportunities for them. How children 
who may have less access, like Aboriginal children or children 
of single parents, etc., have access to those kinds of 
developmental activities. 
 
So there is an emphasis on the youth component of the 
mainstream responsibilities that we have. 
 
As well, we do have some special duties in relation to things 
like the centennial summer student employment program, 
which is meant to provide both an opportunity for succession 
planning in the public planning in the public sector, but also to 
provide career opportunities so that youth who do obtain higher 
levels of education in Saskatchewan have an opportunity to get 
the work experience that will then enable them to get permanent 
full-time job following their graduation. 
 
So I could give you more examples but I think those are two 
examples of an area where we have both a general 
responsibility and a specific responsibility. And if you’re 
interested in more detail, I can go into some of the other 
program initiatives that we’re involved in. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One of the 
issues that I’ve been spending some time with is youth drug 
issues, drug and alcohol issues, and I think we have identified it 
in this province as a . . . very much a youth issue. And I know 
in my travels and my discussions, I’ve talked to people that 
have been involved and wish to get out of it. Some I’ve talked 
to are out of the drug and alcohol issue. And I guess for just a 
simple question at this point is: does the minister’s department 
deal at all with issues of youth related to drug and alcohol 
abuse? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Chair, to answer the 
member, the kind of role we play is preventative in making sure 
that youth have the developmental opportunities that will 
generally prevent them from choosing negative directions as 
opposed to positive ones. 
 
There’s a great deal of data, I think, that you may be familiar 
with in the sport and recreation area of the much lesser 
involvement of youth that are actively involved in sport and 
recreation programs in drug and alcohol than youth that don’t 
have access to those things. And certainly, for example, the 
member for the North, the minister responsible for northern, the 
northern government initiatives, certainly brings it to my 
attention that we do have a need to do even more, for example, 
in the northern area. Because there’s too many youth there that 
don’t have opportunities to do things and, because of that, fall 
into a lot of negative activities. 

So whether it’s in the schools in our relationship to programs 
like the role of the schools, or programs like In Motion in 
Saskatoon, whether it’s making sure that cultural activities are 
available . . . And as we move further into a partnership 
relationship with the First Nations and Métis community, 
certainly there’s more specific opportunities for things like 
cultural camps — places where people can increase both their 
pride in their culture and the importance of the values that 
would lead people to make the choice to lead a life that’s drug 
free, etc. 
 
So I would say that our job is largely preventative. We don’t get 
involved in the treatment end of things, although certainly some 
people in the culture and recreation sector are involved in music 
therapy and healing programs, where sport and culture are used 
as part of the healing and developmental process. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
I wish to continue on this because last year alone, from 
government records, we had 3,300 youth, 3,300 youth that 
called for assistance in drug-related, alcohol-related issues. 
That’s a significant number, Madam Minister. 
 
And my concern, my concern is if this number of youth are 
actually calling for help, where are they going and who do they 
go to? And as the Department of Youth, to me the very first 
place with a youth problem, I would think, should go to the 
Department of Youth. At least for some guidance as to where to 
go. 
 
And on that, I just wish to relate — I realize it’s not your 
department — but how it gets into a matrix jumble and there’s 
no way out. I know last year — unfair maybe, but to use it as a 
comparison — one of the communities in my constituency had 
water issues, very serious water issues. And every time they 
came to a ministry, they’d say, sorry, that’s not under my 
bailiwack. And they went around the circle about three times 
before they actually called me. And it was during estimates that 
we finally got an answer. In fact it was a begrudging answer 
because nobody wanted to take responsibility for the water 
issue. 
 
Now I’m a little concerned with the youth drug issue . . . is 
much the same. And that’s why I wish to address it here this 
afternoon, is if specifically, if it’s not addressed through the 
Department of Youth, if at least you talk to other ministries to 
discuss as to where they should go, what they can do, and how 
they can do it. 
 
And I guess that’s my question now is: if you do not deal with it 
directly — and I know Youth, Culture and Recreation does not 
deal specifically with the drug issue, but it could be an entry 
point for youth — and if you would discuss this with other 
ministries, at least as to where these young individuals can go 
for help. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the point that the member’s 
getting at is a useful one and that’s that although the buck 
always has to stop somewhere — and in the instance of drug 
and alcohol treatment, the final buck stops with the Department 
of Health — the fact is, is that Department of Social Services 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

and ourselves are involved. 
 
And you know, if I could just make a comment a little bit from 
a personal philosophy, I was very supportive of the 
government’s move into early childhood intervention because I 
believe if the tap is on and the house is flooding, the first thing 
you have to do is turn the tap off. And I very much see kids 
having developmental opportunities as a way of turning the tap 
off. 
 
And there may be sometimes more damage at the high end than 
we can sometimes manage to capture in our services. But my 
goal would be to make sure that no child reaches that point 
because I believe — and this is my own personal belief — that 
once that damage is done, it’s very hard to undo. 
 
So in terms of a focus of our resources, we focus on the 
preventative and developmental end and the buck, in that 
particular area, does stop at the Department of Health. 
 
Now as much as I say that, we do also meet with various youth 
advisory groups; the Council on Children, the Youth PACE 
(Provincial Action Committee on the Economy), the various 
groups that are advisory to the different departments. And when 
they raise issues — if they raise issues with us — we do pass 
them on to the responsible department to make sure that people 
are aware of the priorities that youth have mentioned. 
 
But I think our belief right now is that, dealing with our core 
responsibilities of prevention and development, that we have 
more than enough on our plates to do a good job at that aspect 
of youth development. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I’m 
glad that you indicated that the buck stops with the Department 
of Health because I will be asking the same questions to the 
Minister of Health. And I’m still kind of leery that I’ll get the 
runaround to Social Services and to Justice and to all of the 
other ministries, and that’s why I wanted to address it here first. 
And it might be something to look at: is having an entry point 
for somebody that has a problem such as this and they can be 
directed to the individual where the buck stops. 
 
On the preventive side of the house — and I fully agree with 
you, Madam Minister — on the preventive side of the house. 
And I think we understand, I think we as a society understand, 
that if you can target programs to youth in their early teens, 
they’re most effective at that time. 
 
And with that in mind, I would like to ask a question about 
preventive measures which I’ll probably ask later on in 
Learning estimates. Have you, Madam Minister, been made 
aware of or have you ever seen an interactive Web site based 
. . . a Web-based program called Your Life: Your Choice? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, I haven’t. But I would be very 
pleased if the member would provide me with the ident number 
and we would certainly check it out. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I don’t have it right with me, Madam 
Minister, but I did have some notes on it and Your Life: Your 
Choice was recently chosen by the Canadian Centre for 
Substance Abuse as one of the best programs available for 

educating young people about alcohol abuse. 
 
If accepted as part of a provincial curriculum, Your Life: Your 
Choice is available at virtually no cost to students, parents, and 
teachers. In fact, this program has been accepted in a number of 
other Canadian provincial curriculums. 
 
Considering the importance of this issue, the no-cost aspect of 
the program, and the fact that it has received accolades from 
Canadian Centre for Substance Abuse, would you be in favour 
of this program being included as part of the province’s 
curriculum? And I understand, again, that may have to be asked 
of the Department of Learning, but again it’s youth, it’s 
youth-oriented, and it’s a youth initiative. Would you be in 
favour of this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the quite comprehensive 
activities we’re involved in is establishing a youth Web site. 
And it is under development, so it’s, I guess a work in progress 
is the way you’d describe it at the moment. And what we put on 
that site will be based on some of our consultations with youth, 
with some of the programs that are available. 
 
But certainly, an important part of a good Web site is links to 
other useful resources. And we will take a look at the resources 
you’re talking about. And when we get to the point in our Web 
site of linking to resources — and we can also bring it to the 
attention of the minister responsible for Learning, that they 
have I think a large number of sites for teachers as well, of 
resource materials — and it could be something we could both 
look at and consider assisting people to hook up with that site. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ll try and 
get the exact details of this particular initiative to you. And I 
would be very interested in hearing your response after you’ve 
seen the site and whether it could be incorporated because 
again, I think we are in agreement. If you get to the . . . The 
learning area of the youth is an area that we really have to get 
to. 
 
I’m also extremely concerned — and again I’ll talk to the 
Minister of Health about this — but again, it’s a feeling of mine 
in the Youth . . . Department of Youth where we can get into 
addressing the problems more as to how and where young 
people can go. And it’s kind of a sad situation when you speak 
to one of the young people that have been through one of the 
programs, that they can’t get it in Saskatchewan. 
 
And again it may be unfair, tunnelled totally to the Department 
of Youth, but it’s been a fact of life where I’ve spoke to young 
people that have had to go out of province basically to get youth 
treatment. And how do they get there? It’s trying the system 
within the province and finding that they don’t work. In fact, 
I’ve had two young people that have said they actually 
consumed more drugs and alcohol while they were in the 
treatment facilities in Saskatchewan than they did when they 
were at home where they had the problem. 
 
And again I would hope that the minister would talk to the other 
ministers that are involved in this whole youth issue where they 
could . . . you could sit down and actually look at this as a 
provincial problem and to come up with a provincial solution, 
rather than just saying well this comes under Department of 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

 

Health, or is this Social Services or whatever. Because this is a 
very, very critical problem. 
 
I’ll just give you a little bit of feedback from some of my visits 
with some of these young people. And one had taken a 
treatment in Calgary — very much an in-your-face type of a 
rehab program — and the individual scoffed, basically, at what 
we’re dealing with in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now for him to find that program it came via word of mouth 
from somebody else that was a youth, that had been through the 
program, because there is no way that individual . . . his words 
to me were, there’s no way that he could find that out in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And here we are again — 3,300 youth last year. And if they hit 
a dead-end wall, where are they going to go and what are they 
going to do? And I think that’s very much a concern for all of 
us in this province. 
 
So I would hope that in the ministry of Youth that we would 
look at something like this. And I think it’s more global than 
just recreation and culture. I think that we really need to have a 
look at what I’ve suggested within our own caucus, is designing 
a matrix where youth who are very in tune to computers could 
actually log on — I have a problem; what’s your problem? — 
and actually start processing the individual as to how and where 
he or she may go to find some help. 
 
And I know it’s a problem further on, is once they’re directed to 
where that help is, if there’s no facilities available to them or if 
the facilities are not able to cure their problem, then I think even 
in a Web site such as that, we have to be able to direct them 
further on, whether it’s out of the province or not. Because if 
something is not working here, I think we have to be open 
enough to say, if it’s not, where are treatment facilities that will 
work. 
 
So that being said, Madam Minister, I would hope that you 
would — you and your staff — would look into something. 
And like I say, I’m going to be asking some of the other 
ministers the same issue because I think it’s a very, very serious 
problem that we have and it’s, and in my view, it’s kind of been 
on the back burner or out of sight where it’s not a problem. So I 
would ask that you would look into this. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If I could offer a little more comment, I 
mean every jurisdiction develops its own, if you want to put it, 
treatment model. And one of the things that’s very much a part 
of the Saskatchewan solution right now is the fact that 
community schools have been very effective in many instances 
in working with vulnerable children and families. 
 
And because that has been so successful . . . In the Role of the 
School report that was done last year it really was a report that 
brought together court workers, drug and alcohol treatment 
workers, social workers, teachers, people who work in 
community coordination roles, and as well people from sport 
and recreation and cultural organizations, to talk about how 
they could provide more integrated services to youth. 
 
Because, I mean, it’s true. I very much believe in the First 
Nations or Aboriginal model of development which is spiritual, 

intellectual, emotional, and physical. And so when you take an 
integrated, school-based approach, you’re going to capture all 
of the children who are in school. And I think our model is one 
of providing integrated services to that youth from a 
school-based setting. 
 
Now if the youth is so dysfunctional that they can’t exist in the 
school setting, then you have a different kind of problem. But 
again, I would say that whereas certainly I believe it’s 
important, I think we should look at what resources there are. 
 
There may in fact be people for whom the preventative model 
that we’re building on the community schools model will be 
very successful. I know it has been at the high school in . . . 
Nutana high school in Saskatoon. And of course in the last 
budget and in this budget we’ve continued support to develop 
integrated community schools at the high school level as well as 
the school level. 
 
So we very much have an in-community model of dealing with 
these issues as opposed to a sending-people-away-for-treatment 
model, because ultimately you have to live where you are. And 
sometimes treatment settings could be very artificial, although 
sometimes can play an important role in someone who’s going 
through a life change. 
 
But when you have very large numbers of children who are 
experiencing these difficulties, to send them all away is not 
necessarily the most viable treatment model. So I think we’ve 
consciously chosen a model that provides as many supports to 
young people as we can get on a school-based model. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I don’t 
disagree with the preventative model. However, when we look 
at the numbers of 3,300 that called the Help Line, the 
preventative model did not necessarily work. 
 
If you have 3,300 people that have called for help, and then 
what do we say? We’re going to let you go back into your own 
environment, let you live where you are. We have this panel of 
people that we’ll have and come and interview you at your 
school or place of residence, whether it be four or five different 
individuals that wish to come and talk to you about your 
problem. 
 
Well I think we really have to think about that. That doesn’t 
work. That’s why there was 3,300 people that called. They 
didn’t call to say, I hope you send somebody down and visit me 
because I think I have a problem. They’re calling because they 
have a problem. 
 
And so all I’m asking is, from the Department of Youth, if 
there’s something that could be designed or introduced that 
would direct one of these people that have a problem — they’ve 
identified it as a problem; that’s why the call the line, and who 
knows the extent of their problem — rather than just saying 
we’ll go back and re-prevent it. You can’t do that. The problem 
is already there; that’s why these people are calling. 
 
And again I’m looking at some place where these individuals 
can go — the Help Line, where does it go from the Help Line? 
— and if there’s something in the ministry of Youth that would 
direct these people, if they could have an entry point to say, 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

where do I go? 
 
And I know under the current philosophy is, if it’s drug related 
— the way I understand the system now — you go to your 
health district. Well some health districts are not able to deal 
with drug issues, let alone youth drug issues. 
 
(16:15) 
 
We also know that there’s no issue . . . or there’s no facilities 
for youth that are under 12 years of age. They actually go into 
the mental wing of a hospital at tremendous cost to the system 
because there’s nothing for youth. And it’s kind of like we’ve 
turned a blind eye to addiction and alcohol problems for youth 
that are under 13 years of age. And we know that’s not the case. 
We know that there’s individuals at the age of . . . as low as 10 
that have substance abuse problems. 
 
And so, although I appreciate what you’re saying, we want to 
stay with the preventative model. What I’m really asking for is 
if the Department of Youth will look at some way, some system 
within the Department of Youth that somebody with a drug or 
alcohol problem can have an entry point and then be directed — 
not back to where the problem exists, but to where they can go 
for some help. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, I would see our role that in 
being . . . in referring them on to the appropriate resource. 
Because if we start doing what the Department of Health and 
the health districts do, then everybody will be really confused. 
So I think it would be important that we would have the link 
that would link people to the service. And you make a very 
good point. And certainly as we move into developing our site, 
I’m sure that you’ve raised it to everyone’s attention that this is 
something that we should pay attention to. 
 
But I just will comment that there are services like Ranch Ehrlo 
that speak to some of the issues that you’re talking about. 
Whether there’s enough of them, I guess you can question. But 
I say, when there’s a deep level, as there are in some 
communities for historic and other reasons, you cannot deal 
with it by sending the whole community to a treatment centre. 
So there has to be other models of dealing with these things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee now 
report progress on Culture, Youth, and Recreation and proceed 
to estimates on Learning. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Learning to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
The officials with me today are Dr. Craig Dotson to my 
immediate right, the deputy minister of Learning; directly 
behind Craig is Lily Stonehouse, the assistant deputy minister 
of Learning; to my immediate left is Cal Kirby, the director of 
facilities planning. To the right of Craig Dotson is Brady 

Salloum, executive director, student financial assistance; behind 
Cal Kirby to my left is Gord Sisson, director, corporate 
services. Dr. John Biss is to my right and just behind Brady 
Salloum, executive director, student financial assistance. And of 
course John is executive director of university services. And at 
the back of the room behind the bar is Ms. Frances Bast, 
director, corporate services; and directly behind me is Wayne 
McElree, who is the assistant deputy minister of Learning. 
 
These are the officials for today, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, 
Minister, and your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena had suggested that there would be no 
questions outside . . . or in the K to 12 today, so feel free not to 
answer this. But I just wanted to bring it to your attention 
because I just spoke to this issue with the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation and it relates basically to youth. 
 
And I’m not sure if you heard my question on it or not but I’d 
just like to . . . a quick refresher of where I was going with the 
Minister of Youth and I want to do it in different departments. 
And it deals with the alcohol and drug abuse that is going on 
within our youth in the province. And I think we all agree that 
the educational aspects of the drug program entered into a 
school at an early age — and that can be debated at what age to 
bring it in — would help the problem. 
 
I think it’s been shown over the years where models have been 
used where drug education and alcohol education at the younger 
levels actually works. And this brings to my question about a 
Web-based program called Your Life: Your Choice. And my 
question, Mr. Minister, is if you or your staff have seen this 
program or if you are willing to answer the question on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly this particular 
Web-based program that he’s talking about we will look at and 
get back to him on that. I’m not aware of that particular 
program, so we will get back to the member opposite on that. 
 
What I would like to say with regard to issues of drug and 
alcohol abuse and starting at an early age, I think that this looks 
at the broader perspective with regard to society. But when we 
look at the initiatives that we have put forward, we certainly do 
have considerable amounts of drug and alcohol abuse 
throughout our K to 12 curriculum in terms of the perspectives 
that are provided from a society point of view. 
 
Our early childhood development program is a community 
development model and it is well on its way to addressing some 
of the . . . very much the particulars in high-risk 
neighbourhoods with regard to fetal alcohol syndrome, for 
example. When we look at the community partners and some of 
the agreements that have been signed to date on early childhood 
development initiatives, it really does . . . and I’m very hopeful 
that that particular community development initiative will be 
extremely important in eliminating fetal alcohol syndrome from 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re having positive reactions from communities throughout 
Saskatchewan. We are talking about having outreach home 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

 

visits, screening programs, in-hospital prenatal visitation. So 
that whole timeline from conception to our early learning and 
our pre-kindergarten programs are addressed specifically with 
regard to some of the problems we’ve been seeing in society 
related to alcohol abuse. 
 
So there are initiatives underway. But I can assure the member 
opposite that we will be looking at that Web-based program that 
he’s referred to and we’ll be getting back to him on that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I just 
want to just give you a little bit more of what this program is 
about, and you’ve answered my question so this is more of a 
statement. 
 
Your Life: Your Choice was recently chosen by the Canadian 
Centre for Substance Abuse as one of the best programs 
available for educating young people about alcohol abuse. If 
accepted as part of a provincial curriculum, it’s available at 
virtually no cost to students, parents, or teachers. In fact, this 
program has been accepted in a number of other Canadian 
provincial curriculums. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ll get more information for you on it, the 
actual Web site on it, and I would just ask that you take it under 
consideration as viewing it as a possible curriculum item for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 
welcome your officials here this afternoon and my questions 
will pertain to post-secondary education, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, both universities, the University of Saskatchewan 
and the University of Regina, are both undergoing the exercise 
of setting their budgets for the upcoming academic year. I 
believe the University of Saskatchewan, according to a recent 
publication On Campus News, they indicate that they may be 
finalizing their budget as early as tomorrow. 
 
I understand that there is still some negotiations going on with 
your department over the Saskatchewan university funding 
mechanism and I was . . . I guess my first question would be is 
where . . . what stage are those deliberations at and when can 
the universities expect a final decision? 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I may as well ask you to provide 
some . . . me with some information. I understand that this is the 
last of a three-year agreement or program. And could you 
provide me with the amount of funding under the . . . under this 
mechanism that was provided to each of our universities in the 
last two years. 
 
So if you could tell me where the discussions are with regards 
to this current year and how much money did each of the 
universities receive under this mechanism in the last two years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And to the member opposite, thank you for the question. 
 
Certainly when we talk about the setting of budgets, of course, 
between the universities and more specifically the funding 
mechanism for our universities, there is a process that has been 
involved with both universities for some time. And if we look 

at, for example, how this all started with the recommendations 
from the MacKay report and later DesRosiers and the funding 
formulas that DesRosiers outlined, that there has been 
negotiation and discussion between the universities and 
department officials for some time. 
 
There was agreement in terms of providing dollars on a 
phase-in basis that we will provide the member opposite with 
those numbers over the past three years — I don’t have them 
with me right here today — to indicate how that phase-in over 
those three years was provided. But he is correct in stating that 
this was the last year of the phase-in or catch-up related to the 
new university funding mechanism. 
 
(16:30) 
 
I would also like to point out that there is ongoing discussions. 
Consultations have occurred between both universities and 
department officials. The department has provided some 
options recently that are being reviewed by both universities. 
 
And I have had an opportunity to meet with the president of the 
University of Regina recently, and I will be meeting with the 
president of the University of Saskatchewan tomorrow in 
Saskatoon. And these are some issues that we will be 
discussing, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
But I believe that whatever that final resolution is that it will be 
a consensus agreement. And I believe that we are probably 
closer today than we ever have been in coming up with that 
agreement, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, if I heard you correctly you’re 
saying that the final decisions will be made within the very near 
future and then both universities will know the exact dollar 
amount as to what they can expect under this particular funding 
arrangement. And I know that both universities will be very 
happy to have the process concluded. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the estimates there’s an amount budgeted for 
universities, federated and affiliated colleges, and educational 
agencies, and this year that’s $221.368 million. I wonder if you 
could very briefly provide me with a . . . provide a breakdown 
of that number — how much are the two major universities 
going to receive out of that figure, and what the . . . where the 
remaining dollars will be allocated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And with regard to that specific budget line item of 
221,368,000, we’re looking at the universities’ total would be 
roughly 207 million of that. The federated colleges and 
affiliated colleges would be approximately 9 million of that. 
Then we have our Aboriginal and northern education funding of 
close to 5 million, and then there’s some miscellaneous with 
regard to, example, the Saskatchewan Institute of Public Policy 
for the balance of that 221 million. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, could you provide the breakdown 
on that 207 million. How much of that will be going to the U of 
R (University of Regina) and how much will be going to the U 
of S (University of Saskatchewan)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

With regards to the University of Regina, we’re looking at 
approximately 54 million for 2002-2003, but there will be some 
refinements once we have the final agreement on the funding 
mechanism. But that would be the ballpark. 
 
And the University of Saskatchewan would be in the range of 
153 million, again which will be subject to refinement once 
there’s an agreement on the overall funding mechanism. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I am told that the actual amount of 
money that’s available to both universities as a base operating 
grant, and the increase this year is approximately 2.3 per cent. I 
have in my hands here an On Campus News from the U of S 
and the headline reads: “U of S faces shortfall after 2.3 per cent 
provincial budget hike”. 
 
I know during the budget preparation the University of 
Saskatchewan provided your department with a document, 
Building a Nationally Competitive University, 2002-2003 
Operations Forecast. And in that document, I believe they 
talked about a . . . they needed a 5.7 per cent increase just to 
kind of keep doing the things they have been doing in the past. 
And then I believe they also indicated that . . . and they called 
that, I believe they referred to that as a sustaining budget. 
 
And then they also talked about an investment budget to 
achieve some of the . . . reach the goals and move the university 
forward so that it will remain a nationally competitive 
university. And I believe, if memory serves me, that they were 
talking more in the neighbourhood of 8 and 9 per cent increase 
in funding. 
 
I guess . . . I’ve heard President MacKinnon speak on several 
occasions and outline and articulate his vision of the university 
and I must say that I certainly find very little to disagree with in 
that vision. 
 
I guess the question is how . . . We know where we are, we 
know where we want to go. And the same applies to the 
University of Regina. They have a plan and it’s a very good 
plan but to enact that plan and to move down the road to reach 
the goal that they’ve set for themselves they need more than 2.3 
per cent in new money. 
 
Now that leads me to believe that we’ll be seeing some fairly 
significant increase in tuition fees in this upcoming year. 
Perhaps not of the magnitude that we saw last year, but still 
fairly significant increases, Mr. Minister. And these increases 
will come on top of, as I said, significant increases last year and 
significant increases the year before. This sends a pretty tough 
message to our students and our universities, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I realize, we all realize that Saskatchewan is in a bit of an 
economic difficulty and dollars are a bit tight and that sort of 
thing. And we’ve discussed the reasons why in this Assembly 
many times and I’m sure we will continue to discuss them. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, how do you answer the universities’ requests 
when they’re, you know . . . I feel they’re on the right track, I’m 
sure you do. And now as both universities have said, with a 2.3 
per cent increase, it’s going to make things pretty tough and 
they’re going to have to make some pretty tough choices, one 
being most likely a tuition fee increase. 

What kind of a message is your government sending with this 
type of an increase, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you. Thank you again 
very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. The member opposite did relay 
some good information with regard to their support, but also our 
support, for both the directions of the universities with their 
strategic plans. 
 
We believe that the University of Saskatchewan and the 
University of Regina have done a commendable job in working 
out strategic plans and business plans for their future. And 
we’re excited about the future of both universities. 
 
When we looked at the opportunities that have been provided 
by the visions of both presidents of both universities, we can 
see that there has been not only an improvement in the 
direction, but I think we can also see that there has been some 
significant uplifting in terms of the student population and staff 
morale at both campuses. 
 
I had an opportunity to visit the University of Regina today and 
had a chat with the vice-presidents of academic and 
administration. And they’re excited about their strategic plan; 
they’re excited about the future of the University of Regina; and 
they believe that they have a very good working plan. 
 
Also with regard to the funding mechanism and the funding that 
was provided in this budget: first off, last year the universities 
received a base grant increase for operating of 3.5 per cent, and 
then additional dollars with regards to phase 2 of the phase-in 
on the funding mechanism. This year the base was 2.3 per cent 
but there was also additional dollars provided, with regard to 
the funding mechanism, also additional dollars provided to the 
College of Medicine, an increase for Physical Therapy; there 
was also increased dollars provided for Nursing to expand their 
program. 
 
So the offshoot was that the numbers were actually closer to 
three and a half per cent in terms of the increase on the 
operating side. And both presidents on budget day indicated 
that they recognize the economic circumstances that the 
province was under at the time that it set its budget and believed 
that, obviously, that education was indeed a priority for this 
government considering that many departments did not receive 
any increase, and in fact some were rolled back. 
 
So the priority of the Department of Learning is to make sure 
that we do provide dollars. We’ve always felt that accessibility 
was important for students to our post-secondary system. 
 
And when we talk about tuition it’s my understanding that 
because of the increases that we have provided this year and the 
increases we provided last year, that the University of 
Saskatchewan has indicated that they won’t be proceeding with 
the 15 per cent increase in tuition but will be having a tuition 
increase probably less than 5 per cent which, considering that 
students were being faced with a 15 per cent increase, I think is 
quite a large improvement. 
 
The other thing to mention is that when we’re talking about 
tuition, it’s only one component in terms of the affordability of 
post-secondary education. We do have a very generous student 



May 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

 

financial package available to students in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We do have costs of living in both of the major 
urban centres in Saskatchewan that are considerably less than 
their competitors. 
 
And we also recognize that both universities have engaged in a 
policy of moving their tuition fees closer to the Canadian 
average norm. And that particular policy of moving tuition into 
a provincial average setting is one that the universities have 
engaged on, despite any grant improvements that we might 
provide. So we believe that is also the right policy to adopt. 
 
I understand that there will be some adjustments in terms of 
some professional colleges, upwards from that 5 per cent 
tuition, and I’m expecting that announcement in the near future. 
But I also recognize that there are some schools that have been 
having tuitions higher than their provincial averages that will 
also be rolled back with the upcoming announcement. 
 
So this is part of some strategic initiatives that both universities 
have adopted, but I believe — and I think the majority of people 
in the province of Saskatchewan would agree — that we do 
have affordable post-secondary education in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, seeing that our 
time is somewhat limited here this afternoon, I guess I’m just 
going to touch on a few areas and we will . . . sure we’ll have 
opportunity to come back to them at a future date. 
 
I’ve been in conversation with both universities and they tell me 
that they really haven’t got a whole lot . . . don’t know a whole 
lot about your new program to fund capital projects. They say 
there’s a real dearth of information from your department. They 
really have no news at all. And they are becoming somewhat 
apprehensive. 
 
They have a whole lot of projects that they would like to get 
underway and all those sorts of things. Your government has 
said you’re going to make $50 million available for capital 
construction in post-secondary education and they are certainly 
eager to access that money. 
 
I guess my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: when can the 
universities expect some details on that program? And could 
you briefly outline how the program will work for the 
universities and for all those involved in post-secondary 
education that may be able to access that funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. We 
are currently in the process of receiving the prioritized capital 
lists from both universities. It is our plan to look at those lists 
and then provide the very specific information to both 
universities. And we should have that available to them within 
the next two weeks, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I’ve discussed this new structure 
with you in our last session of estimates. I guess I will ask a 
question as it pertains to post-secondary education. 
 
Will the arrangement between the universities and the 

Department of Learning and this new Crown corporation, will it 
be the same as for those people involved in the K to 12 system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
The processes for priorizing capital projects within the 
post-secondary system and within the K to 12 system will be no 
different than they have been in the past. 
 
And we have made the commitment that there will be 50 
million available to the post-secondary sector with regards to 
capital this year, and the prioritization of those projects is not 
. . . is completely unchanged. And we have made the 
commitment that the component that the government would 
normally provide to universities and federated colleges is . . . 
will be the same. And that component will be fully covered off 
with dollars to cover the principal and interest payments, that 
will be provided to the universities from the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation. 
 
So really in terms of what projects will be approved, that 
process won’t change; that process has been in existence for 
some time in both the university sector and the K to 12 sector. 
And the dollars are obviously substantially increased and will 
allow for considerably more projects to be approved this year, 
because I think we’re looking at approximately a 65 per cent 
increase from the dollars available last year, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, I take it from your answer then 
that the universities and federated colleges when they access 
funds through this structure, they will be assuming the loan as 
such, and you . . . what you’re telling me . . . telling us is that 
you will be providing them with the money to make their 
interest payments and their principal payments. 
 
Could you provide some details as to what type of a term they 
may be looking at, if it’s over a period of five years, ten years, 
that sort of thing? And then I guess maybe I’ll just put this as a 
part of the question. Why wouldn’t you have structured it in 
such a manner that your department would assume the liability 
for the loan and loan the money or borrow the money from this 
new corporation, and thereby not adding additional liability and 
risk to the universities and federated colleges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
The period for amortization of these loans would depend on the 
particular project. If it is a new construction — a new university 
building, for example — that would probably be amortized over 
30 years. If it was for the purchase of a piece of capital 
equipment, the normal time frame would be to amortize that 
loan over a period of five years. 
 
Because the Crown corporation, the Education Infrastructure 
Financing Corporation is providing the funds to the university 
in the form of a loan . . . but it is in the form of a guaranteed 
loan. So the government is basically stating that they would 
incur any, obviously, infractions related to that in terms of the 
guarantee. But the asset that is created belongs to the 
independent institution. If that was a university, for example, 
they would own the asset. 
 
So what we’re saying is that the funds are provided in a 
guaranteed way, the asset belongs to the university, and the 
government will provide the dollars to pay the principal and the 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2002 

 

interest for acquiring that asset. 
 
So I think it really is a good way of allowing for not only a 
boost to our economy but for definitely needed with . . . 
providing needed infrastructure to our university campuses. 
And I think that the details, when they come out in terms of the 
amount of projects and the number of projects that will be 
approved in the very near future, will show that there will be 
some significant impacts in not only our universities but 
throughout the education facilities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I know when we discussed this in 
prior estimates, you indicated that you will be guaranteeing the 
loan, I guess, and those sorts of things. And, I mean, we on this 
side of the House don’t have a problem with this new structure. 
The only concern we have — and it’s been expressed to us by 
boards of educations and other people — that they feel that 
perhaps sometime down the road if this government should find 
themselves in an even tighter squeeze, that they’re concerned 
that this money will be coming from their traditional operating 
grant; that at one point in time that the budget line item may be 
erased because other municipal governments have seen that 
with budget line items. The rural municipalities — there was a 
budget line item for policing and it was there for one year and 
then it was gone. And that’s where the concern is. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this applies equally to boards of educations 
and to our universities and affiliated colleges. They’re asking 
for ironclad, I guess, guarantees. And what type of guarantees 
can you make to them that they don’t have to worry in the 
future that, in the case of boards of education, that the property 
tax owners . . . the property owners will have to pick up these 
additional payments because they have . . . because the boards 
of education have more liability? 
 
The same applies to the universities, that students may be asked 
for . . . are looking at higher tuition costs because there’s a 
breakdown in the structure of this financing proposal that 
you’re putting forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I can 
assure the member opposite that the commitment is solid, 100 
per cent. And we can say that in terms of, you know, our 
provision in terms of the General Revenue Fund to cover the 
principal and interest payments. 
 
But I also would indicate — and I think I’ve indicated this 
before — is that each one of these capital projects involves a 
signed agreement and it’s a binding agreement. And certainly 
when we commit to providing the dollars for a particular capital 
project in this way, that that commitment is 100 per cent solid. 
 
Certainly when we look at future years in terms of whether the 
same dollars might be available in a given year it may be more, 
it may be less. But certainly the dollars that are available this 
year will be accompanied by signed agreements for each project 
and the principal and interest payments will be covered. 
 
And I think we’re getting close to the end of our time, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, and I thank the member opposite for his 
questions today and also for the officials for providing the 
information. And we look forward to the next time we can 
debate estimates. 

Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


