















































Hansard: April 04, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 421 
 April 4, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby received: 
 

A petition asking for a reinstatement of reasonable annual 
deductibles to the Prescription Drug Plan; 
 
A petition concerning the serious conditions of Highway 
15; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional 
paper no. 7, 8, 11, and 18. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 19 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation: (1) what qualifications does Kathy Langlois 
hold in the field of water safety and water quality 
management to justify her being hired as a special advisor 
to the North Battleford Water Inquiry; (2) was the salary of 
Kathy Langlois charged against the cost of the North 
Battleford Water Inquiry; (3) how much was spent on the 
travel of Kathy Langlois in 2001; (4) to what account was 
the travel cost of Kathy Langlois charged; (5) did Kathy 
Langlois ever talk to the mayor or any resident of the city 
of North Battleford in the course of her duties as special 
advisor to the North Battleford Water Inquiry; and (6) if so, 
what are the names of the persons she spoke to and the 
dates of those meetings? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce, behind the bar on the opposition side, a visitor from 
Manitoba, Peter George Dyck, who is the MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) for Pembina and the caucus chairman for 
the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus in Manitoba. 
 
I would like to ask all members to welcome Mr. Dyck here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join the hon. member opposite in welcoming Mr. Dyck 
to the . . . back, welcoming him back to the Saskatchewan 
Assembly. I know that he’s been here before and has, as part of 
the participation in Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
events, been involved in rigorous debates right in the floor of 
this very Chamber. So from the government side, we’d like to 
welcome him back to Saskatchewan. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you a gentleman in 
your gallery, Mr. Jerry Ehalt. Jerry has been a former candidate 
for the Saskatchewan Party in Saskatoon Northwest and he’s 
been a tireless worker for his community. And I hope Jerry 
enjoys the proceedings this afternoon and please join me in 
welcoming Jerry to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Law Student to Clerk with the Supreme Court 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I 
stand today in proud support of many Aboriginal people that 
have accomplished many great things. We talk about Ted Nolan 
being the coach of the year in the NHL (National Hockey 
League) and we talk about the Saskatchewan person, Matthew 
Dunn, being a role model for Saskatchewan, for the entire 
nation. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, a member of the English River First 
Nation has been chosen to serve as a research assistant with the 
Supreme Court of Canada. Sacha Paul, the son of Ralph and 
Yvonne MacDonald-Paul, will begin a one-year term as a Clerk 
with the Supreme Court beginning in May 2003. Hundreds of 
law students apply every year for these few opportunities, Mr. 
Speaker, and Paul says he was not expecting to get this 
opportunity. Quote: 
 

“Talking shop with Supreme Court Justices was a bit 
intimidating and I thought my interviews went well, but not 
great,” he says. “To be honest, I almost fainted when I 
found out I had been chosen. It was really quite shocking.” 

 
Paul will graduate from law school in April and plans to article 
with the Winnipeg law firm of Thompson, Dorfman and 
Sweatman. He hopes to be called to the bar in June 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very, very proud of this individual, and I ask 
all members of the Assembly to stand with me and recognize 
the great work of Sacha Paul. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battleford-Cut Knife Constituents’ Son 
to Join Troops in Afghanistan 

 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another family in the 
Battleford-Cut Knife constituency feels the impact of the war in 
Afghanistan. 
 
Grant Eidem, the only son of Donna and Bob Abel of Unity, 
Saskatchewan was scheduled to fly out last Thursday. He has 
been on standby since November as part of the Princess 
Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry out of Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
Grant and his colleagues have been on a leave of absence to 
prepare for their mission since hearing about their departure 
only a few days earlier. There will be 130 people in Grant’s 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

company leaving to join 750 Canadians already there. 
 
I wish that all members of the legislature pray for Grant’s safety 
during his time in Afghanistan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grand Opening of Joint-Use Facility in Weyburn 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
draw attention to a grand opening ceremony in Weyburn. This 
morning I was on hand to represent the government at the event 
which marked the opening of the joint-use facility for Southeast 
Regional College and Weyburn Comprehensive High School. 
The joint-use facility highlights a new vision for learning in this 
province. Learning during one’s life does not only take place 
during formative and school-aged years, but rather it is a 
lifelong pursuit of self-improvement. 
 
The willingness of the community in Weyburn to work 
co-operatively with the Department of Education and 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, now the 
Department of Learning, and also with one another on this 
project illustrates that community’s commitment to lifelong 
learning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This two-phased project had several goals in mind. First, 
renovations had to be completed to create space for the high 
school students and regional college, and also to bring the 
complex up to existing fire codes. 
 
Another goal was increasing students’ access to technology, and 
to accomplish this a shared computer lab was added. A new 
band room was also created to meet students’ needs to be both 
intellectually and artistically stimulated. 
 
Phase 1 was completed in 1999 and phase 2 saw its completion 
in 2001. Being there this morning, Mr. Speaker, it’s looking 
great. 
 
This project clearly demonstrates the recognition of 
Saskatchewan residents that co-operation is the best way to 
accomplish goals. The project aptly provides needed space and 
facilities for students both young and old. The vision of the 
school board and the college and the community partners is to 
be truly commended. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North Battleford Water Inquiry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, if I hadn’t already resigned from 
this government, I certainly would today. My constituents are 
angry. 
 
The North Battleford Water Inquiry has been in the hands of the 
government for one week. So far no one else, including the 
mayor, has been allowed to see it. This high-handed treatment 
of the people of North Battleford by this government reached 
new lows today as it was revealed that the special advisor to the 
North Battleford Water Inquiry, who is being paid $111,000, 

never went to North Battleford. She was too busy attending 
conferences in places like Namibia. 
 
The minister says her attendance wasn’t necessary because the 
government had tons of people at the inquiry. And what were 
those tons of people doing, Mr. Speaker? They were trying to 
convince the commission that water problems in North 
Battleford and other communities are strictly the problem of 
municipalities and the government of this province has no 
responsibility. The provincial budget offered no help to any of 
the 50 communities with boil-water advisories and no help to 
North Battleford. 
 
The government is faced with a full-blown crisis. What is their 
response? To spend millions of dollars on an inquiry, fly people 
all over the world, and then plead poverty when they’re asked 
to help. 
 

Accomplishments of Campbell Collegiate Student 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview stood before you to speak 
about the academic accomplishments of one of his constituents. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I rise to acknowledge the athletic success 
of a young woman named Heather Brooks. 
 
Heather is a grade 12 student at Campbell Collegiate in Regina 
who is heavily involved in her two favourite sports — 
basketball and volleyball. Make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, this 
upstanding young woman is not only an athlete, she’s also a 
straight A student, placing her on the honour roll at Campbell 
Collegiate. 
 
Ms. Brooks recently accepted a scholarship to play volleyball at 
High Point University, an NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic 
Association) division 1 school located in North Carolina. The 
chance to play competitive sport at the next level is a dream that 
few athletes get to live, Mr. Speaker. And soon Heather Brooks 
will be living that dream. 
 
Heather’s sporting resume also includes a trip to the 2001 
Canada Summer Games in London, Ontario and a silver medal 
in women’s rowing from the Canada Cup. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Heather on her 
accomplishments in both academics and sport. She sets an 
example of hard work, dedication, and vision that all members 
should admire. 
 
We hope that Heather will follow her father’s footsteps and do 
as Dr. Harvey Brooks, deputy minister for Highways and 
Transportation, has done and bring her many gifts and abilities 
back to Saskatchewan after her graduation to help build this 
wonderful province. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join with me in 
congratulating Ms. Heather Brooks. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grow Saskatchewan Meeting in Northern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

 

today to announce to this honoured Assembly good news in 
regards to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last evening, April 3, people from the Lac La 
Ronge district attended a Grow Saskatchewan meeting in the 
town of Lac La Ronge to hear the good news of hope for 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Led by our leader from Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs were met with open arms by the 
citizens from the Lac La Ronge district, eager to meet and greet 
the next premier of Saskatchewan, the before-mentioned MLA 
from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party members who attended were from all 
across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And they were amazed and 
pleased that there is not the despair about economic possibilities 
that could be happening in northern Saskatchewan. Too often, 
in this House, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite paint a 
picture of doom and gloom of a segment of Saskatchewan that 
is incapable of managing their own affairs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, even though the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) members opposite will continue to paint a picture of 
hopelessness for northern Saskatchewan, members on this side 
of the House know that opportunity abounds in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night’s meeting — attended, I might add, by 
500 per cent more people than attended the member from 
Regina Centre’s meeting in Lac La Ronge — again reaffirmed 
the intestinal fortitude that prevails throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I would like to thank all 
those people who made last night’s meeting an overwhelming 
success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan First Call 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, a new toll free pipeline location 
hotline service known as Saskatchewan First Call will be in 
place this fall. The service will provide contractors planning to 
dig or excavate anywhere in the province a convenient way of 
completing a number of line location inquiries with a single 
call. 
 
This service will be developed with the Saskatchewan pipeline 
community, SaskEnergy, and its subsidiary, TransGas, and will 
reduce damage associated to underground facilities. This will be 
a valuable service to pipeline companies that have infrastructure 
but limited resources to notify their customers on a regular basis 
about existing facilities. 
 
This is another example of the people of Saskatchewan’s public 
industry serving the public good and helping to encourage more 
investment and expansion in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan First Call is therefore also an 
example of listening and positively responding to industry 
needs in this province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Accomplishments of Angus Robert Campbell Noted 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, and members please join me 
today in honouring the accomplishments of the late Angus 
Robert Campbell. Mr. Campbell was born in Swift Current, 
Saskatchewan in 1917. In 1925 he and his family moved to 
Kinistino where he continued his education. He resided in 
Kinistino until 1940 working on several farms. Winter months 
were spent logging in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1940 Angus moved to British Columbia where he was 
employed at the Vancouver Shipyards and the Hedley gold 
mine. He returned to Saskatchewan to farm after the war. 
 
In 1955, Mr. Campbell made history. He was the first employee 
of the Saskatchewan Bureau on Alcoholism. Mr. Campbell 
went on to serve as the director of community service for the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol Commission. 
 
He received wide recognition for his tireless efforts of helping 
families and individuals struggling with addictions. Among his 
many awards are the Saskatchewan Order of Merit and the 
Order of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise today and honour the late 
Angus Campbell. He not only served the people of my 
constituency, he served the people of this province. May his 
memory live on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Duties of Government Official 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Premier and I would ask the Premier to 
clarify the situation with Kathy Langlois, the former president 
of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. What 
position does Kathy Langlois hold in the Premier’s office and 
what is her salary? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will 
know — I assume he will know — from widely distributed 
press reports today that Ms. Langlois works in the cabinet 
planning unit, not in the Premier’s office. And through freedom 
of information publication brought to the attention of the media 
and the public, Ms. Langlois’s salary — I’m reading right from 
the freedom of information information — $110,976. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well so now 
we do know that she was hired by the Premier; that she is being 
paid $110,000 a year. We also understand from the 
government’s own documents that she was hired specifically to 
handle the North Battleford Water Inquiry. And she gets the 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

$110,000 for doing this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier tell us how many days Kathy 
Langlois spent in North Battleford while the water inquiry was 
being conducted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to be clear — and I can 
understand why the member opposite would not have this 
knowledge — but to be clear, senior public servants in this 
government, and I expect most governments, are put in place by 
the senior public servant of the province, that being deputy 
minister to the Premier. The deputy minister to the Premier will 
make decisions about hiring, roles, and responsibilities. Those 
decisions are then reported to me as Premier, particularly if they 
affect cabinet planning or Executive Council. 
 
In this case, Mr. Speaker, I am 100 per cent supportive of the 
deputy minister to the Premier and his decisions, and I am 
supportive in particular of Ms. Langlois’s work in this 
government. 
 
Now the question about Ms. Langlois’s role. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the question, Mr. Speaker, about 
Ms. Langlois’s role — deputy to the Premier, cabinet planning, 
assigned to Ms. Langlois the important responsibility of 
coordinating this government’s work and response and 
involvement with the North Battleford inquiry. And if the 
member wishes to read the freedom of information request he 
will see that clearly a part of her responsibility is to put together 
a strategy to move this province forward in dealing with the 
significant water issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. An 
individual hired at $110,000 per year specifically to be in 
charge of the North Battleford Water Inquiry but, but spending 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — But according to the government’s own 
documents, Mr. Speaker, we now know that Ms. Langlois spent 
zero days in North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, it makes you 
wonder what Ms. Langlois was doing in her capacity as the 
special adviser of the North Battleford Water Inquiry. 
 
Well as it turns out, in the year since Kathy Langlois was 
appointed to advise the Premier, she’s been busy. She’s been 
travelling — to Toronto, Ottawa, Newfoundland. But she didn’t 
travel to North Battleford once. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what matters relating to the North Battleford 
Water Inquiry did Ms. Langlois attend while she was travelling 
to Toronto, Ottawa, and Newfoundland? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . in this House for 15 years and this is 
about as cheap an attack on a public servant that I have heard 
since I came here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the member opposite seems 
to have the ability to stand in this House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite seems 
to have all the capacity in the world to read those prepared 
questions. No matter what the answer, he’ll get up and read the 
next prepared question — mark my words. 
 
Well I suggest that he take some time and read the information 
provided under freedom of information regarding Ms. 
Langlois’s responsibilities not only to this water file but to 
international work being taken on by Canada under the auspices 
of the federal government in Namibia. She’s representing our 
province and doing an excellent job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier then 
explain why in their own documents she is listed as the special 
adviser on the North Battleford Water Inquiry? Will he then 
explain why she wasn’t able to spend a single day in North 
Battleford? Will he then explain why, instead of being in North 
Battleford at least on a single occasion, she had all this time to 
travel all across the country, all across North America, but not 
one day to spend in North Battleford? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there will be many 
qualified individuals within the public service of Saskatchewan 
who carry more than one responsibility or the responsibility for 
more than one file. 
 
Ms. Langlois’s responsibility surrounding the North Battleford 
inquiry, as I have just said, was to coordinate the efforts of 
government, to coordinate the response of government, and 
more importantly, to begin to build the strategy to take us 
forward in this province. 
 
Now that role, Mr. Speaker, is not a legal role; it’s not a role 
that she should be sitting in the inquiry. We had the provincial 
lawyer there. It’s not a technical role. Ms. Langlois is not a 
technical expert. She is a managerial expert who can bring 
together strategy within government from Municipal 
Government, from Health, from Sask Water, from 
Environment. 
 
And on Friday of this week the people of Saskatchewan and 
members opposite will see the strategy that has been developed, 
much through the good work of Ms. Langlois. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well once again I would ask, I would 
ask the Premier how it is that he expects that his special adviser 
on the North Battleford Water Inquiry could stay connected to 
what was happening in North Battleford while she was 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

 

travelling all over North America — not only all over North 
America, Mr. Speaker, but she was travelling to Namibia in 
Africa as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier tell us what matters relating to the 
North Battleford Water Inquiry Kathy Langlois was attending 
in Namibia, Africa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As I have indicated there will be a 
number of public servants in this province who have the ability 
and the capacity to work on a number of important public issues 
in the province. When Ms. Langlois is in Namibia under the 
auspices of CIDA (Canadian International Development 
Agency), paid for by the federal government, is representing 
our province, our nation, in developing that important part of 
the world, Africa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know what’s going on here. There is no mystery 
about what’s going on here. It is the penchant of that party to 
take . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they take on public 
servants when they have no issues of their own to bring forward 
— public servants who have no mechanism of being able to 
defend themselves, Mr. Speaker. What . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Let’s try again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You see, Mr. Speaker, when they know 
they have no case, they shout — they shout, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me say again, Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of this 
opposition, if ever to occupy the benches of government, and 
we know it from their own quotes and I’ll be glad to share them 
with the House — I’ll be glad to share them — we know it’s the 
intention of this group of men and women, if they should 
occupy the benches of government ever, to attack the public 
service of Saskatchewan just as they are doing today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
can the Premier tell us if his special adviser on the North 
Battleford Water Inquiry will be in North Battleford tomorrow 
when the North Battleford inquiry report is released? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Ms. Langlois’s task, as I 
have outlined now I think on three occasions during this 
question period, was to work to coordinate the efforts of 
government and to work to help us in framing a water strategy 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That water strategy will be released as part of our response in 
North Battleford tomorrow, and Ms. Langlois will be there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health District Finances 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Health districts across 

this province are beginning the process of amalgamating into 
the new health service delivery regions as set out by the 
province. 
 
There will be many decisions that have to be made surrounding 
the logistics of bringing districts together, but one question that 
comes up repeatedly is how district deficits and accumulated 
debt will be handled. We know there are several existing 
districts that are running deficits in the last fiscal year. And 
there are districts in the past who have had to borrow to meet 
the needs of the health services in the district and are carrying 
long-term debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is the total deficit for the last 
fiscal year of all provincial health districts, and what is the total 
accumulated debt of these districts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the districts are completing 
their books for this year. The year-end was about three or four 
days ago. We’re gathering this information. 
 
I asked this very specific question this morning about how soon 
we could get that information, and it’s coming along very 
quickly because we have asked the districts in the past year to 
be very careful in managing the money in light of all of the 
financial difficulties that we’ve had in this particular year, and 
specifically as we prepared the budgets for next year. So what 
we are doing is working with the districts, working with the 
people to have all of the information available. 
 
What we’ve also said is that we are in a position to make sure 
that we have ongoing funding for this next year as set out in our 
budget. The whole issue of some of the district debt as comes 
forward in the amalgamated regional health authorities is an 
ongoing issue that we will be working with the people about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a 
recent post-budget meeting in Yorkton, the Deputy Premier was 
asked how the debt and deficits of health districts would be 
handled in the amalgamation process. 
 
He said, and I quote: 
 

Their deficit will be part of the overall debt of the province 
we’ll need to consolidate over time. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the NDP be taking over the overall deficit 
and accumulated debt of the health districts? If so, is the NDP 
just planning to absorb it into their fudge-it budget as part of the 
overall provincial debt, or will they use the increase in the 
health budget to cover it? What kind of jiggery-pokery are the 
NDP planning to play to hide this debt as well? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister specifically explain to this House 
what the NDP intends to do with the accumulated debt and last 
year’s deficits of the health districts? Will it be eaten up in this 
year’s budget increase or it will be added to the provincial 
growing debt? 
 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members 
opposite don’t know that the debts of the health districts are 
accounted for by the Provincial Auditor in the summary 
financial statements already, then there isn’t much that we can 
say to help the members opposite. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor has to 
look at the debts of the health districts and those are taken into 
account as part of the public debt. If the members don’t know 
that, they should know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say, because the members opposite like to talk 
about financial accountability, we should look at the record of 
this government and we should look at their record when their 
cousins were in office, Mr. Speaker. Because what this 
government has done, Mr. Speaker, is to produce timely public 
accounts earlier and earlier each year — summary financial 
statements which were brought in by this government, mid-year 
financial reports, and now quarterly financial reports, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We can contrast the record of this government on debt 
management with those people who one year, Mr. Speaker, 
never even produced a budget if you can believe that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the question on the minds of 
many health district CEOs (chief executive officer) and board 
members as the amalgamation process takes place: these 
districts have worked hard to stay within the confines of their 
existing budgets, and they’re concerned that after the 
amalgamation process their financial picture may be drastically 
changed by the debt load of other districts who have also 
struggled to meet the demands of the health services. 
 
So the NDP may well say, we’ll retire all the debt after this year 
and we’ll all start at zero. But then what about next year, Mr. 
Speaker? Year after year this NDP government has paid off the 
deficits of some health districts that they have found carrying 
and the message to other health districts is that it doesn’t really 
matter if you continue to carry or run up debt; it’ll all get wiped 
clean at the end of the day after all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do the CEOs of those districts who have 
worked so hard to balance their budgets reconcile to their 
front-line office people, their front-line health professionals, 
their front-line workers, the inconsistency of this government’s 
policy on wiping out the debt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I think what the people of the 
province are aware of is that when it comes to running up debt, 
the largest debt in the history of our province was run up by 
those people over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say this to the members opposite, that they talk a 
lot about debt. Debt comes in many forms. Sometimes there is 

debt to build hospitals, which may be amortized over time, or to 
buy equipment, which may be amortized over time. Sometimes 
there is debt that is operating debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The health districts are doing a good job, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide health services to the people of Saskatchewan. The 
government has reduced the amount of the public debt from 41 
per cent of the gross domestic product down to 23. 
 
And the important fact to note, Mr. Speaker, is we have gone 
from being one of the worst provinces in Canada when it comes 
to debt to being one of the best. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, we are 
now one of the best — no thanks to the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Negotiation of New Gaming Agreement 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming. Yesterday the minister refused to provide 
answers to our questions about the new gaming agreement 
being negotiated. By avoiding the issue, the minister has done 
nothing to raise public confidence that the new deal will be 
good for the First Nations people or for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the same government that mishandled the gaming issue 
when the SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) 
scandal was revealed two years ago. They let things get totally 
out of control before taking any action. Now we hear the NDP 
is negotiating a new 25-year agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should the public now trust the NDP to 
negotiate a new deal when they’ve mismanaged gaming in the 
past and they refuse to answer questions about negotiations 
now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
guess I should . . . I can’t understand why the opposition 
continues to attack our First Nations community with whom we 
are negotiating. Negotiations are underway; we have confidence 
in our negotiations and our negotiating team. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when that agreement is arrived at, everybody 
will see what kind of an arrangement we have reached with our 
partners, the First Nations community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — This is not an attack on First Nations. This is 
safeguarding the dollars that are supposed to go to First Nations 
but . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, there are still many questions 
about the police investigation into the activities of former SIGA 
members. There are questions about the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority’s role in the events as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister assure the public of 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

 

Saskatchewan that no one negotiating this agreement for SIGA 
or the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), and 
no one negotiating on behalf of the provincial government is or 
was in any way involved with the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) investigation into the SIGA scandal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again I 
would like to just remind this House, and the public that’s 
listening, and our partners, what occurred in early 2000 when 
the province was involved in negotiations with the FSIN to 
renew an agreement. 
 
When irregularities came to light in the SIGA issue, this 
government acted swiftly to suspend those negotiations — to 
suspend those negotiations — and supported the Provincial 
Auditor’s request for a formal investigation into SIGA. Mr. 
Speaker, this was carried out. Everything was above-board. 
 
When the auditor reported his findings, this government laid out 
specific progress benchmarks for SIGA in November 2000, and 
stated we would not go back to the table until those high 
benchmarks were met. 
 
Well I’m happy to say, Mr. Speaker, they were met. We have 
confidence in our negotiating teams, we have confidence in our 
partners, and I still can’t believe that the opposition, after the 
leader . . . after the leader is saying gaming will certainly play 
an important role in . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North Battleford Water Inquiry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government has 
had the North Battleford Water Inquiry report for a full week. 
No one else will be allowed to see it until tomorrow. The city of 
North Battleford didn’t even know about the person hired as 
special adviser to the inquiry. And it’s no wonder. She never 
went to North Battleford. She was too busy in Africa. 
 
My question to the minister: what expertise does Ms. Langlois 
have in the area of water treatment to justify her being hired for 
this position? Has she ever spoken to the mayor of North 
Battleford or anyone else in North Battleford about the water 
crisis? Will she be attending the meeting this afternoon with the 
council of the city of North Battleford? Is she willing to finally 
face the people of North Battleford who lived through the 
tainted water crisis and who are paying her $111,000 salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This, Mr. Speaker, is the height of 
hypocrisy. There is the member, there is the one member of this 
House who said we should not have an inquiry in North 
Battleford, who maintains to this day that position — we should 
not have an inquiry; we should not get to the root of what 
happened in North Battleford; we should not learn from what 
happened in North Battleford for the benefit of all 
Saskatchewan people and all communities. 
 
No. He said, don’t have an inquiry — and now the hypocrisy 
and the gall to stand in this House and make accusations against 
a valuable public servant in this province when he didn’t even 

want the inquiry in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, what I said was if the people of 
North Battleford had their choice of spending millions of 
dollars on an inquiry and nothing to fix their water treatment 
plant or millions of dollars on their water treatment and not an 
inquiry, they would choose to fix the problem. That’s what I 
said. 
 
The height of hypocrisy is a government prepared to spend 
millions of dollars on an inquiry, millions of dollars on a special 
adviser to North Battleford who never goes to North Battleford 
and then — and then — when they ask for help to fix the 
problem say, oh I’m sorry, we’ve got no cash. 
 
In view of the nearly 50 communities in this province with 
boil-water advisories, my question for the Premier: when is he 
going to start taking the water crisis seriously? When is he 
going to accept that this problem is not going to be solved by 
bureaucratic desk shuffling, by inquiries, by flying people 
around the world? It’s going to be solved by giving 
municipalities the tools to correct water treatment deficiencies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I sometimes, you know, think that we 
should put that member in charge of revenues here — they 
expand by the moment in his comments. Now we’ve spent 
millions on the inquiry and we’ve spent millions on the staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the inquiry, to my understanding, will cost about 
$1.8 million. A lot of money, Mr. Speaker, a lot of money, but 
money well spent because through this work of Justice Laing, 
and I hope he’s not . . . and I hope now he’s not attacking 
Justice Laing and his work. 
 
What is being accomplished through this work and through the 
money spent is to get a thorough understanding of what 
transpired in North Battleford— a clear picture of those issues 
which face us as a province. I am convinced that all will share 
some cause for concern here — municipal, provincial, federal. 
 
That money, in my view, Mr. Speaker, and the staff that’s taken 
to do this work is money well spent for the long-term future of 
drinking water in this province. And I don’t much care what the 
member from North Battleford says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — If the 2 million spent on inquiry actually leads 
to some action besides bureaucratic desk shuffling, then yes, it 
will have some value. But if it’s not going to lead to anything 
more than giving somebody a job fresh from the Dosenberger 
scandal, then I say it has not accomplished what needs to be 
done to correct the water problems of North Battleford and the 
50 other communities of this province. 
 
I ask the Premier: why has he sat on this report for a week? 
Why will the city of North Battleford and the mayor not see this 
report until tomorrow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I am confused. For a man who 
didn’t want the inquiry, now he wonders why I’m sitting on it. 
Now I think though, in this question period alone, we’ve 
convinced him of the worth of it. 
 
What I guess I have not convinced him of is this absolutely 
inappropriate attack on a public servant again we heard in his 
last question. I did not know that member had joined the 
philosophy of the large opposition over there. 
 
And while I’m on the question of the large opposition over 
there, the Leader of the Opposition may want to explain, may 
want to explain his comments about the public servants of 
Saskatchewan where he said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, the 
Leader of the Opposition said: 
 

Before I agreed to run for the leadership, I asked the 
MLAs, (the other ones over there), do you know who . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. There ought to be some 
relevance to the question in the answer. I rule the Premier out of 
order . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, for a 
personal statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Resignation of the Member of the Legislative Assembly 
for Kindersley 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can’t 
help but notice, outside today it’s cool but spring is close at 
hand and with spring comes renewal and change. And over the 
last number of weeks, I’ve had to reconsider my future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With the support of my family and my colleagues, I’ve decided 
to step down as MLA for Kindersley. It’s been a pleasure to 
have represented the people of the Kindersley constituency for 
the last number of years. 
 
My decision is strictly a personal one, and as one of the first 
Sask Party members I continue to wholeheartedly support the 
Sask Party and, in particular, the Leader of the Official 
Opposition. I think the Sask Party and the Leader of the Official 
Opposition will make a great premier and a great and 
long-lasting government for the people of our province. My 
departure should not be interpreted in any other fashion and I 
would urge civility with respect to that. I’m a committed Sask 
Party member and always will be. Our leader has asked if I 
would stay on with respect to the party’s election readiness 
team and I’ve accepted that invitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, politics at times can be a bit of a 
rough-and-tumble sport and can wear on you, as all members 
here would know. I certainly would want to thank many people 

here, this afternoon: my family for their continued support, my 
caucus, my leader, my constituency. 
 
And I would certainly appeal to the Premier opposite to call a 
by-election, or I guess a general election, soon so that the 
people of the good constituency of Kindersley can be 
represented as soon as possible. I would hope that the Premier 
would agree with me that that constituency certainly deserves 
representation as soon as we can arrange for that to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good folks of the Sask Party and the 
constituency of Kindersley nominated a young man last night 
with my full support, a young man by the name of Jason 
Dearborn, and I believe he will make a great representative for 
us in the by-election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been my honour and my pleasure to have been 
here over the years and I wish to thank everyone in the 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 
respond to the member’s personal statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today with regret over the fact that we are losing a very 
esteemed MLA. 
 
During the nearly five years of existence of the Saskatchewan 
Party this is the first time we’ve seen the departure of a 
colleague. And, of course, it’s a time when we have a deep 
sense of loss, but also a deep sense of appreciation for a 
member who has served, not just his party and his colleagues 
well, but has served the province of Saskatchewan extremely 
well. 
 
I want to particularly thank the hon. member for Kindersley for 
the service that he has provided in so many areas, beginning 
with his service to the residents of Kindersley who I know, 
having also served that area federally for quite some time, felt 
they were well represented by their MLA. 
 
I want to thank the member for the 11 years that he has given to 
the province of Saskatchewan. It is not easy to make a 
commitment of 11 years out of your life to serve in such a 
public way, and the member has done that splendidly. 
 
I want to thank the member for being a driving force behind the 
creation of the Saskatchewan Party. There would not be 26 of 
us sitting here on this side of the House had it not been for the 
work of the hon. member for Kindersley. 
 
I want to thank him for being an effective MLA regardless of 
his responsibility, and he has held many responsibilities, and he 
has done an excellent job at everything that he has endeavoured 
or embarked upon. And I also want to thank the hon. member 
for being such an advocate of agriculture, the current role that 
he is playing and has fulfilled with excellence. 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

 

I also want to thank the member for being a family minded 
man. I want to thank his family, his wife, Lynn, and his 
children, Regan and Shari, for allowing him to serve for so 
many years. Those of us who have families know the sacrifices 
that are made and the support that is required of family, and we 
particularly appreciate the member’s family and the support that 
they have been to him. 
 
We thank him for being a business minded representative of the 
legislature, and also being community minded as I know his 
community of Eston appreciates. There are many characteristics 
that you would associate with my colleague and friend. Of 
course we’re all called hon. members, and certainly honourable 
is a suiting adjective to describe the member. But you can add 
integrity, you can add ability, versatility, determination, and a 
doer, not just a talker. 
 
Speaking of talking, we all know that he’s an excellent and has 
been an excellent orator. His verbal gymnastics are of 
Olympian proportion. And as the members opposite have 
witnessed many times, they’ve seen many gold medal 
performances by the hon. member for Kindersley over the 
years. 
 
I know I’ve but scratched the surface and I won’t speak longer 
but I also want to say that I personally want to thank the 
member as a colleague and a personal friend, for the support he 
has provided me as a new leader. His experience has been 
invaluable to me. I have felt he has not only been a colleague in 
the legislature but a personal supporter, and for that I am deeply 
appreciative and thankful, and I know that he will continue to 
work with us in a non-elected role. 
 
So if I might, Mr. Speaker, just bend the rules a little bit, I 
would like to thank the hon. member from Kindersley, Mr. Bill 
Boyd, for his excellent career in politics in Saskatchewan, his 
service as a MLA to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
say a few words on behalf of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Just . . . I know that . . . with leave is . . . 
Leave granted. Thank you. I just didn’t want to get called on it, 
Mr. House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m going to start again, Mr. 
Speaker. This is very much a place of emotion. Some days 
laughter and some days sadness. And I have to say that for me 
this is a day of sadness. 
 
The member from Kindersley has served this place with 
integrity and ability, and I think no one can question that. I 
haven’t always agreed with the positions he has taken, but I 
have always been very much aware of his abilities to put forth a 
very strong case. My colleague had indicated sometimes not 
only a strong case, but done in a sort of a marathon. His 
speeches can get somewhat lengthy here. 
 
I want to thank the member from Kindersley for his service to 
this province and to his constituents. I know that his goal here 
was to make Saskatchewan a better place, and I think he has 

done that, in that critique of government’s positions is always 
important because I do think it strengthens public policy. 
 
And I want to say just upon a personal note that, Bill, we’re 
going to miss you. You’ve added colour and, as I’ve said, 
ability and integrity. This place will not be the same without 
you. And I will always remember, as my colleagues will, the 
hours that we spent together trying to build a stronger province. 
 
So, Bill, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to also add to the 
comments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to rise on behalf of the 25 
other members on this side of the House to add to the comments 
of the Leader of the Opposition and the House Leader of the 
government. 
 
I do want to make some comments on behalf of five people 
within this caucus — the member for Humboldt, the member 
for Kelvington-Wadena, the member for Saltcoats, the member 
for Melfort-Tisdale, and myself. 
 
We were that group of elected officials back in 1995 for the first 
time appearing in this Legislative Assembly as members of the 
Liberal Party. And we quickly recognized the skills that the 
member for Kindersley had. Not only the skills as the member 
for Rosetown-Biggar has indicated, strong orator skills, strong 
leadership skills, strong ability to see, to see the big picture, to 
understand the issues, the controversial issues that were facing 
our caucus and to be able to look at the big picture, and I want 
to thank him for that type of leadership that he showed to us. 
 
As we moved through 1996 and 1997, it became obvious that 
we were going to form together to form a body that represented 
what we believe the majority of people in Saskatchewan . . . as 
a party that would represent non-socialist opinions and would 
move forward. 
 
And I want to thank the member for setting aside that leadership 
role that he had played within the Progressive Conservative 
Party to say that for the success of the Saskatchewan Party there 
had to be someone different than the Leader of the Progressive 
Conservative Party or the Leader of the Liberal Party. And 
that’s a tribute to him. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that all of us, all of us will 
leave this Legislative Assembly at one time or another and we 
can all hope that the legacy that we would leave behind is the 
kind of legacy that the member for Kindersley is so proud of, 
and that we are so proud of the legacy that he has left behind in 
this Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — By leave to respond, Mr. Speaker. 
 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider myself 
privileged to be able also to join in the tributes to a member I 
think we all recognize as talented and skilled and, yes, 
entertaining. 
 
The legislature, as the Leader of the Opposition has noticed, has 
also lost its premier advocate for prairie agriculture. And that is 
a position that is going to be sorely missed, as we know that the 
member for Kindersley could be counted first and foremost 
among our membership to speak for the needs of western 
farmers no matter what their political stripe. 
 
His political skill, I think, also will go down in the history of 
our province. In 1995, by all the rules of the game, they should 
have disappeared. And I think it was largely due to his talent 
and his skill that what appeared to be an irrevocable verdict 
against him was turned on its head. And for that he will enter 
the history books of the political history of Saskatchewan. 
 
He was a formidable adversary, and I know that all Liberals in 
this province would want me to wish him well as I do, to wish 
him bon voyage. As the member for Canora-Pelly said, we all 
must leave here at some time. And may we, like him, leave with 
our honour and integrity intact and with the support of our 
constituents very much intact as I know he does. 
 
I wish him well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — With leave, to comment on the resignation 
announcement of the member from Kindersley. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in my spot 
today to comment on the member’s resignation announcement 
on behalf of the number of Sask Party MLAs that were first 
elected in the 1999 general election. 
 
The member from Kindersley, frankly, stunned us today when 
he informed us of his decision. For the first time in my 
legislative career I was speechless. And I guess that was why I 
was given the opportunity to comment in the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have come to count on the member from 
Kindersley as a capable speaker and an insightful political 
mind. We counted on him for his experience, much of it gained 
through the school of hard political knocks. We as rookies 
counted on him for his honesty and integrity to guide us through 
unchartered political waters. We counted on his good humour 
and storytelling ability to bring levity to almost any gathering. 
We counted on him to bring his considerable influence to bear 
in favour of the Saskatchewan Party team. And we also counted 
on him to eviscerate our arguments when they couldn’t stand up 
to scrutiny. 
 
Today we are counting on him to have made the right decision 
for himself and his family, no matter how difficult the decision 
was or how uncomprehending of it we may be today. 
 

(14:30) 
 
The member from Kindersley played a role in my own personal 
decision to enter the political realm. He didn’t know that until 
just a few hours ago. How did he influence my decision, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
I watched the member struggle against insurmountable odds to 
salvage almost single-handedly a party that was on the edge of 
dissemination in the 1995 election. I admired from afar the 
decisive and honest way he handled subsequent bad news and 
political adversity. I was encouraged by his presence to 
consider the political realm as one where honour could be 
restored, and I was propelled into action politically when I 
witnessed him unwillingly put his leadership aside for a greater 
political purpose — the establishment of the Saskatchewan 
Party as a new and promising entity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve only actually known the member from 
Kindersley for a short time and I’ve only ever questioned his 
judgment once — and that’s when he supported somebody else 
in a nomination process. But we got over that and established a 
very firm and, I believe, lasting friendship. 
 
We campaigned together briefly in the northern part of my 
constituency, which borders the constituency of Kindersley, and 
where I knew the member’s reputation would stand me in good 
stead, and I took advantage of his willingness to help me at that 
point. 
 
Informally around here the member from Kindersley became 
the leader of what we jokingly refer to as the southwest 
Saskatchewan caucus. 
 
Today we say farewell to the member from Kindersley. We say 
farewell to an outstanding member of the Saskatchewan Party 
team. We say farewell to a man that is the example of what 
conviction and determination can accomplish. We say farewell 
to him as a colleague of incomparable capability. But most 
significantly, Mr. Speaker, we say farewell to him as our friend. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, we wish him well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to respond. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we’ve already heard 
there comes a time when you kind of sit back and you think and 
you look over your team, and you start to begin to look forward 
to another election and you wonder will the team be together or 
will some team members have chosen a different path. 
Sometimes those choices aren’t easy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as one of the members who was elected prior to 
1991 — I guess the longest serving on this side of the Assembly 
at this time — I had the privilege of meeting the member from 
Kindersley when he was sent to my office, and I was supposed 
to encourage him to seek a nomination, and let him know how 
good it was to be a member in public life. 
 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

 

And I think I was frank enough to indicate that yes, there’s a lot 
of positive and joyful experiences, but there’s some difficulties, 
and some of those arise when we think of young families. 
 
And the member from Kindersley let his name stand with a very 
young family at that time, as I did at the moment that I entered 
politics. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t anyone in this Assembly who 
does not appreciate what members give up. I think . . . I look 
around. It doesn’t matter what your political stripe is, there’s 
some of the things you miss. 
 
The member from Kindersley missed Shari’s hockey games, 
missed Regan’s sports activities, and many activities at school, 
like we all do. But as well, the member from Kindersley also 
realized that he had . . . and we saw in him an individual who 
had the ability to play an integral role in the development of our 
province. 
 
In 1991 the member from Kindersley was elected the MLA for 
Kindersley. In 1994 he accepted the leadership of the PC Party 
of Saskatchewan, and I’m sure at that time had he known what 
was coming down the road, he probably would have walked 
away — or he’d have run away. 
 
In 1995 he went into a general election, as we’ve referred to 
already, I would have to say almost as . . . the vision would be 
of the dark days of World War II. The PC Party was facing a 
real struggle. 
 
But I’m reminded of the words of a great leader of the British 
nation, Winston Churchill, when he said, never, never give up. 
And the member from Kindersley exemplified . . . he didn’t 
give up. 
 
Through adversity, he moved forward. He brought a team 
behind him — a team that worked with him. And as a result of 
that team, and as a result of the election of 1995, and then the 
political process in 1997, the formation of a clear alternative in 
this province to what the NDP offered — a clear alternative on 
the right, centre right, of the political spectrum — in the 
formation of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that we will miss the wit and the 
humour of the member from Kindersley. I know we will miss it 
in our caucus, and I don’t question the fact that there isn’t a 
member in this Assembly that will not miss that wit and 
humour. 
 
But on behalf of my colleagues, on behalf of all members, we 
want to wish the member well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could — Bill, we pray God’s blessing on you, 
on your wife, Lynn, your daughter, Shari, your son, Regan, and 
on all the future decisions and the changes you make at this 
time. And you know we will be there to support you. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I request 
permission to table responses to written questions no. 36 
through 42. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to questions 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
41, and 42 have been tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was 
speaking from the perspective of my constituents with respect 
to the provincial budget, and certainly there are more remarks 
that could be made in that regard on behalf of the people of 
Swift Current in respect to the budget. 
 
I had the occasion actually to talk to a senior, for example, just 
yesterday on the way home, who was concerned about the 
impact of the budget on her and her husband vis-à-vis the drug 
plan and the increase in long-term care fees that they face. She 
was, for example, concerned that she would now be unable to 
afford her car and supporting that car which she used to visit 
her husband in the long-term care facility, the Palliser Regional 
Care Centre, in Swift Current. 
 
And I was also going to go into some . . . a good deal of 
concern that we have on this side about the sustainability of the 
budget and the fact that clearly this is a deficit budget and a 
major departure from what we have seen from the governments 
of Mr. Romanow. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, there is . . . It’s beyond my ability 
to add or detract, frankly, to the words that were spoken in 
support of the amendment currently before the Assembly by my 
very good friend, the member for Kindersley, ironically enough. 
And so, I just would like to say that it’s with his example in 
mind and his friendship in mind that I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
it will be an unqualified honour to support the amendment put 
forward by the opposition and seconded by the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
address some of my comments this afternoon concerning The 
Balanced Budget Act. This Balanced Budget Act, Mr. Speaker, 
was passed in 1995 and I believe the then-premier, Roy 
Romanow, and Finance minister Janice MacKinnon would say 
it was the most important legacy of their government and their 
administration. 
 
And it was designed and intended to ensure that we would 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

never again fall into the trap we fell into in the ’80s of spiralling 
deficits — deficits not properly accounted for, deficits using 
money shifting willy-nilly between the Crowns and General 
Revenue Fund, with no rhyme nor reason except to cover up the 
true state of the province’s finances. 
 
And we recall that in the 1980s the Crown corporations 
sometimes paid dividends to the General Revenue Fund which 
were financed by debt, in other words money that wasn’t there. 
 
Well unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this year we see record 
transfers from the Crown corporations to the General Revenue 
Fund, which negates the sale of the Cameco shares that were 
supposed to be used to pay down debt but in effect have been 
used into the General Revenue Fund. 
 
The Balanced Budget Act was to have been the legacy of the 
government which took over a desperate financial situation in 
this province in 1991, and they were determined after it was 
corrected that it would never happen again. 
 
What a bitter irony, Mr. Speaker, it must be for the members of 
that administration to now see that that legacy has been undone, 
and that legacy has been undone not by some resurrected Tory 
Party, not by some recycled Devine politician, it has been 
sabotaged by the New Democratic Party. And I think that must 
be a matter of extreme sorrow to those who brought this in. 
 
It is also a tragic irony for the people of Saskatchewan who 
tried to deal with the debt situation at considerable sacrifice. We 
all know about the 52 closed hospitals. We all know about the 
declining state of our public roads and the whole of the public 
infrastructure of this province. We know that the deficit of this 
province was dealt with through a great sacrifice of all of the 
residents of this province and not just of our government. We 
had hoped that we had turned the corner. 
 
Well if we look at the balanced budget legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
what we find is, first of all, if there is an unforeseen 
circumstance — an unanticipated event as the Act says — 
which means that the budget tips into deficit, the Minister of 
Finance is to tell us what that event is and to lay a plan on the 
table for dealing with it. 
 
Well this last several months, Mr. Speaker, we have been 
treated to several talks from the Minister of Finance and of 
others identifying September 11 as that unanticipated event. 
September 11 was, to be sure, a tragedy and unanticipated. 
However I would respectfully submit that its impact on the 
finances of the province of Saskatchewan was minimal. In any 
event, the government cannot have it both ways. 
 
If it is saying that the softwood lumber dispute and September 
11 have adversely affected the province’s finances and tipped 
us into deficit, then the Minister of Finance is required to lay a 
report on the table identifying that situation and what he will do 
about it. 
 
And if he is not saying that this is a circumstance which could 
. . . twisted us into deficit and into debt, then why are they 
continually bringing up those excuses? The same applies to the 
drought situation on the farm last year. 
 

The Act, Mr. Speaker, goes on to say that for purposes of 
determining whether or not we are in a deficit, it is necessary to 
use the existing accounting rules. And should those accounting 
rules be changed, the Minister of Finance is required to use the 
previous rules in order to report to the legislature whether or not 
we are in deficit. 
 
Now what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? Well specifically 
regarding the 90 million of capital expenditure for schools, that 
is required to be shown on this year’s balance sheet. If the 
Minister of Finance chooses to take it out of the financial 
statements, so be it. But he must include it in this year’s 
statements for the purpose of reporting whether or not we are in 
deficit. That’s what this legislation says. And the government is 
not following its own legislation, its own legacy, when it 
ignores that. 
 
(14:45) 
 
The Minister of Finance has tried to frame the debate around 
the issue of whether or not building schools is a good thing. 
And course, he says, building schools is a good thing. I doubt 
anyone would disagree with him. 
 
However all of government is a question of balance, is a 
question of what the province can afford over what the province 
wants in terms of services. We want certain services; we have 
only so much tax base. 
 
And what we know, Mr. Speaker, is that because our tax base 
has been shrinking because there has been so little economic 
development in this province, that our capacity to keep a 
modern infrastructure has been severely compromised. 
 
But in The Balanced Budget Act, the Minister of Finance, if he 
wants to change the accounting rules, he can do so. But he has 
to use the existing rules when he reports to the legislature. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, the desperate need this province 
has for a summary financial statement, one that encapsulates the 
entire financial situation of our province in terms of public 
finances, both the General Revenue Fund and the Crown 
corporations. We know that many times in the past money has 
shifted back and forth as a sort of shell game. And I respectfully 
submit that is what is happening this year. 
 
Only when we have a financial statement which integrates the 
total public finances of the province into one coherent 
statement, can we see at a glance exactly where the government 
and province of Saskatchewan stands. This the Minister of 
Finance refuses to do. And we will not have open and 
transparent accounting until we get that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most provinces in Canada already have that — it’s 
seven of the ten — only three do not. And it is particularly 
noticeable that one of the provinces that does not have it, 
namely our own, is a province in which approximately 40 per 
cent of the activity of the public sector is done by the Crown 
corporations. So that is close to half then of the total of 
government activity is outside of the budget, outside of the 
financial statements. 
 
Now this year we have taken the construction of schools outside 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

 

the financial statements. 
 
So the financial statements simply do not give us a full and 
complete picture. Until we have that, the people of 
Saskatchewan will be unable to make reasoned, fully informed 
decisions as to what expenditures they want from their 
government and how much our tax base can afford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been called for by the Provincial Auditor. 
It is accepted by seven of our sister provinces; there is simply 
no good reason why it should not be accepted here. 
 
I said before that I consider it tragic that The Balanced Budget 
Act — perhaps the single greatest legacy of the Romanow 
administration — has been undone by his own party, but I 
wonder how members of the opposition feel as they consider 
the prospect that they may someday be government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Balanced Budget Act was put in place so that 
if some future government wanted to play jiggery-pokery with 
the books, they would be prevented from so doing by this Act. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Party need not be concerned about The 
Balanced Budget Act should they form the government of this 
province. The Act has been effectively sabotaged. Effectively it 
does not exist, because we now have a government of 
Saskatchewan which simply ignores the Act and pretends it 
isn’t there. 
 
And when the Minister of Finance has said . . . is asked why 
don’t you account for school construction according to the rules 
laid down in The Balanced Budget Act, he says what’s your 
problem, are you against building schools. 
 
Well, we all know, Mr. Speaker, the real problem, the real 
problem is that we have failed to grow our tax base. 
 
The government has pointed out to us on many occasions that 
the reason we have lost so many working people in this 
province is because of the decline in the ag sector in these past 
years of great challenge on the farm. They are correct in that. 
They are also correct when they point out that the decline in the 
number of persons working in the farm sector has occurred in 
other provinces and states. 
 
However, tragically the big difference between ourselves and 
other provinces and states is that in other provinces as the farm 
sector has been able to employ fewer people, other sectors of 
the economy have sufficiently grown to take up this slack. 
 
Tragically as our farm sector has contracted by 12 or 13 per 
cent, there has been no other alternate economy for those people 
to go to within the province and they have been forced to seek 
opportunities elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was a member of the government, it was 
decided to bring in a 25 per cent rebate on education tax on 
farmland. This was to in some small way recognize that in this 
province, farmers pay a disproportionate cost of education as 
compared with any other province. 
 
Farmland, or land generally, pays a higher percentage of school 
tax, the cost of education, than in any other province of this 

country. So because we use the land tax base to fund education 
more here than anywhere else, this means that education falls 
disproportionately on our farm population. 
 
Well we were going to try and deal with that in some small 
way. And I’m sorry to see that the government has removed 
that this time. It would seem to be a clear indication that there is 
no strategy for the government to try to win back farm support, 
that they have simply written off that vote for the next election. 
 
I think that we need to move away from the property tax base 
for the funding of education. Property tax is outmoded and 
unfair. We need to move to a fairer system of taxation to fund 
our education system. 
 
And one of the reasons we need to do that, Mr. Speaker, is that 
the property tax base is turning some of our rural population 
against education because as they see a higher and higher 
property tax bill to fund education at a time when in the rural 
areas there are fewer and fewer students and fewer and fewer 
schools, they become angry about the very real needs of 
education. And I understand their feelings. However, ultimately 
we all know that the future of our province, the future of our 
young people depends on a strong education system. But that 
education system can no longer continue to be funded solely on 
the backs of property owners. 
 
I said that what is ultimately needed is to grow our tax base, Mr. 
Speaker. What we need are plans. For instance, what about a 
north-south corridor? We know that Alberta is developing a 
north-south corridor. We know that 6 to 700 kilometres can be 
cut off the Mackenzie Highway by routing it through 
Saskatchewan. We know we have untold riches and tremendous 
beauty in our Athabasca region which could be opened to 
tourism and other development. 
 
We all know that the Northwest Territories, especially because 
of diamonds and North Slope oil and Mackenzie Valley 
pipeline, is rapidly expanding. Are we going to allow all of that 
wealth to be funnelled through the province of Alberta? Or are 
we in Saskatchewan going to say we are the natural conduit 
from Chicago and the American Midwest up through the 
Athabasca and linking our communities of Stony Rapids or 
Fond-du-Lac and on into Fort Smith in the Northwest 
Territories and the Mackenzie Highway? 
 
That could even be, Mr. Speaker, a toll road because unlike 
most of the province, you could build a toll road in that area and 
that would open up this province to enormous wealth for us to 
capture some of that wealth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said that I’m pleased with the ethanol 
announcement last week by the minister of mines and energy. It 
is more suggestions, more initiatives like that . . . As you know, 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken out very strongly against investing 
$160 million in Australia when the government itself admits no 
jobs will be created. The ethanol announcement has the 
potential to build wealth and build jobs here at home. That is 
what we need. 
 
And by building wealth here, we will expand our tax base. And 
when we expand our tax base, then we will be able to remove 
the crippling burden on farmland that we have presently placed 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

the cost of education on, and we will be able to give 
opportunities for our young people to remain in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the other issues I have dealt 
with in another times speaking, and I know that other hon. 
members will want to participate in debate, but I find it 
unfortunate that The Balanced Budget Act is today effectively 
dead. And its murderer is, ironically, its creator. 
 
Why this government chose to go the route of ignoring and 
sabotaging its greatest legacy is beyond me. Why the sacrifices 
we made throughout the ’90s to get our province back into 
solvency, to get a good credit rating for our province, why, why 
these efforts are being thrown to the four winds is something I 
simply cannot understand. But The Balanced Budget Act 
deserved to be respected, and now we are in the situation where 
any future government of this province can effectively ignore 
its existence because this government has. And for that reason, I 
will not be supporting this budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to join into the budget debate. And before I begin my 
remarks, I would like to just make a few comments related to 
my constituency and to some of my colleagues here in the 
legislature today. 
 
I would like to say that I wasn’t able to partake in the budget 
debate last year, or in the Throne Speech, and was not able to 
publicly thank the good constituents of Meadow Lake who have 
seen it fit to elect me to this legislature for three terms now. 
And I want to say how honoured and privileged and humbled I 
am to be able to represent them. Truly. 
 
I know we all think we represent the best constituencies in the 
province, and I know that I’m right about that, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a wonderful area to represent. 
 
I’d like to also take the opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. 
Speaker, for, I think, doing a very good job in the past short 
while that you’ve been in that chair. As a former seatmate of 
mine, I know I was . . . I regret having lost you, but you do a 
great job up there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to congratulate and welcome the new member as well 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld. The member was a resident actually 
of the Meadow Lake constituency for quite some number of 
years. He and his wife lived up there, and he was actually, 
believe it or not, instrumental in convincing me to run in the 
election and to seek the nomination. And so I saw it only fitting 
to go back and re-convince him that he should run once he 
moved to Saskatoon. And we’ve both been, fortunately, 
successful in our challenges to each other. 
 
I want to also welcome back a colleague of all of ours, but I 
think a colleague as well, I guess, from northwest 
Saskatchewan, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. I can’t 
imagine how difficult a time he and his family have gone 
through and I really want to personally wish that member and 
his family the very best of luck into the future. 
 
And when I made notes to myself I did not think I would be 
making comments about the member from Kindersley. But I do 
want to say on a personal note as well that having been elected 

at the same time as he was in 1991, I can only echo the 
sentiments from many of the members of the legislature here 
today around that member’s abilities in this legislature, and I 
know I too personally will miss what he has offered in this 
legislature and what he has provided for his constituents and the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I want to also take the opportunity to thank the staff that support 
me, Mr. Speaker, in my cabinet office, Don, Kirk, Jennie, 
Brenda, and Jody, and in my constituency office back in 
Meadow Lake, to Susan and Adriane who are really my eyes 
and ears and who do an amazing job in representing me when 
I’m away, which is a fair bit as a minister of the Crown. 
Without these people we know that we would all not do nearly 
as good a job as we do. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to take the opportunity to thank my 
family. We all know that without the support of our families it 
would be an almost and a virtual impossible task without their 
support. And to Virginia and to my son, Mayson, and to the 
new addition that’s to arrive shortly, I say thank you very much 
for your support. I really do appreciate it. 
 
I want to just parenthetically say, just as a little aside here, I had 
a phone call from my mother just several weeks ago, as I know 
we often get calls from our families, who indicated to me that 
her and my father saw me in a TV clip fairly recently and 
thought that I looked awfully tired and it was probably time to 
be getting out of politics. And I said to my mother, Mom, it’s 
not the politics, why didn’t you tell me about raising kids? 
That’s what’s making me look tired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So anyway to all of my family, both Virginia and Mayson, and 
to my parents and brothers and sisters who have supported me 
all through this I say thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to if I could add my voice to those of my 
colleagues who have congratulated the Minister of Finance on 
bringing down the ninth consecutive balanced budget, truly a 
remarkable record. 
 
2001 was a very tough year for all provincial governments in 
economic downturns and reduced revenues right across Canada. 
Yet we were able to stay the course in Saskatchewan with 
funding to health care and education continuing to go up and 
income taxes continuing to come down. We did it without the 
gutting of public services and massive layoffs taking place in 
BC (British Columbia) and without the huge tax bite taken by 
Premier Klein in Alberta. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Crown corporations have played a major 
role in putting our province back on its feet over the last decade. 
They have helped restore Saskatchewan’s fiscal position to the 
point where we can weather a bad year, substantially increase 
funding on the priorities of Saskatchewan people, cut income 
taxes, and still, Mr. Speaker, balance the budget. 
 
Since 1995, the Crown sector has put $1 billion back in 
dividends and equity repayments into the General Revenue 
Fund. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, Crowns have paid off 
$2.3 billion in debt. That’s the kind of performance that gets the 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

 

attention of bond raters. Improved Crown performance has been 
sighted by bond rating agencies as a key factor, Mr. Speaker, in 
the string of double and triple A’s Saskatchewan has been 
getting on its credit report cards in recent years. 
 
I want to say a bit more about the billion dollars paid to the 
General Revenue Fund by the Crowns over the last few years 
because we are already at the point where the members opposite 
seem to be getting confused, Mr. Speaker. They’re always 
talking about taxpayers’ money going to the Crowns. The last 
time that that happened, Mr. Speaker, I say to you and I say to 
the members in this legislature, was 10 years ago when the 
Devine government left the Crowns on the verge of fiscal 
collapse and an equity injection was required from the General 
Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker — from the General Revenue Fund 
to Crown corporations. 
 
Those members and former colleagues of the members opposite 
crippled the Crowns by stripping equity and forcing them to 
borrow to pay dividends. It’s obvious they have learned nothing 
from that experience, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since then, the flow of money has been one way, Mr. Speaker 
— $1 billion from the Crowns to the General Revenue Fund. 
The money is paid to the Crowns in return for a service. Some 
people say SaskTel for cellular service . . . Some people, I 
should say, pay SaskTel for cellular service and some pay 
TELUS and Rogers AT&T. The customer is paying a user fee 
in every single case whether it’s provided by a Crown or a 
private company from outside of the province. 
 
Like any business, the Crowns invest some of their earnings in 
improving services and paying their debt down. The rest goes to 
the General Revenue Fund to help pay for public services by 
paying user fees for power, natural gas, telephones, and 
insurance to the publicly owned Saskatchewan companies. 
 
Our citizens are $1 billion to the good since 1995, both as 
taxpayers and as shareholders. They also benefit as customers 
for the lowest overall rates, Mr. Speaker, in Canada. I repeat, 
the lowest overall rates in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, there are plenty of 
examples of the benefits of public ownership to taxpayers, 
shareholders, and customers in the budget now before us. 
 
The Crown dividend to the General Revenue Fund is $300 
million for this fiscal year coming up, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
entire budget of the Department of Highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By paying our companies for utilities and keeping that money 
in the province, Saskatchewan people generate a dividend that 
pays for more than 700 kilometres of paving and reconstruction 
of our highways. A dividend, Mr. Speaker, that amounts to 
nearly 20 per cent return on our investment in the Crowns. That 
is something, Mr. Speaker, that I think that we should be proud 
of, not something that we should criticize and be embarrassed 
about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just to connect the dots, Mr. Speaker, one more time for the 
members opposite. That dividend comes from the fees that 

Saskatchewan people would be paying — I say would be 
paying — big utility companies from outside of the province if 
we had not built our Crowns. Those companies would take the 
profits and dividends outside of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
outside of the province. Because we pay utility user fees to our 
own Crown companies, we are able to generate a $300 million 
dividend that benefits Saskatchewan people as taxpayers. 
 
Every dollar earned by the Crowns that is surplus to their 
reinvestment and debt-servicing needs is a dividend dollar. 
Every Crown dividend dollar that helps pay for public services 
is a dollar less that has to come from income and sales taxes, 
Mr. Speaker. A dollar less that has to come from income tax 
and sales taxes. I can’t make it any plainer than that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Anyone over there who still doesn’t get it, just doesn’t want to, 
Mr. Speaker. I wouldn’t be the first time that their ideology got 
in the way of their common sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the argument that the Crowns use taxpayers’ 
money holds no water with me and, I think, the general public. 
Nor does the related argument we often hear from the opposite 
. . . from members opposite that the government is taxing 
Saskatchewan people through the Crowns. 
 
There might be some truth to that argument if we had sky-high 
utility rates in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but the facts are that 
we have the lowest overall utility rates in all of Canada. And in 
the gas sector, Mr. Speaker, four out of the last five years we 
had lowest rates in North America, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The budget provides examples of just how much that means in 
reduced living costs to Saskatchewan utility customers. Under 
the intercity comparisons of taxes and household charges for a 
family of four with a $50,000 income, we see the following 
total annual charges for home heating, electricity, telephone, 
and auto insurance. In Vancouver that charge would be $4,714, 
Mr. Speaker; in Calgary, $4,256, Mr. Speaker; in Winnipeg, 
$3,459, Mr. Speaker; in Toronto, $5,060, in Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, $3,455, Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon 
has the lowest overall utility rate costs on that list, and it would 
still have the lowest costs if I had taken the time to give you the 
numbers from cities from the other five provinces. 
 
Saskatchewan utility customers are paying less than anyone else 
in the country. Anyone, Mr. Speaker, who argues that they are 
being taxed through the Crowns, is playing fast and loose with 
the truth. Mr. Speaker, our citizens get the lowest overall rates 
in Canada as Crown customers and big dividends as 
shareholders and as taxpayers. 
 
But there are still those who just won’t accept the fact that 
publicly owned Saskatchewan companies perform so well. 
They will claim that if Crowns are accomplishing all this it 
must be running up their debt. Okay, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at 
the budget once again to see if there is any truth in that 
argument. 
 
Total Crown corporation debt in 2003 is estimated to be 
virtually unchanged — unchanged, I repeat — from 2002. In 
other words, Crown debt will be stable; dividends will be paid 
out of earnings; investments in improved services as well as 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

growth and diversification will continue; and overall Crown 
debt will not, not go up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was the hard work of many thousands of Saskatchewan men 
and women who put the Crowns back on their feet in the 1990s. 
We will not repeat the mistakes of the Devine years where 
Crowns were either sold for a song or used as just another way 
for the government to borrow money for its day-to-day 
operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget lays out a sound plan for the continued 
growth and development of Saskatchewan’s economy. We are 
investing in health and education, in renewing infrastructure, in 
research and technology, in personal and small-business tax 
cuts, and in safe and healthy communities. 
 
Our public enterprise sector in partnership with a private sector 
and co-operative sectors play an important role in growing our 
economy. Crown corporations employ over 9,000 
Saskatchewan people — about half in head offices and half in 
towns and cities throughout our province. Those employees put 
annual earnings of more than half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
into their local economies. 
 
Crowns invest over $400 million every year in Saskatchewan to 
expand and improve their services, creating thousands of 
construction jobs each and every year. Those numbers add up to 
Crowns being some of the biggest businesses in Saskatchewan. 
Because they are big, they are . . . and are good at what they do, 
the members opposite claim that they crowd out the private 
sector. Once again, it’s a claim that gives a wide berth, Mr. 
Speaker, to the truth. 
 
When we look at the facts, we see thousands of successful, 
private businesses which are partners or suppliers to Crown 
corporations. Crowns partner, Crowns partner with about 600 
local dealers and brokers to provide telecommunications, 
natural gas, and insurance services. All Crowns have buy in 
Saskatchewan policies and do most of their purchasing in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. Crowns spend over a billion dollars a 
year close to home making them key customers for nearly 
12,000 — I repeat, 12,000 Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three weeks ago I announced in this legislature 
that SaskTel is taking high-speed Internet services to another 
191 communities in Saskatchewan. SaskTel is a world leader, 
Mr. Speaker, in providing the latest telecommunications 
services such as high-speed Internet and digital cellular to rural 
areas. No other jurisdiction is even close to us in this area. 
 
There are critical services . . . these, I should say, are critical 
services to give residents of rural Saskatchewan an opportunity 
to participate in the global economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I made this announcement, the member for Swift Current 
recognized the benefits of what he called connectivity for rural 
Saskatchewan. But he expressed his disappointment that 
SaskTel was not leaving it to the private sector to do this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to connect the dots for him one last 
time. As he well knows, SaskTel has been in full competition 
with some of the biggest companies in the world for many 
years. Private companies like Rogers, AT&T, and Bell with 

billions of dollars at their disposal could — I repeat, could — 
have invested hundreds of . . . could have invested the hundreds 
of millions required to provide these services for rural 
Saskatchewan anytime they chose. They haven’t, and they 
won’t, Mr. Speaker, because they can’t make enough money at 
it. 
 
We have high-speed Internet and will soon have digital cellular 
services in Meadow Lake because we own SaskTel. If we 
didn’t, we would never see these services in northwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The cellular coverage maps for SaskTel and its competitors, Mr. 
Speaker, tell the story. If you look at SaskTel’s map, you can 
just . . . and you see just about the whole southern half of the 
province covered, Mr. Speaker, and with most areas having 
digital services in the next couple of years. 
 
If you look at the maps of Rogers, AT&T, and TELUS, and you 
see coverage . . . what you will see, I should say, is coverage for 
Regina and Saskatoon as well as corridors along the 
TransCanada and the Yellowhead Highways. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s about it. 
 
Private companies won’t go outside of the heavier populated 
areas because there’s no money in it, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 
blame them for that. You would think that members opposite, 
who represent rural ridings, would be able to figure that out. 
But they obviously can’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
SaskTel provides these modern services in rural areas because it 
is a Crown corporation which has an obligation to provide them 
those services throughout the province. That takes us back to 
the very, very reason that Crowns were created in the very first 
place. That is to provide services to all, including many areas 
where private companies simply would not go; to keep the fees 
we pay for utility services in the province; to help grow our 
economy, Mr. Speaker; and to keep the rates absolutely as low 
as possible. 
 
Our Crown corporations have done a good job of delivering 
these . . . those objectives over the century of public enterprises 
in our province. And I say century, Mr. Speaker. Many people 
don’t know that our very first Crown was actually created in 
1901. They have been with us for over 100 years now, Mr. 
Speaker, and have served us very well. And they will continue 
to play a key role in providing province-wide services and 
building a modern economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Meadow Lake provides a good 
example of the kind of economic activity we have in rural areas 
because we own our utility companies. The four major Crowns 
all have substantial operations in Meadow Lake. SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has a claim centre and 
SaskTel, SaskPower, and SaskEnergy have regional offices. 
Together they employ 47 people with an annual payroll of $2 
million. They spend millions of dollars every year on 
maintenance and improvements to their systems, creating 
hundreds of construction jobs. None of that would be happening 
in Meadow Lake if these companies were not owned by the 
people of Saskatchewan. 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

 

We can break those numbers down further by looking at the 
activities of just one Crown corporation. Mr. Speaker, 
SaskPower alone employs 20 people and serves nearly 7,000 
customers in the Meadow Lake region. In 2001 SaskPower 
purchased over $800,000 — 800,000 — in trucking, electrical, 
trenching, and manufacturing goods and services from Meadow 
Lake businesses. Last year SaskPower did nearly $2 million 
worth of maintenance and construction work in our area. This 
year it will spend nearly 5 million on a transmission line and 
upgrades to the Meadow Lake switching station. 
 
That’s a big contribution to the local economy. It’s a 
contribution that only a publicly owned Saskatchewan company 
with a mandate to serve the whole province would logically 
make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the interests of balance, openness, and 
accountability in this legislature, I’m going to provide numbers 
for Crown activity in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In his haste to criticize everything the Crowns do, I doubt that 
the member from that constituency has ever stopped to think 
about the impact on Swift Current’s economy if his party got its 
way and the Crowns were sold. 
 
The four major Crowns account for a lot of economic activity in 
Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. They employ 140 people in six 
administrative and maintenance offices and claim centres — I 
repeat, 140 people in six administrative and maintenance 
offices. 
 
Those Crown employees spend most of their $6.6 million 
annual payroll at Swift Current businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
Crowns spent over $5 million maintaining and upgrading their 
systems last year, providing a lot of construction jobs in the 
Swift Current area. They purchased over $7 million in goods 
and services from hundreds of local businesses. 
 
Crowns partnered with 19 local businesses including cell, 
Internet, and SecurTek dealers; insurance brokers; and 
plumbing and heating contractors. If the Crowns were sold, as 
the member for Swift Current and his party would do, a big bite 
would be taken out of that city’s economy. There would be 
some activity by the companies that took their place but it 
would be nothing near — nothing near, Mr. Speaker — the 
boost that Swift Current receives from its Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about the contributions of Crown 
corporations in meeting the challenges outlined in this budget. 
And Saskatchewan people in my estimation benefit as 
customers from low rates, as shareholders from dividends, and 
as taxpayers from keeping the user fees they pay for utilities in 
this province. 
 
Their local, regional, and provincial economies also benefit 
from being our utility companies owned here and operated here, 
Mr. Speaker. Those . . . all of those benefits I should say, Mr. 
Speaker, would have been lost if the members opposite ever got 
turned loose on the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Their policy as stated by their leader is to sell the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. They have been trying to soft pedal that policy with 
weasel words about conducting a review, Mr. Speaker, before 

they start the fire sale. They do that, Mr. Speaker, because they 
know most Saskatchewan people don’t support the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they do not support selling those Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. The public simply does not support that and that was 
revealed in a very recent poll, Mr. Speaker, where nearly 67 per 
cent supported, Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations. 
 
Once you break through, Mr. Speaker, the fuzzification they 
have tried to put around their policy on Crowns, you find the 
same old triumph over . . . of ideology over common sense, a 
hostility to public enterprise that goes back through generations 
of Conservative politicians. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, they 
oppose every initiative of Crowns like SaskTel to expand and 
improve their services to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Somehow it’s good for Access Communications to partner with 
Rogers AT&T, to compete with SaskTel for cellular phone 
service, but it’s bad, Mr. Speaker, for SaskTel to offer its 
customers an alternative to the Access monopoly in the cable 
business. 
 
It’s good, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan security firms to 
partner with American-based companies and have call centres 
and monitoring done in Dallas but, Mr. Speaker, it’s apparently 
bad for them to partner with SaskTel’s SecurTek, and have the 
call centre and monitoring done in Yorkton, where it has 
created nearly 55 jobs. And that number will grow, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When you dig just a little bit deeper into this attitude, the 
complaint from the members opposite boils down to this one 
single thing, Mr. Speaker — Crowns are doing too . . . are too 
good at what they do. They want to restrict SaskTel from 
competing in the wide-open telecommunications market, and 
clear the way for huge transnational companies like AT&T, 
who will take their profits outside of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The opposition also opposes every initiative that SaskTel takes 
to invest outside of our province and bring revenues back into 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Never mind that SaskTel is $157 
million to the good so far on its diversification investments. 
They are opposed to any growth and diversification by Crowns 
no matter how successful it has been. 
 
Where they would get the hundreds of millions it takes to 
provide high-speed Internet and digital cellular service 
throughout Saskatchewan, they don’t say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead of being proud of these Saskatchewan success stories, 
they want to sell them. And I think that’s a real shame, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ve got news, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite — 
Maggie Thatcher and Ronald Reagan are over. The people of 
this province have already been for a stroll down that path with 
Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. They don’t like what happened 
then and they won’t — and don’t — want to go back for 
seconds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The choice is clear. Despite the attempts of the Saskatchewan 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

Party to cover up their policy on Crowns, our government wants 
to grow and diversify so they can continue to provide low rates, 
good service, and economic benefits to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s as simple as that. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party wants to shrink the Crowns now and 
sell them later if they ever got a chance to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since we are talking about the fiscal position of the province in 
this budget debate, I want to deal with one last bogus argument, 
Mr. Speaker, from the members opposite, regarding the Crown 
corporations — the one that says we should sell them, take the 
gain to pay down the debt, and reduce annual interest costs. 
 
Let’s leave aside for a moment that we would lose most of the 
benefits of publicly owned Saskatchewan-based utilities that I 
have been talking about. How would we do on the province’s 
balance sheet if in fact we did sell the Crowns, Mr. Speaker? 
The Crowns’ dividend to the General Revenue Fund is $300 
million this coming year. If Crowns were sold and applied the 
proceeds to the government debt . . . would yield interest 
savings of about, Mr. Speaker, $240 million. Another $60 
million would have to be added to the utility rates because the 
Crowns . . . because of the Crowns’ exemption from paying 
federal tax would now be gone. 
 
Let me see if I can sum up the math on this Saskatchewan Party 
plan. We throw away a bunch of head and regional offices and 
lose 6 or 7,000 jobs as well as seven . . . several billion dollars 
of economic activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would throw away good service at low rates, 
not just in the cities but throughout the province. We would 
throw away an annual dividend that will be $300 million this 
year. We throw away a federal tax exemption that saves utility 
customers over $60 million a year. And in return we get $240 
million in interest savings. 
 
I don’t think anyone except for the members opposite will have 
a . . . will have trouble doing the math on that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, Crown corporations are a great 
Saskatchewan success story that we should all be extremely 
proud of. It’s a story, Mr. Speaker, about Saskatchewan people 
having the courage and the foresight to build these companies 
for themselves. It’s about Crowns moving into competitive 
markets and successfully taking on some of the world’s biggest 
companies, Mr. Speaker. It’s about the knowledge and skills of 
Saskatchewan men and women who work in our Crowns, being 
in demand around the globe. It’s about keeping the money that 
we spend on utilities at home to boost our economy. It’s about 
building modern infrastructure to support growth and partnering 
with . . . and partnering with the private sector, Mr. Speaker, to 
invest in our economy and in our future. Most of all, most of 
all, Mr. Speaker, it’s about nearly a century of good service to 
people in all parts of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the contribution that Saskatchewan 
public enterprise has made to improving services, cutting taxes, 
and balancing the books despite a worldwide economic slump. 
And I will be joining my colleagues in supporting this very 
excellent budget which was presented by our Minister of 
Finance. Thank you very much. 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m certainly glad it was my opportunity to speak on 
the budget today because that allowed me the opportunity to be 
here for the best part of the previous member’s speech. And 
frankly I learned more about Saskatchewan Party policy 
listening to him than I’ve ever learned in my own caucus. And I 
appreciate that opportunity. 
 
You know the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite 
make all kinds of assertions, make all kinds of comments. 
Whether or not they’re based on fact seems to be irrelevant. We 
were accused by the previous member, Mr. Speaker, of being 
ideologically bound to selling the Crowns. He can’t produce 
one shred of evidence that there’s any veracity to that 
accusation. 
 
But I guess what I find more important than that is that when 
those kind of statements are made, it doubles my resolve, Mr. 
Speaker, to be very conscientious and careful about what I do 
espouse as a member of the official opposition and what policy 
positions I do take. Because it’s important to be accurate; it’s 
important to be informed; and it’s important to be consistent in 
putting out your policies on behalf of a political party in 
anticipation of seeking the public’s support at the next election. 
And what I hear from the members opposite, quite frankly, is a 
distortion of anything that I have ever assumed to be the policy 
of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I guess in the role of debate, you can say almost anything you 
want. And I guess we will excuse the minister for having made 
those comments in light of that freedom that we’re given to say 
anything that comes to mind. 
 
You know I stood accused — or we stood accused, as the 
official opposition — of holding a certain point of view based 
on ideology. And yet what I heard was quite a lengthy 
enunciation of an ideology of its own and all the substantiation 
and justification for an ideology that is entrenched in the minds 
of the government. You know you can . . . you must be careful 
when you’re calling the pot black, Mr. Speaker. And I find that 
when we are accused of ideology, the argument set to us or used 
against us, frankly, is equally based in ideology. 
 
Let’s get back to the business at hand, Mr. Speaker. You know 
I’m quite pleased to have this opportunity to enter the debate on 
the presentation of the government’s budget a week or so ago. 
But I’m a whole lot less pleased with the budget document itself 
and the direction taken by the NDP government through that 
document. I would have been a whole lot more pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, if the budget had contained any item of good news for 
the people of Cypress Hills. The sad reality, Mr. Speaker, is that 
the budget provided quite the contrary. It is, frankly, filled with 
bad news for the people of my constituency and, I believe, for 
the people of this province as a whole. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Sadly, this budget is a hatchet job on the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I say that quite readily, frankly, because I 
looked through some of the provisions of the budget and I asked 
myself, as we looked at the various details, who’s going to pay, 
who’s going to pay as a result of these changes in direction, 
who’s going to pay as a result of these increased levies? 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

 

I came to the conclusion very quickly that the people who will 
pay the most are the elderly, the sick, the weak, the vulnerable, 
through a whole series of new fees. The people who will pay 
will include both urban and rural communities because of 
shortchanging of revenue sharing. The people who will pay 
include property owners everywhere in this province. It 
includes farmers and ranchers, especially since education taxes 
are once again going to be forced significantly higher. There 
just was not enough money put into education to help alleviate 
that prospect. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the 11,000 or more families in this 
province whose drug costs are going to go higher because of 
cuts to the provincial drug plan. Those are the people who are 
going to pay. 
 
Unfortunately, the budget provides no real incentives to any 
individual in this province to encourage him or her to stay in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Political rhetoric aside, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you a real life 
story. I was in the community of Leader just shortly after the 
new year. I was to meet an individual later in the afternoon. I 
had some time to kill and attended a restaurant about 1 o’clock 
in the afternoon. The main rush had already dissipated and there 
were very few of us left in the restaurant. 
 
While I was sitting there looking at the menu and just waiting 
awhile until the owner came around to take my order for the 
meal, I noticed in particular a lady who was sitting at a table a 
few feet away from me, and she was looking at ads in a 
newspaper. And I recognized the newspaper as being the 
Medicine Hat News. And I was kind of curious as to why this 
lady in a restaurant in the small town of Leader would be 
perusing the want ads in the Medicine Hat News. 
 
While I was kind of thinking of that, the owner of the 
restaurant, who was a new immigrant to this country and 
obviously the new owner of that particular establishment, came 
to my table and introduced herself, and I engaged her in 
conversation. I found out a little bit about her. I found out that 
she and her husband had just recently bought the restaurant 
there; they’d relocated from Saskatoon where they had been 
engaged in some training as new immigrants — English as a 
second language course and so forth. I found out that she was 
quite excited about being the new proprietor of the restaurant in 
the community of Leader and that she had anticipated good 
things for the business decision that she and her husband had 
made. 
 
After leaving my table, the owner of the restaurant wandered 
over to the lady I referred to earlier — the lady who was 
looking at the Medicine Hat News — and went through the 
same dialogue with her, introduced herself as the new owner, 
wanted to know this lady’s name, where she lived, you know, 
what she did in the community. Just establishing the most 
rudimentary elements of communication and going through this 
process individually with people in the restaurant. 
 
After having discovered the customer’s name, the restaurant 
owner made some reference to her as a regular customer: would 
she be coming back, would she see her again? And the lady 
with the newspaper said, I’m afraid not. Oh, was the response, 

and why not? Well, the lady with the newspaper said, my 
children and I are going to be relocating to the city of Medicine 
Hat. And we will be selling our house shortly and moving there. 
 
And you know, that particular instance represented to me what 
is clearly wrong and troublesome in this province. Because we 
had an individual who represented the hope and the future of 
this province — a new immigrant who came to this area, who 
invested their money and was prepared to work hard to create a 
success for themselves in a small community — juxtapositioned 
with an individual who already lived here and who was making 
the decision to leave the province and go to another centre in 
another province. 
 
That particular contradiction of expectations was so poignant 
and spoke so clearly to me to the challenges and the problems 
that we are facing in this province. There is wonderful 
opportunity here, but there is a whole segment of our population 
— especially in rural areas and especially in areas so close to 
the Alberta border, as I’ve referred to many times in this House 
— where individuals there feel that the loss in opportunity and 
the unavailable nature of opportunity compels them to go 
elsewhere. 
 
It’s a sad contradiction and one that affects our constituencies in 
many, many parts of rural Saskatchewan, and is now to a 
greater extent starting to infect — as well as affect — the urban 
areas of this province. 
 
I tell that story for a number of reasons. And I think that, you 
know, the contrast is certainly one of the reasons. But what I 
thought about when I read this budget was that scenario, which 
has been repeated in my mind many times since I was a witness 
to it back in January. 
 
What I wanted to know when I looked through this budget was 
this: what hope, what opportunity, what provision did this 
budget create to minimize situations like I have just described? 
What was within this budget, what was contained within this 
budget that would reduce the number of people who wanted to 
leave this province, or who felt compelled to leave the 
province? What was contained in this budget to create 
enthusiasm for business development in communities 
throughout this province, no matter how large or how small? 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t see anything in the budget that 
would answer any of those questions in a positive, assertive 
way. 
 
The community of Leader has gone through difficult times. In 
the last half dozen months or so, since late last summer, the 
community of Leader, which is only a town of about 800 
people, has lost 70 individuals. In six or seven months a 
community has lost almost 10 per cent of its population. Why? 
 
And what, Mr. Speaker, will stop that kind of hemorrhaging 
from happening in small-town Saskatchewan, especially in 
small-town southwestern Saskatchewan? What has the budget 
provided to impact the community of Leader in a positive 
sense? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as hard as I looked, I couldn’t find a single item. 
 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

What we did get, Mr. Speaker, was significantly higher fees for 
senior citizens in nursing homes. The community of Leader has 
one of those nursing homes. Those increases that were 
announced in the budget will affect every single person in care 
in communities just like Leader, except those who already are 
living below the poverty line. 
 
You know, we’ve heard from the Minister of Health, when he 
was asked about this, that these fee increases are going to affect 
a very small number of people. Only 120 people at the very top 
of the income spectrum will be affected. Only the very rich 
living in these senior citizen homes, these extended care homes, 
will be affected. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that answer might be technically 
correct, but it does a disservice in its inaccuracy to the rest of 
the people who are going to be affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my mother lived in the nursing home under those 
kinds of circumstances. I saw the impact of ever escalating 
costs. I saw what little money she was left with; what bare 
necessities cost these days and how little money she had to 
access those bare necessities. I saw the impact of drug costs on 
my mother and on other people who lived in that nursing home. 
I saw the despair in the eyes of old people who didn’t know 
from month to month whether they would be able to survive 
financially. 
 
And now what we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, is a situation where fees 
are going to go up significantly. A hundred and twenty people 
at the highest level might be technically accurate. But what 
about the other literally hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of 
people who are going to see their fees go up in a proportionate 
amount? 
 
I have with me today a fax sheet on the increase in long-term 
care fees, and I was just looking through this, Mr. Speaker, and 
I think that the record needs to show exactly what these changes 
will mean to individuals. 
 
Under the old fee structure, the minimum fee was $828. Under 
the new fee schedule that does not change. But here’s where the 
change becomes significant. Any income that a senior citizen 
gets over and above the $828 minimum will now have 90 per 
cent of any of that excess income go to the cost of their care. 
That is going to apply in an extrapolated manner and a 
proportionate manner to every senior citizen living in a nursing 
home and having income over $828 a month. 
 
Now $828 a month, I understand, is only a fraction of what the 
overall cost of a nursing home fee would be. Or if you were 
recovering all of the cost of a nursing home, they would be 
significantly higher. But $828 a month for an individual person, 
if you take that out over the length of a year, puts that person 
not just — not just in a poverty position but in an extreme 
poverty position. 
 
So if a person’s now making 900 or 1,000 or $1,200 a month in 
income, they’re not in any sense of reality wealthy. They’re not 
a whole lot better off. And under this particular formula, they’re 
going to be significantly impacted by the new cost. Ninety per 
cent of any income that they have over $828 will now go to 
their care and leaving them basically a minimum disposable 

income of $166. I don’t know what you can buy for $166 a 
month, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I know that that is absolutely 
marginal and most people are going to feel the impact of that in 
a very significant way. 
 
I just want to quote from the Saskatchewan Party’s position in 
response to those fee increases, for the record today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

“These fees affect elderly people on fixed incomes who, in 
many cases, have no other option but to go into long-term 
care . . . The fact that the NDP government can just 
arbitrarily add 40% to their care fees is nothing short of 
highway robbery.” 
 
“These people have worked hard all of their lives. They’ve 
saved and managed their money so they could afford care 
in their golden years and so that their spouse and (or their) 
families would be taken care of. They did not do it (they 
weren’t prudent with their money; they weren’t careful 
with their money) so that the government could have it” . . . 

 
Long-term care residents pay a minimum fee of $828. 
Under the old fee structure, if a resident’s income was over 
$994 per month, they paid the minimum fee plus 50% of 
their monthly income. Under the new fee structure, which 
begins October 1 . . . (of this year), residents will pay the 
minimum fee plus 90% of their monthly income. 
 
(Now) “Whether their monthly income is $1,100 per month 
or $3,000 per month, the NDP government will be taking 
90% of a long-term care resident’s income . . . The other 
10% will be all that’s left to cover a resident’s prescription 
drug costs, incidental charges by the care home and 
personal care items like clothing and hair care.” 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have had a number of people come to 
my office in person or call with their concerns about this 
change. And the response of family members has been 
heartbreaking in many instances, but the response of the 
individuals, the old folks who are going to be personally 
affected by these changes has been very, very hard to take. 
 
I understand completely the uncertainty that this has created for 
them. I understand the turmoil it puts them in. And they don’t 
want to be a burden on anybody. They want to manage their 
affairs as best they can, and yet we have a government increase 
fees to such a significant point that it has left many of these 
people very, very concerned about their future and their own 
welfare. 
 
I just alluded to the increase in drug costs because of changes to 
the Saskatchewan drug plan. Now the government has 
minimized this change by saying, well, only 11,000 families or 
so will be affected by this. But I think that again minimizes the 
impact of this kind of a change. There are going to be many 
seniors affected by it. There are going to be many individuals 
affected by it. And I think that we’re going to see a great deal of 
concern generated by this change that will only come to the 
forefront as people are impacted when they go to buy their 
drugs, when they see their deductible affected for their 
long-term drug costs increase as a result of these changes. 
 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

 

I noticed also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of a freedom of 
information demand or some other effort by maybe the media, I 
believe, to get some details on this that the Department of 
Health said, generally the elimination of the deductible means 
that families with incomes of less than 50,000 will not have to 
pay more. But $50,000 sounds like a lot of money, but you 
know in today’s world that’s two working individuals in one 
family earning $25,000 a year. And after taxes and so forth, you 
know that $25,000 a year income is not a significant amount of 
money. 
 
So really the impact will be felt by a lot larger number of people 
in this province than anyone was led to believe as a result of the 
information that was put out by the Department of Health. 
 
The other thing I found quite interesting, looking through some 
of the disclosure related to the fee increases, were a selected 
number of provincial fees that are going to be altered as a result 
of the budget, with very little fanfare. And I suppose the 
argument would be made by the government that there’s not a 
lot of money involved so it doesn’t really matter; we don’t need 
to make a big deal of it. 
 
But I just want to, I just want to highlight two or three or maybe 
four of the fee increases or new fees that are going to come into 
being as a result of this budget. I mentioned earlier, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that vulnerable people would be affected by this, this 
budget. And let me just indicate what they are. 
 
There’s going to be new fees introduced by the Department of 
Justice that are going to amount to not very much money — 
$10 for individuals. Who are these individuals? There’s a $10 
charge for individuals seeking to resolve disputes involving 
child custody, interim child support, interim spousal support, 
and interim possession of the matrimonial home. Isn’t that 
interesting? 
 
We’re now going to be charging fees of people who are going 
through various levels of personal and matrimonial distress. 
And I think that that’s unconscionable, frankly. 
 
We’re going to implement a new $100 per hour fee for 
providing legal services on behalf of clients of the Public 
Trustee. Now isn’t that interesting? Most people who are clients 
of the Public Trustee are these very old and incapable senior 
citizens living in nursing homes who have lost the ability to 
look after their own affairs. And now we’re going to charge 
them a $100 per hour fee for providing legal services to these 
incompetent people. 
 
We’re also going to see increases in the fee for the 
commencement of a proceeding pursuant to the Divorce Act. 
We talked about vulnerable people being affected by this 
budget. Here’s another example. Anybody who’s going to 
commence a proceeding pursuant to the Divorce Act will now 
be charged a $100 fee, an increase from the previous fee that 
existed. 
 
And we’re going to see an increase in the minimum fee for 
administering a deceased person’s estate from 300 to $600 to 
recover the Public Trustee’s cost. We don’t have inheritance 
taxes, I don’t believe. I’m not sure if that’s true any more, but 
now it has just become more expensive to die in this province. 

It’s going to cost you double to get the benefit of the Public 
Trustee. 
 
Those are just a few of the items that I picked out of the budget 
of smaller amounts that are going to affect people. But there are 
some other areas that the budget did not address that I felt really 
needed attention. 
 
There’s no indication in the budget that there would be any 
increased assistance for farmers and ranchers affected by 
drought. That particular issue has real significance for my 
constituents because the drought has moved into the Southwest 
in a very dramatic way over the last couple of years. While 
much of the province affected last year by one year of drought, 
we saw drought for two and, in some instances, three years in 
areas of the Cypress Hills in some unique areas, and 
specifically, in the deep Southwest and right along the Alberta 
border. 
 
When we came to the government for a proposal to help with 
water initiatives last year, we worked rather diligently with the 
Minister of Agriculture and asked for some assistance. He took 
the proposal to the federal minister, and there was at that time a 
$3 million program put together in partnership between the 
provincial government and the federal government. 
 
And that was so desperately needed that the money apportioned 
to that particular program disappeared very, very quickly. As a 
matter of fact by, I believe, January 24 all the money was gone. 
There were a number of projects in limbo as a result of that, but 
nevertheless having said that, that project came into being. It 
was put to good use and we were looking forward to a similar 
program this year. And what we got was nothing. No mention 
of it in the budget; no mention of it, period. 
 
And I think that given the extent of the drought in the deep 
Southwest, the impact it has had on water and water sourcing 
and water supply, it’s incumbent on the provincial government 
to take some leadership in that particular area, and do 
something for additional water development projects, whether 
or not the federal government comes onside. 
 
You know, it’s important to have the federal government as a 
player. I accept that. But, you know, it’s really hard to say to the 
federal government, you need to participate, if the provincial 
government does not take the lead. And I thought in the budget, 
at the very least, the provincial government could have shown 
some leadership and said, we will do this provided the need is 
there. We will take the initiative. We will take responsibility. 
These are our ranchers; these are our people who need 
assistance in these very dry years and we will take 
responsibility. 
 
But I didn’t hear that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m seriously 
disappointed by that omission from this year’s budget. 
 
What was the other bad news we got in terms of agriculture, 
through this budget? Well we saw changes to The Crop 
Insurance Act. We saw the loss of spot loss hail coverage, 
which was a very attractive option at a very reasonable rate. We 
saw the elimination of that. 
 
We saw the elimination of the variable rate coverage — 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

although frankly we had enough dispute with that particular 
option and the way it was handled last year that we’re not sure 
that the loss of that is a tragedy, but it certainly isn’t going to 
help the situation for farmers this year. 
 
We saw rates go up, crop insurance rates go up. And we saw the 
introduction of a type of roulette in the coverage of grasslands, 
grazing land, in this year’s crop insurance package. 
 
I think I’m going to have to avoid repeating verbatim what 
several of my constituents said to me when they looked at that 
program. I think the general . . . the nuance was, you know, if 
the government really wanted to make us mad, they found a 
way of doing it. And I think there is a great deal of criticism 
that is going to come the government’s way as a result of those 
particular changes to crop insurance. 
 
Jack up the rates when times are tough, when the need is the 
greatest. Introduce a program that nobody understands, and 
which amounts to nothing more than a game of roulette in terms 
of coverage for your grazing land. 
 
What else did we see in the budget? Well let’s put it another 
way. Maybe I should rephrase it. What didn’t we see in the 
budget? We didn’t see enough education funding, frankly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There was a small increase in education, I’ll 
grant you that. But you know what the implications are for the 
people of southwest Saskatchewan, especially in the Cypress 
Hills? The implications for the people of Cypress Hills are nil, 
or worse. 
 
The foundation grant formula does not apply in the Southwest. 
Virtually no provincial government money comes to the school 
districts of the Southwest. So any monies that go into the 
budget have not impacted us in a positive sense. 
 
But what has happened, what has happened, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that with increases that are going to be incurred by 
the school districts in terms of support staff and teacher salary 
increases, in terms of maintaining existing programs and 
teacher/pupil ratios — given those kinds of costs that are going 
to be incurred, with no money coming to my constituency and 
the school districts in my constituency, we are going to see, 
we’re going to see an increase in property taxes: another 
increase in property taxes for the ranchers and farmers of the 
Southwest as a direct result of the implications arising from this 
budget. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that under the current 
conditions affecting agriculture, under the implications of 
increased costs for crop insurance, as a result of so many other 
cost increases that are being experienced, the last people . . . I 
mean, sorry, the last thing that the people of Cypress Hills 
needed was another cost increase related to school taxes. And I 
think that we’re going to be, we’re going to be seeing a lot of 
fallout from that particular issue. 
 
I cannot substantiate this just yet, but I understand that there are 
people looking at the results of these changes that are going to 
produce increases of up to 30 per cent in school taxes on some 
rural property. And if that’s the case I think we’re pushing, 
we’re pushing people far too hard financially for them not to 
respond in a very bitter way, frankly, to the way their needs are 

being addressed — or maybe I should say to the way their 
situation is being recognized by this provincial government. 
 
You know, you can only . . . you can only go to the well so 
many times before the well runs dry. And given the experiences 
that we’ve had in the Southwest lately, that analogy has become 
much truer than we would like it to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why won’t I be supporting this budget? 
For the following reasons: it clearly does not address the needs 
of my constituents in the Cypress Hills, nor I believe the people 
of the province generally. 
 
I think it employs dubious accounting measures, where there 
was a change in midstream to hide the financial realities facing 
the province. That’s especially true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it 
concerns the Crown corporation established to fund educational 
facilities. 
 
I don’t think there’s anybody who has a gripe with that 
long-term financing approach. But you know when you change 
your accounting principles in midstream to take into 
consideration these changes or to implement these changes, it 
distorts the entire picture. And I think that people get a little 
dubious about what’s happening when those kind of changes 
are made midstream. And I think the government needs to be 
very, very concerned about the implications of that kind of 
change. I think it poses a real potential pitfall for the 
government and I think that somebody on the government side 
needs to take that concern seriously and address it. 
 
I won’t be supporting the budget because it imposes financial 
obligations on the Crown corporations at an unprecedented 
level. We recognize through the documents related to the 
budget that the government has traditionally depended on 
monies from the Crown corporations to help balance the 
budget. We understand that that’s the purpose of Crown 
corporations these days. They’ve gone from being a service 
provider, which was their original mandate, to a revenue 
generator for the government. And it’s not uncommon that the 
government would take revenues from the Crown corporations 
to help balance their books. 
 
But this year we got an unprecedented level of money moved 
from the Crown corporations to the government to balance their 
books. And that’s all happening at a time when rates are going 
up, coincidentally. Isn’t that ironic? When rates are going up for 
provincial consumers for all of the utilities provided by the 
Crown corporations, the provincial government is taking more 
money out of the Crown corporations to help them balance their 
books. 
 
I won’t support this budget because it relies on the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, which most people now realize has no 
money in it, and coincidentally never has had any money in it. 
Now when has the Fiscal Stabilization Fund had money in it? 
 
You know, we unfortunately took the word of the Minister of 
Finance when the Fiscal Stabilization Fund was, when the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund was developed . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’m trying to hear the 
member for Cypress Hills. Many people will have a chance to 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

 

enter into this debate, but we’ll have to do that after the member 
for Cypress Hills concludes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 
know, I think I hit a nerve because I didn’t hear much comment 
from the other side until we talked about the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. 
 
When that fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that fund was 
established on paper, we were told that money from the Liquor 
and Gaming Fund was going to be going in there as well as 
some other excess revenues that had been made available 
because of good economic times. We were going to have a fund 
there that would help us through rainy day situations that might 
arise in the future. I mean that fund was sold to us and to the 
public as a true savings account, a true savings account that 
actually had real money in it. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And it’s only in the last six months or so that we’ve found out, 
having consulted with the Provincial Auditor, having talked to a 
variety of people who are familiar with the way this kind of 
accounting is done, that the fund doesn’t actually have real 
money in it. So I find it hard to understand, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, how you can transfer money from a fund that doesn’t 
really have any money to balance a budget that really isn’t in a 
deficit. 
 
You know, what is the rationale here? What is the logic here? 
You know, you can’t sell a budget as balanced if you have a 
deficit; and the Minister of Finance admitted, technically 
speaking, in a cash balance scenario, we’re in a deficit. 
 
Now what is it —is it a deficit or is it a balanced budget? Is 
there money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund or isn’t there? 
What is the truth? The fact of the matter has become that 
nobody understands what the truth is any more. 
 
And it hasn’t really helped the cause by having the minister say 
that we’ve got a balanced budget but, well, on a cash basis 
we’re looking at a deficit. That hasn’t helped clarify the 
situation at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, a paper fund sounds vaguely familiar. I think we’ve 
heard references to those types of accounting procedures in 
some pretty significant collapses, financial collapses, lately, and 
I wonder if we might not be seeing the same type of thing 
starting to unfold with this particular government’s budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t be supporting this budget because 
it brings into question the credibility of each one of us elected 
to serve the province with honesty and integrity. That’s one of 
the reasons that I am troubled mostly by this budget. 
 
There’s too much fudging going on. There’s too much 
inexplicable stuff happening. There’s too much questionable 
transfers of money from one entity to another, whether it exists 
or not. There’s too much movement of monies from the Crowns 
and back to the government, and from . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there’s just no accounting for a lot of the movement of this 
money. 
 

It really calls into question the credibility, not just of the 
government but of each one of us who were elected by the 
people of this province to serve with honesty and integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this budget on a political plane; I 
most certainly can’t support it on the basis of principle. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be voting in favour of the 
amendment and against the budget. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — . . . Mr. Speaker. Before I get into the text of 
my remarks I want to welcome the new member of the 
legislature from Saskatoon Idylwyld. I did not speak during the 
Throne Speech when many of our colleagues from the 
legislature welcomed him to this Assembly. I think that he did a 
wonderful job of articulating the government’s response to the 
Throne Speech when he moved the Speech from the Throne. 
 
As people know the member is an educator by profession, a 
vice-principal of a school that has spent a lot of time working 
with young people in his professional career. As well, he’s a 
person that has had a lot of experience volunteering in his 
community and is a person who lives in the constituency of 
Saskatoon Idylwyld and I think will serve the people of 
Saskatoon Idylwyld with great distinction. 
 
I also want to thank the member from Saskatoon Greystone, 
who seconded the Speech from the Throne. The member from 
Greystone has served in this Assembly over . . . in the 1970s, 
the 1980s, into the 1990s, and now in the new millennium. He 
is a man of incredible integrity. His credentials when it comes 
to the environment are impeccable. And I think he too serves 
the constituents of Saskatoon Greystone with great distinction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about my constituency of 
Saskatoon Nutana and talk about the people that I represent. I 
want to pay tribute to the woman who is my constituency 
assistant, Judy Gossen. She’s been my constituency assistant for 
some time and while I served as a member of the cabinet, she 
spent a lot of time dealing with constituents and their various 
issues and problems. And she has done an incredible job of 
looking after citizens’ concerns in the constituency of 
Saskatoon Nutana and I want to thank her for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent the east side of the city of Saskatoon 
where the boundaries surround the University of Saskatchewan, 
the Broadway business district, as well as along the river of 
Saskatoon into the exhibition area. 
 
My constituents come from a wide variety of backgrounds. I 
have many constituents who are students at the University of 
Saskatchewan, teach and work at the University of 
Saskatchewan. I have constituents that are doctors, lawyers, 
accountants, teachers, nurses, work in the health and education 
field, as well as the . . . (inaudible) . . . field. And I have many 
constituents who are business people in our city. 
 
I can say this about my constituents, that they contribute 
professionally to the city of Saskatoon and they also contribute 
on a volunteer basis. I suspect that we have more citizens that 
volunteer from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana than most 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

places in the province of Saskatchewan. And they volunteer on 
boards of Big Sisters, Big Brothers, the YWCA (Young 
Women’s Christian Association), the YMCA (Young Men’s 
Christian Association), the chamber of commerce, as well as 
many, many other community organizations. These are people 
that bring huge skills to the volunteer sector and I want to pay 
tribute to them in the work that they do on behalf of people in 
our province. 
 
As well, I want to say something about the merchants along the 
street of Saskatoon, Broadway. And in fact I was flying home 
on the weekend from Vancouver and the enRoute magazine 
looked at cities and where there were places to be. And I have 
to say that one of the cities that was acknowledged was the city 
of Saskatoon and the street that was acknowledged as a 
happening place to be was Broadway. 
 
And I think that that has a great deal to do with the people who 
have their businesses along that street. These are small-business 
people. They are not large box chains or international chains. 
These are people that live and work in our community and they 
too contribute to the quality of life in our community by the 
work that they do. And I want to pay tribute to them for 
creating a vital street that has now been acknowledged in 
various national magazines as a good place to work and a good 
place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Throne Speech that was delivered in the 
House by Her Honour outlined four pillars of what this 
government has done and intends to do when it comes to the 
province of Saskatchewan. We talked about economic 
development and the environment, through a sustainable 
environment. We talked about infrastructure and how 
infrastructure can support economic and social development in 
our province. We talked about health care and our commitment 
to health care. And we talked about education. 
 
Then the Minister of Finance stood up in this House last 
Wednesday and delivered his budget. And I want to pay tribute 
to the Minister of Finance. He is the longest-serving Minister of 
Finance in this province since Clarence Fines. And once again, 
he delivered a budget that is a true tribute to his remarkable 
achievements as Minister of Finance for the province. I want to 
thank him for his service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to put this budget in 
context. I notice that the members opposite are chirping away, 
but I wanted to put this budget in context. The context of this 
budget is that we are a province that has seen declining 
revenues from oil and gas. We are a province that . . . where 60 
per cent of our geography has been affected by drought. We are 
a province that relies heavily on agriculture and we are . . . our 
farmers are faced with huge international subsidies in the 
United States and the European Economic Community. 
 
It’s impossible for our farming community to compete with 
those international subsidies, particularly within the context of a 
drought. And there’s no question that this has had a dramatic 
impact upon the jobs in our province and the revenues of our 
province. 
 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, while we are the fourth 
wealthiest province in the country, we are still a province that is 
reliant upon equalization payments from the federal 
government. And equalization payments are paid to provinces 
in order that all provinces in this great federation of Canada can 
have a similar standard of services and living regardless of 
where you . . . where one lives. 
 
And when the federal government decided to cap equalization, 
it means that if a province like British Columbia goes into a 
downturn, then they too are eligible for equalization, and I 
understand they will be in this last fiscal year. And that will 
have an impact on what happens to those provinces that rely 
upon equalization in order to provide services to their citizens. 
 
Within all of this context there’s no question that there has been 
an economic slowdown in Canada and we see that in terms of 
the budgets that have been delivered in British Columbia, where 
they are estimating an over $4 billion deficit, and many, many 
cuts to human services and economic services in that province. 
 
As well we see what the economic impact of the slowdown has 
had in Alberta, where there have been dramatic cuts in services 
to their citizens. Over 1,000, as I understand it, or close to 500 
employees have been laid off. As well there have been dramatic 
increases in their premiums that their citizens pay for health 
services. 
 
There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that this budget is a restraint 
budget and we need to acknowledge that. 
 
Now what’s in our budget? Well I can say to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan regardless of what the members opposite want to 
say, is that our budget is balanced. It is not a deficit budget. The 
budget is balanced. 
 
It is true, Mr. Speaker, that we are spending more money than 
we are taking in, but we are able to balance our budget with the 
use of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, a fund that the members 
opposite would have had us spend in 2000 . . . the 2000 budget 
year and the 2001 budget year. 
 
And I’ve had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to go through many, 
many, many clippings where I’ve seen what the members 
opposite had to say. 
 
I want to talk about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. It was a fund 
that came about as a result of not taking all of the excess 
windfall revenues that came from oil and gas and spending it on 
one . . . on tax cuts as the opposition had proposed. They were 
talking about further income tax cuts. They were talking about 
further small-business and corporate capital tax cuts, and they 
were talking about putting this money into ongoing operating 
expenditures. 
 
And our minister of the day said at the time that this fund was 
going to be used in order to smooth the situation when times 
were rough. And, Mr. Speaker, times have been rough in this 
province in the past two budget years and the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund has been drawn upon to ensure that we don’t 
go back to the days of deficit financing in our province. 
 
This is also a budget, Mr. Speaker, that did not increase the 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

 

personal sales tax. It’s also a budget that continued the Finance 
minister’s decision to begin to reduce income taxes in our 
province. And those income tax reductions will be put in place 
by January 1 of 2003. And this is also a budget, Mr. Speaker, 
that did not introduce a health-care premium. 
 
Now I want to take those four pillars that I discussed and were 
discussed in the Throne Speech and I want to put them in the 
context of this budget. 
 
Now the first pillar is on economic development, and in this 
budget we saw the continuation of our ethanol strategy where 
the fuel tax on ethanol produced in our province and sold in our 
province will not be paid. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there were initiatives in this budget for 
oil and gas recovery. There is a reduction of the corporate 
capital tax. As well, the manufacturing and processing tax was 
reduced to electrical producers. 
 
As well, there was a commitment of $500,000 for the 
synchrotron in the city of Saskatoon, and that is absolutely 
essentially in order to attract research and development to our 
province. And the synchrotron certainly will . . . and the money 
that’s coming from the province is certainly going to add to 
economic development and research and development in our 
province. 
 
(16:15) 
 
As well there is an ongoing commitment to tourism and 
ecotourism, and I know from my travels across the globe that 
there are citizens in other countries that are extremely interested 
in what ecotourism has to offer them, particularly in our 
province. 
 
We are seen as a province that has pristine lakes, particularly in 
northern Saskatchewan, and that we have a forest growth that is 
of interest to people who have never seen clean water and trees. 
And I think that there are initiatives that continue the 
development of tourism. As well, as I said earlier, personal tax 
reductions are of interest to people, particularly when it comes 
to economic development. 
 
The other initiative or pillar of our budget is in the area of 
infrastructure. And, Mr. Speaker, I was so pleased last year 
when we announced our CommunityNet where we had over 
530 educational institutions available for high-speed Internet as 
well as 120 health facilities and 106 government offices. And 
this year we will add another 460 facilities in the province that 
will have access to high-speed Internet. And this too is of great 
use to business attraction and economic development because 
we know that businesses want to have access to high-speed 
Internet. 
 
And SaskTel, that Crown corporation that the members 
opposite love to criticize, has been instrumental in bringing 
high-speed Internet to parts of the province where private 
business would not be prepared to go to. 
 
I can also say that at the end of this process of CommunityNet 
we will have over 366 communities. We will be the most 
Netted province in the country in terms of accessibility to 

high-speed Internet, and that will of course be helpful to 
businesses that want to locate or start in our province. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have an ongoing commitment, and it 
was a commitment that we made last year to our highway 
system. We will spend over $300 million for 700 kilometres of 
highways projects in our province. And that certainly will be 
helpful given all of the economic development activity that’s 
taking place across Saskatchewan and the need to ensure, given 
that we are an export province, the ability to transport those 
exports to market. 
 
In this budget we will see 150 kilometres of thin membrane 
surface roads that will be paved to a standard that allows for 
heavy loads. As well there will be 370 kilometres of resurfacing 
done and that certainly will add to the condition of our 
highways. 
 
We’re going to complete the twinning of another 24 kilometres 
on Highway 1 and there will be a complete twinning of 
Highway 1 west of Regina by the fall of 2004. I think we’re on 
track to meet our 10-year commitment of $2.5 billion and that’s 
important. 
 
Also contained in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is a $1.2 billion 
commitment to education. And education is absolutely key to 
the future of this province. And if you look at nations across the 
globe that are developing their economies and have highly 
developed economies, it’s absolutely essential that we have 
highly educated and highly skilled citizens in order to meet 
those new and growing opportunities. And in this budget you 
will see a 7.2 per cent increase or $78.6 million more on 
spending when it comes to education in our province. 
 
And I might remind the members opposite who like to talk 
about the NDP’s election promises in 1999, their promise was 
to freeze spending in education and health. And certainly if 
those members opposite had have been the government during 
this budget process, we would not have seen a 7.2 per cent 
increase in education spending in our province for the K to 12 
system, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), regional colleges, Aboriginal institutions, and so 
on. 
 
As well, the members opposite like to criticize the government 
for spending $90 million in new capital construction in our K to 
12 and post-secondary institutions. And I can tell the members 
opposite that for too long, because we’ve been so concerned 
about getting our books in order and our fiscal house in order, 
that we have not spent the kind of money that was necessary in 
order to renew our educational facilities. And the capital 
spending and the new Crown corporation will give schools and 
post-secondary institutions across the province the opportunity 
to really begin the renewal process of facilities in the province. 
And that too will contribute to economic development because 
it will mean jobs for our trades and construction sector as well 
as our goods and services sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget, which is the fourth pillar of our 
plan, we’re spending $2.3 billion on health care and that’s a 5.8 
per cent increase in health spending. What I’m really, really 
proud of, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re increasing health research 
in the province from 5.2 million to $9.2 million. And I’m not at 



446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

all sure if the members opposite were in power that we’d see 
that kind of increase in health research in the province. Do I 
think it’s enough, Mr. Speaker? No I don’t. I think we need to 
spend more but it certainly is a good beginning. 
 
And what I can say to the people of the province who might be 
listening, about three years ago we increased health research by 
$1 million and as a result of that there was a change in the 
federal government’s view of how grants were given out, 
particularly to smaller colleges of medicine in this country. 
 
And we have seen a tremendous increase in the number of 
research grants going to our scholars in the College of Medicine 
and also the University of Regina. And in fact they are 
dominating the awarding of those research dollars in this new 
partnership program with the federal government. And I think 
it’s been a huge success in terms of recruiting and retaining 
health scholars to our province. 
 
And with this added research money that’s coming from the 
Department of Health of over $4 million, all I can say is 
congratulations to the Minister of Health and his visionary 
approach to research and development in our province. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there’s $10 million for medical 
equipment, equipment that is certainly needed in our province 
in order that our citizens can have access to some of the new 
technology. And there will be $24 million for capital 
improvements. 
 
What I’m particularly pleased to see in this budget is an 
emphasis on primary health teams where we have a team 
approach to the delivery of health services to our citizens, and I 
think that much progress will be made on that front in this year. 
 
As well, a 24-hour, toll-free line for health advice. And these 
lines have been set up in other parts of the country and it’s had 
the effect of reducing people’s visits to the emergency rooms in 
our hospitals. And I think this will be helpful. 
 
As well there’s more training spaces for health workers and in 
return those young people who are going into those training 
spaces are asked to return service to the province. And I think 
it’s only fair, Mr. Speaker, that when young people are given 
opportunities to train and there’s public money expended to 
train them, that they should return that service to the citizens of 
our province because it is taxpayers’ dollars that are being used 
for that training. 
 
What I’m particularly pleased about, Mr. Speaker, is the 
decision to put money into upgrading 240 emergency medical 
service personnel to EMT (emergency medical technician) 
standards over the next three years. And that’s highly crucial 
because we know that training is absolutely imperative when it 
comes to those people that are responding to car accidents, 
strokes, heart attacks, and so on. And we will have a hugely 
trained emergency medical service in our province once the 
three years have passed. 
 
Now I just wanted to say this. I’ve had the opportunity to listen 
very carefully over the last two and a half weeks to what 
members of the opposition have been saying about our 
government’s Throne Speech and our government’s budget. 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we all know that we are coming closer 
and closer to a provincial election. And we know that as you 
become . . . as you get closer to a provincial election the 
opposition wants to do everything it can to put a poor light on 
the government, and of course the government wants to do 
everything it can to put a poor light on members of the 
opposition. 
 
So I want to say this about our government and the kinds of 
services that we’ve been able to provide to our citizens in the 
last 10 years. Mr. Speaker, when I look at . . . And I’ve studied 
government and various forms of government and governors. 
What I can say this about what I consider to be the more 
conservative people that are governing in this country . . . and 
I’m not really sure that they believe in government. 
 
And when I look at the Sask Party’s plan to grow the province, 
I want to point this out to our citizens. The Sask Party says that 
they want to review government services; they want to put a 
microscope on government services, and anything that does not 
contribute to economic development, they would do away with; 
all of the government services are going to be looked upon as 
how do we grow the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I want to say to the members opposite and to the 
citizens is this, that there are many government services that are 
provided to our citizens that don’t have a lot to do with growing 
our province. And let me give you some examples. 
 
We know that there are services that are provided to the most 
vulnerable people amongst us. And let me use this example of 
the child action plan. I’m extremely proud that this government 
has been recognized internationally for the kinds of works that 
we’ve done to support children in our province. Our former 
premier, Premier Romanow, was honoured by the Child 
Welfare League of this country acknowledging that our 
government was at the forefront of reducing child poverty in 
this country and providing services so that young people could 
grow up to be valuable citizens. 
 
Now I suspect that if the members opposite were to shed a light 
on the kinds of work that’s being delivered by front-line 
workers in this province, they would say that’s not really 
growing Saskatchewan, and we’d have to get rid of that. That’s 
what I suspect. 
 
The second point I want to make is that time after time we have 
spent money on community schools in the province in order 
that young people have access to a public education. And what 
I’m extremely proud of, Mr. Speaker, is that our government, 
when you look at the test results, we have the smallest 
differential between low-income young people and high-income 
young people. We have the smallest gap in the country. 
 
And what that really does say is that we have an egalitarian 
society here in the province of Saskatchewan, and I would say 
that through public policy we have gone a long ways towards 
reducing the gap between lower-income citizens and 
higher-income citizens. And we’ve been able to do that through 
a public education system that has been supported by curricula, 
has been supported by good teachers and good teaching, and 
has been supported by support services that have been put into 
our community schools. 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

 

The other thing that I’m extremely proud of, Mr. Speaker, is our 
early childhood development strategy which has just been 
moved from Health to Education. We know . . . We know — all 
of the research is evident — that a child’s development takes 
place, fundamentally, between the ages of prenatal to five. And 
what happens to that child basically determines their outcomes. 
 
We know that that child’s mother’s education is one of the 
predetermining factors of what’s going to happen to those 
young people. And we put an incredible amount of resources — 
public servants have worked on this, community people have 
worked on this, government programs have worked on this — 
in order that we have children that are school ready. 
 
What I’m extremely proud of is that we are putting resources 
into identifying at-risk mothers prenatally, to identify those 
mothers that are at risk of drinking or doing drugs during the 
pregnancy. 
 
Now does that contribute to economic development? The Sask 
Party has not been clear about that. In the long term, Mr. 
Speaker, it does. But if growing Saskatchewan is just about 
deregulating, reducing taxes, and getting rid of Crown 
corporations, then we don’t want to have anything to do with 
that, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what the opposition is about . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you know what, you people 
won’t . . . 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. The member must 
remember to address all . . . direct all of her remarks through 
the Chair. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — . . . Mr. Speaker. But when the members 
opposite are chirping away, I just have this to say about them 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The ruling of the Speaker stands. It does not 
need equivocation or any responses. The member may proceed. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Anyway, Mr. Speaker, of course I will accept 
your ruling with some . . . whatever. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say to the members 
opposite is that if you look at the kinds of programs that this 
government has been able to develop, will those members 
opposite say it’s part of economic development? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I watch very carefully to what the British 
Columbians are doing. And the Leader of the Opposition and of 
course the member from Lloydminster has said that they are 
going to follow the lead of what’s happening in BC. 
 
Well let me tell you what’s happening in BC. In British 
Columbia, the lawyers in that province are charged a tax I guess 
of 7 per cent, which is now 7.5 per cent, compliments to the 
right-wing government out there. And that money was used to 
provide legal services to low-income people that had 
difficulties, whether it was civilly or criminally. And what the 
Government of British Columbia has done is they still continue 
to tax. They’ve increased the tax, but they’ve cut legal aid or 
legal services in half. That, of course, wouldn’t contribute to 

economic development. 
 
And we have a legal aid system in our province. We have a 
Human Rights Commission in this province which allows 
people in our province to have access to human rights and to go 
to the Human Rights Commission if they feel as though their 
rights have been violated, either by government, private 
employers, religious institutions, and other institutions. Would a 
Human Rights Commission contribute to economic 
development? I suspect not. 
 
We provide, Mr. Speaker, a grant to people in this province to 
provide services to gays and lesbians in the city of Saskatoon. 
And they provide hundreds of hours of services, health services 
to a population that has not been treated well historically 
throughout the times. Now I wonder whether that particular 
program would be cut because it doesn’t contribute to economic 
development. 
 
It has to do with how they see economic development, and they 
need to lay that plan out to the people of our province. We have 
— and I’m very, very proud of this — we have contributed to 
the renewal of the 20th Street in Saskatoon where we have 
young Aboriginal people . . . And this was a huge feather in the 
hat for the member from Eastview, the former associate 
minister of Health, where she worked diligently to get funding 
in place to provide the Core City Centre for Aboriginal youth. 
Now they receive ongoing operating funding. Does this 
contribute to economic development? 
 
Then we have the Community Service Village in Saskatoon 
where groups of people have been brought together to provide 
services to vulnerable women and children. Would this be seen 
as promoting economic development? 
 
So my message to the opposition and to the citizens of this 
province is that when you listen carefully to their core review of 
services, let’s understand what these people are talking about. 
Are they talking about straight economic development or are 
they talking about other things? 
 
Because I suspect if you look at what they’ve done in British 
Columbia, they have cut service after service after service to 
people on the ground who are providing services to people who 
are vulnerable, who are poor, who are low-income, and who 
need skills enhancement. And those are the people that have 
been hit hard by the Liberals, the right-wing party in British 
Columbia. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when these people talk about growing 
Saskatchewan — 100,000 people in the next 10 years — and 
they’re going to do it by reviewing government services, I 
suspect what we’re talking about is eliminating government. 
 
When they talk about cutting taxes . . . And if you’re going to 
cut taxes and balance the budget and you’re not going to have 
any Crown revenues, then I don’t know how you’re going to 
provide these services. And I know who will get hammered 
because we saw it in the 1980s. The people that got hammered 
were the people who did not support the members opposite. 
They were the people in the cities and the towns and the 
villages. They were the people that got hammered. 
 



448 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2002 

 

And so we’ll see because we’re going to make sure that they 
put, they put their position on the public record. And I noticed 
that the member from Kindersley when he was speaking in 
Kindersley and was asked about this: what services are you 
talking about; what civil servants are you talking about? 
According to the newspaper reports, he avoided the question. 
He avoided the question. 
 
And I don’t think they’ll be able to avoid the question in the 
next provincial election because citizens in this province are 
going to want to know, where do you stand, members of the 
opposition, and where does the government stand? 
 
And we have a record, we have a record . . . We have a record 
of service to this province. We have a record of providing funds 
to community organizations. We have a record of reducing 
taxes appropriately that are fiscally sustainable. We have a 
record of economic development and the highest economic 
growth rate in this country between 1992 and 2000 — and it is a 
public record. 
 
We have a record of having the best books when it comes to 
transparency . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh yes we do. And 
you can laugh all you want. Yes we do. 
 
You ask any auditor in this country whether Saskatchewan has 
a good record. In fact ask the Provincial Auditor and he will tell 
you that we have substantially — substantially — improved the 
transparency of our province’s finances. And in fact, if the 
member cared to be a member of the Public Accounts 
Committee she would have learned that in January, instead of 
the member from Humboldt giggling from her seat. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no question that this is a good 
budget, given the fiscal context. It’s a budget that will be 
supported by members of the government and it’s a budget that 
I believe will be supported by the citizens of our province. And 
I can assure the House that I will be supporting this budget 
when we vote on it later this week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak on behalf of 
the constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy and to reply to the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent a great constituency. The people are 
hard-working, salt of the earth people. And just last night I had 
the privilege of attending a ratepayers meeting in . . . for the 
RM (rural municipality) of Brokenshell in the hall in Trossachs. 
 
It was great to have the opportunity to talk to real, down to 
earth people who are going about making a living, looking after 
their families, and helping to keep their communities alive. But 
it also brought home to me the reality that this government has 
done everything in its power to destroy this way of life and to 
destroy rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker, we 
have many enterprising people who have started new businesses 
and ventures. They’ve created jobs and helped to keep Weyburn 
and area viable. They have accomplished this, Mr. Speaker, in 
spite of this government, not because of it. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak about a few . . . give you a few 
examples of such enterprising people. And one prime example 
in Weyburn, and that is known actually throughout all of 
Canada and probably throughout North America, is the 
Weyburn Inland Terminal. 
 
This is one of the largest, most successful inland terminals. This 
past year, Mr. Speaker, they celebrated their 25th anniversary. 
And Deana Driver of Regina published a book about the 
terminal and about their successes. And she called it Just A 
Bunch of Farmers. The book celebrates their efforts, their 
innovations, and their determination on their way to improving 
Canada’s grain handling system. 
 
But the most remarkable thing, Mr. Speaker, about the 
Weyburn Inland Terminal is that it is totally 100 per cent farmer 
owned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another success story in Weyburn-Big Muddy is 
TWC, one of the largest financial firms in Western Canada. 
TWC administers over 3.5 billion in assets and it recently 
combined with Altara Securities of Vancouver to form a new, 
broader-based company called TWC Altara. The company will 
continue to operate in Radville and Altara will continue to 
operate in Vancouver. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is a shining example of how business can be 
run from anywhere with today’s technology. The Calibaba 
family of Radville had a dream and made it happen here. They 
didn’t have to go to Atlanta, Georgia to make it happen, and 
they didn’t need government involvement either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are far too numerous number of success 
stories in Weyburn-Big Muddy to name them all, but I would 
just like to name a few more. 
 
Another one is Precision Ag which was started by three young 
farmers at Griffen. There’s . . . (inaudible) . . . Manufacturing at 
Ogema; Ceylon Pulses Plus; Country Green at Radville; 
Paradise Herbs in Weyburn, which is now expanding not only 
their own business but creating an outlet for additional 
individuals who want to start a new business. We have Red 
Coat Road and Rail out of Pangman and Ogema. We’ve had 
various elevator conversions where farmers have taken it upon 
themselves to buy the elevator and turn it into a worthwhile 
enterprise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have PanCanadian Resources. PanCanadian 
has been and continues to be one of the main engines of the 
economy in Weyburn. They have . . . they provide excellent 
employment opportunities for many people in Weyburn and in 
the surrounding area. At a time when farming is on the 
downturn we can always count on the oil industry in our area to 
pick up the slack and to provide jobs and needed income. 
 
It is also known for its support of community, giving thousands 
of dollars in donations to support culture and sports. With the 
CO2 expansion, Mr. Speaker, and now the merger with Alberta 
Energy, PanCanadian has a bright future and that is good news 
for Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Access Communications is another successful 
company that provides valuable community services. Now 



April 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

 

government, this government, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, have 
decided to compete directly with Access Communications. This 
is a prime example of direct competition by this government 
with existing businesses in Saskatchewan. They take their tax 
dollars and then they turn right around and use those tax dollars 
to compete with them. And then the NDP wonder why 
everywhere we go people are asking us, when is the next 
election? 
 
Mr. Speaker, good things happen in this province in spite of the 
NDP, in spite of the NDP’s policy of building a public empire 
and chasing away our good, young entrepreneurs. The NDP are 
competing directly with private business and they are 
competing outside of Saskatchewan with our tax dollars; 
they’re taking our tax dollars, investing them outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What this government should be doing is to creating an 
infrastructure so business can grow and flourish within the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one prime example of the NDP’s failure to grow 
this economy and to add the necessary infrastructure is the 
deplorable states . . . state of our highways. And nowhere is this 
more evident than in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
Our highways are a disgrace and they are unsafe. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read to you at this time 
excerpts from an article that was written. It’s called, “Canadian 
Bacon,” by Roland Hoag and it was published in a motorcycle 
magazine, speaking about our highways, and I quote: 
 

Over the past years I’ve received votes on the best roads in 
Canada and there was little competition, leaving Alberta 
and Highway 93 from Banff to Jasper the winner. With 
every bit of good news, there is evil lurking in the 
background. When there is a best, there is a worst. 
 
My travels this year found the legend of the road from hell, 
or should I say roads from hell, collected in one province. 
All the provinces have some bad roads, but no other 
province can beat Saskatchewan for having a compilation 
of highways from hell. 
 
Motorcyclists beware. The back highways of Saskatchewan 
are dangerous and should be avoided. Saskatchewan is 
known for wheat, grain elevators, and now for having 
Lucifer on staff at the Department of Highways. 

 
What a sad commentary about our highway system in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are all talk when it comes to supporting 
rural Saskatchewan. There have been several efforts in my 
constituency by people who would like to start a pasta plant. 
The NDP do not support this. They will not stand up for the 
farmers in Saskatchewan and try to obtain an exemption from 
the Canadian Wheat Board so that this venture can proceed. 
 
What is the NDP’s answer to agriculture, Mr. Speaker? The 
NDP’s answer in this budget is higher premiums and less 
coverage for crop . . . excuse me . . . for crop insurance. They 
again have promised us in the Throne Speech that there would 

be a long-term safety net program. This has been promised 
since the NDP tore up GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
10 years ago. Do we see any dollars in the budget for GRIP? 
None. Do we see any dollars in the budget for some other kind 
of long-term safety net program? Not a dime. 
 
(16:45) 
 
But what this government has done is taken less; they are 
contributing less dollars for education. They are going to drive 
up property taxes again in rural Saskatchewan. They are not 
only driving up the cost, but they are also removing the $25 
million education tax rebate that has been in place for the last 
two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also sent back seventeen and a half million 
dollars to Ottawa when they cancelled the spot loss hail in the 
crop insurance program. There has been absolutely no 
recognition of the hardship that agriculture is facing because of 
the drought, not only with the agriculture producers, the grain 
producers, but also on behalf of livestock. The ranchers of this 
province are concerned about where they are going to get water 
to feed their cattle and how they are going to grow a hay crop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on about how the NDP have failed 
rural Saskatchewan. Another way that they have failed rural 
Saskatchewan is by their failure to address the problems with 
water treatment in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In my constituency, the RM of Norton, the village of Pangman, 
and now Radville have all applied to this government for help 
to change . . . to improve their water treatment and their landfill. 
And to date, not one of them have received a dime from this 
government. 
 
And yet we see in this budget they are not increasing the 
amount of dollars spent, but they are taking $1 million out of 
the fund. How is this going to improve water treatment in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that the time has passed 4:45, and at this time 
I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:48. 
 


