















































Hansard: June 18, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2159 
 June 18, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 9 — The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand tonight to address Bill No. 9, An Act to amend 
The Real Estate Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of our members, opposition members, 
have spoken to this Bill previously and have outlined some of 
the areas of concern with the Bill. And this concern was 
brought to our attention by the Saskatoon Real Estate Board as 
well as realtors from other areas of the province. And you know 
we recognize that the NDP (New Democratic Party) is calling 
this a housekeeping Bill, Mr. Speaker, and it’s one that makes 
some fairly inconsequential — inconsequential, sorry — 
amendments, but there is still a part of this Bill that speaks to 
one of the major problems facing the province. 
 
But first of all in relating to the housekeeping amendments, they 
have taken care of updating legislation that deals with 
confidentiality and information sharing within the real estate 
industry, and the official opposition has no problem with that, 
Mr. Speaker. There are also amendments that allow for 
interprovincial agreements between bodies and regulators, 
something that would be necessary when there are brokers and 
salespeople moving from one jurisdiction to another. 
 
So overall we don’t take issue with those amendments that talk 
about confidentiality and information sharing. And we also 
support those sections that strengthen agreements reached 
between regulating bodies and representatives. 
 
Changes that require errors and omissions coverage are in 
themselves not negative — in fact the real estate group has 
indicated that they actually prefer that. It would only make good 
sense that they should have that kind of protection. 
 
Changing the requirements regarding disclosure and reporting 
are also things we don’t take issue with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the one thing that we and the real estate community have a 
major problem with is the section that deals with specifying one 
insurance carrier and making this mandatory. This has the real 
estate business very concerned. It’s almost as if they didn’t 
know about that particular clause in the body of this Act. 
 
In fact during his second reading speech, the Justice minister 
said that the government had consulted with the Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Commission, with the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Association, and the Superintendent of Real Estate; yet we 
know that there have been a number of letters sent out, all of 

them expressing concerns about the section that speaks of a 
specified insurance carrier. In other words, it looks as if the real 
estate community hadn’t seen this particular Bill as it is written. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, lack of proper consultation on the part of 
the NDP government. 
 
Why was the section of the Bill that specifies one insurance 
carrier necessary? There were no reasons given for this. 
Specifying one insurance carrier, Mr. Speaker, means 
funnelling more business to just one company and not leaving 
the market open — and this is the point that the realtors of the 
province would like to make. It’s important to them to have 
freedom of choice to choose the insurance carrier that they 
choose. They don’t want anyone determining this for them or 
having a mandatory stipulation put forward in this legislation 
where they should be told which insurance carrier they must go 
with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if a monopoly is allowed in that area, it would not 
make things easier or more commercial or more economical. In 
fact it would have the reverse effect. The Saskatoon real estate 
association and the Insurance Brokers Association of 
Saskatchewan have very clearly indicated that they do not 
support that particular section of the Bill. Businesses right now, 
Mr. Speaker, are overtaxed and they’re over regulated as it is. 
The last thing the real estate community needs is to be told that 
they must deal with a specified insurance carrier. 
 
In the words of the Saskatoon real estate association: 
 

The only single insurer model our association has seen 
provided 80 per cent less coverage at 30 per cent higher 
costs to the registrant. 

 
This certainly cannot be in the interests of the consumer or the 
real estate industry. 
 
Insurance brokers have also expressed their concern with this 
section of the Bill. They too do not feel it would be in the best 
interests of all concerned if this section were allowed to 
proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be making an amendment to this Bill. At 
this time we are prepared to move it on to Committee of the 
Whole, but we certainly hope that the government takes very 
seriously the request of the real estate people in this province 
and the insurance brokers. The request that they’re issuing to 
the government to make an amendment to this Bill to remove 
clause (q) . . . I’m not quite sure exactly, I’ll have to just refer to 
that clause, Mr. Speaker. It’s clause 83(1)(q.1). And that’s the 
thing that they would like to be removed from this particular 
Bill. And the opposition will be moving an amendment during 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would at this time take the opportunity to table a 
number of letters of support for that particular clause being 
removed, by members of the real estate community. These 
brokers are from Saskatoon and Regina, and there is also some 
representation here from North Battleford. I would be pleased 
to table this on their behalf and would ask the minister to please 
review these and consider very seriously granting the request of 
the Real Estate Board in Saskatoon as well as, as I mentioned, 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

brokers throughout the province who are asking for this to be 
returned . . . rather, removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s in the Bill, there’s the word mandatory 
used as well as the word compulsory. In this Bill it’s, you know, 
the word mandatory is being used and there is a big difference 
between mandatory and compulsory. 
 
Compulsory means that certainly all real estate brokers would 
have to have errors and omissions insurance. And that’s pretty 
well been the consensus of the real estate boards. They in fact 
have passed bylaws that this would have to be the case. And so 
they’ve already seen to that. 
 
To use the word mandatory, a mandatory specified insurer, 
really strikes a chord, a fear in their heart, that they’re not going 
to have the freedom to choose their own insurer. And certainly 
this is something in a democracy that we as the Saskatchewan 
Party feel is important for people. It’s important for people in 
business, it’s important for everyone in the province to be able 
to do their business freely and to deal with the open market 
because they can determine best what is best for them and 
certainly for their clients. 
 
So without a doubt, this particular clause of the Act to amend 
The Real Estate Act must be removed if we are going to 
guarantee people the freedom to choose as they should have in a 
democracy. 
 
As I’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker, I will be making an 
amendment to this Act during Committee of the Whole, and I 
now refer this Bill on to Committee of the Whole and I do table 
these letters for the minister responsible to review and certainly 
I hope he will consider it very seriously. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 53 — The 
Department of Economic Development Amendment Act, 
2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In speaking to this 
Act very recently, I alluded to several things in the Act that 
required some further investigation, further questions to be 
answered. We’ve had a short amount of time in order to do that 
and I’m going to shortly allow this Act to move on to 
Committee of the Whole, but in the meantime I have a couple 
of other points that I would like to put on the record. 
 
In this amendment to the Act, The Department of Economic 
Development Act, there is some positive things that I think we 
certainly don’t have any problems with. I think the 
government-wide approach to the computer technology that 
they talk about in these amendments I think is a very positive 
aspect of this amendment. I think trying to get those kinds of 

services into one department and being able to coordinate it 
from one department I think is excellent. 
 
There is a couple of points that I think we have to be aware of 
and we’ll discuss these when we get into the Committee of the 
Whole, but just to make the point I think we would certainly 
like to understand to a little more depth what is meant by one of 
the clauses in here called . . . referring to some out-servicing 
when the capability is not present in that particular department. 
I think that’s an important understanding that we have to come 
to grips with. 
 
There is another aspect in this Bill. When we’re talking about 
purchasing of equipment, the Department of Industry and 
Resources will now be responsible for the IT (information 
technology), as I read it. And they have been given a larger 
limit, in fact a larger mandate to purchase the IT equipment for 
other departments. 
 
I referred to this earlier, and I think this is something that we 
will certainly be pursuing in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
When the departments do that purchasing, under whose budget 
will the purchases be made? Will they be transferred to the 
particular budgets or will it be absorbed under Industry and 
Resources in a new budget item of technology, information 
technology? 
 
Those are the kinds of things that I think will have to be 
pursued because one of the important aspects of economic 
development in this province, or economic development even in 
any industry — and after all, this is an Act that was amending 
the previous Department of Economic Development, after 
which it became Economic and Co-operative Development — 
one of the essentials of economic development is, is it 
sustainable, is it predictable, and is it transparent. Those three 
items are very important, whether you’re looking at a 
government department or whether you’re looking at a 
corporate agency. 
 
If they are not sustainable and they are not transparent, it’s 
going to be very difficult to make sure that either the 
shareholders are satisfied — in this case, the people of the 
province — or in fact the banking institutions or the financial 
institutions, and in the case of government of course that at this 
stage means the borrowing capacity of the government. 
 
So we don’t want to belittle the fact that this is an important 
part of this Act because I think it has long-term implications 
that will have to be sorted through. 
 
(19:15) 
 
We also see that because the department has merged between 
several other departments, it becomes a very large and 
complicated department. The department of . . . Industry and 
Resources, rather, is now a compendium of several others, and 
it’s a little confusing for people in this province in dealing with 
the government to know exactly which department to call for 
questions, for answers, and for assistance. 
 
Mines and Energy has now been absorbed and merged into this 
department; some aspects of the forestry industry. As well it 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

 

puts a lot of material under the mandate of the minister and the 
minister’s department. And we want to make sure that the 
accessibility to the departments is maintained — in fact 
increased — so that contacts can be continued and answers 
obtained. 
 
There isn’t a great deal of other material in this Act that is going 
to cause a great deal of concern with us because we think that 
bringing together, for efficiency reasons, things like information 
technology, as I mentioned, being an excellent start in the right 
direction. And as we move on in this Bill into Committee of the 
Whole, we’ll be looking forward to asking those questions that I 
just referred to and we’ll see if we can discover what the 
answers are. 
 
So at this time we’ll allow this Act, Mr. Speaker, to move to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 59 — The 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I need to address some of the 
concerns that we have in the Saskatchewan financial services 
Bill, Bill No. 59. 
 
What this . . . the key thing in this particular Bill, and along 
with a few other things on the sidebars, are that it integrates 
three major organizations that regulate financial services in 
Saskatchewan. And it’s a bit amazing that the people that are 
best known for red tape would actually look at something like 
this because there is some movement finally on the part of the 
NDP opposite to reduce some red tape. And that’s the thing 
they’re noted the best for, they’re noted the best for. 
 
And I see the Finance minister already has his ears perked up 
and is listening carefully because as an individual who is sort of 
responsible for some of the business in the province and 
creating a business climate, the amount of red tape in this 
province is one of the key things that needs to be looked at. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the red tape this 
government has created over the years, it is truly amazing. It is 
truly amazing. 
 
The least they could have done, the least they could have done, 
Mr. Speaker, instead of just coming up with Bill No. 59 and just 
sort of doing a little bit of tampering here and a little bit of 
tampering there, is basically put in something like a sunset 
clause or something that would say any time that a piece of 
legislation, a piece of red tape, has been around for a certain 
period of time, it has to be looked at again. And we’re very 
aware of a lot of communities and areas in our province where 
you have a piece of legislation that has been around for a long 
time, actually becomes antiquated and then becomes useless 
and becomes a problem in society if it was actually kept in 
place. 
 

This NDP government is famous for that. And I recall about 
two, three years ago, Mr. Speaker, when I had an individual 
come to my constituency from British Columbia and wanted to 
set up a dairy in this particular province. And one of the first 
things he discovered was the amount of red tape, and Bill No. 
59 addresses that. And I think we have to give some examples 
dealing with the amount of red tape the NDP have. And I 
imagine because they’re NDP that’s why the term red tape is 
being used. But they’ve created no end of that. 
 
And he came to Saskatchewan, having run a dairy in British 
Columbia with his father, and his father basically said, well 
land prices are very high in British Columbia and there’s limits 
on how much in the valley area you can develop a lot of these 
industries. So we just can’t set up another dairy in the valley 
area so Saskatchewan would be a good place to come to, and he 
did. And he came to Rosthern constituency which is about the 
best place in Saskatchewan to come if you want to come into a 
vibrant area that still has some semblance of health care, that 
still has schools that are still growing and those positives are out 
there. 
 
And so as he started to set together this dairy, Mr. Speaker, he 
found out that there was no end of red tape. And the very 
frustrating thing — the very frustrating thing, Mr. Speaker — 
was that as he tried to work his way through this red tape there 
seemed to be absolutely no end to it. There also seemed to be 
no beginning to it because if you can find the beginnings of it 
you can fairly easily trace it through to the end. But it was just 
one big jumble of it and he’d be attacked someplace. Well 
where’s the beginning? Where’s the end? 
 
This government could have very easily, Mr. Speaker, set up a 
single window for agricultural investment. If this person could 
have come to Saskatchewan, contacted a key person who would 
have said, okay you’re involved and interested in dairies; here’s 
where you go, this is what you have to do, here are the things 
you have to take care of, here are the people and the phone 
numbers, the offices you have to contact. When you go ahead 
and sort of jump through those hoops you’re finished, and if 
you can jump through them successfully you’re in business. 
 
But that isn’t what happened in his case. He went ahead and 
contacted all the people that he thought he should contact once 
he found them — and he called my office for a few of those. 
And then when he was partway through the project all of a 
sudden he finds there’s a few other things that he hasn’t done. 
No one had told him about it. No one had told about it. 
 
It’s unbelievable that in this province we have an NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker, that actually claims that they’re 
trying to help business and growth and development in this 
province, that they wouldn’t have thought of that very basic 
concept. 
 
Somebody comes here to open a dairy — this is the person you 
contact; all the red tape will be laid out in front of you. You 
know what you have to do. But no, the individual had to 
scrounge and scrounge to try and do it. And he wanted to do it 
right because he knew that governments don’t like to go ahead 
and make special applications in situations for people who are 
already partway through a project and then find out that it 
doesn’t quite meet their regulations, Mr. Speaker. 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

So he worked his way through those, and as I said, he 
continually came up with one difficulty after another one. And 
that’s what this NDP government is noted for. 
 
We’ve had a number of Bills in front of us already this spring 
session, Mr. Speaker. Where we look at the Bill . . . and the 
ethanol one is probably one of the best examples of that. When 
you read through the ethanol Bill, and my colleague from the 
southwest corner, Cypress Hills, went through that in detail last 
time and showed us very plainly that there really isn’t a whole 
lot in that Bill. Everything that’s in there that should be of 
consequence is left over to regulation. 
 
Now how in the world are the people of the province being 
made aware of legislation? They can’t watch the channel as 
some people are doing tonight, and I am amazed at how many 
people are actually watching this. But I found out, Mr. Speaker, 
the reason that they are actually watching this channel and that 
visibility is going up, and that virtually every time I go home 
and I’ve done something on TV, I have a number of people who 
come up and say, saw you on television, liked what you said. 
 
And I keep asking them, you have nothing better to do than to 
watch the legislative channel? And invariably, Mr. Speaker, 
invariably they say this is the closest look we get at government 
and we keep watching because we know, we know, Mr. 
Speaker, that this NDP government’s going to fall flat on its 
face one of these times. 
 
They’re teetering, they’re tottering, they’re just about over, and 
they know that one of these times they’ll be watching and it’ll 
be a big collapse of the NDP government. And they want to see 
that moment, Mr. Speaker, because it’s going to be one of the 
most glorious moments in this province when this NDP 
government actually finally falls. This finally is going to fall 
and they want to watch that. 
 
So basically, as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, they can’t, they 
can’t watch the channel and find out what happens in 
regulations. They can go ahead and watch this channel, Mr. 
Speaker, and they can go ahead and hear what we’re discussing 
about Bill No. 59. They could hear the member from Cypress 
who did a great job — Cypress Hills — did a great job of going 
through that ethanol Bill and explaining what it actually doesn’t 
say. And they have that information. 
 
But how do they find out what happens in regulations? They 
don’t. Because this NDP government in its true socialist 
manner, Mr. Speaker, goes behind closed doors, makes 
decisions and doesn’t tell anyone, and then waits, and then 
waits to see if they can ambush someone that hasn’t made the 
right decision. That’s the way this group operates this province. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, industry finds this government so 
difficult to work with, because they have miles and miles of 
regulations. But people don’t know about it. People get caught 
up in it. And anyone coming here has a very difficult time in 
finding out what it all is. 
 
They can’t go through the Bills that have been passed in the last 
10 years and say, I’m going to find out what applies to my 
particular area, because it’s not there. It’s not there. It’s hidden 
someplace in regulations. And that’s not the way a good 

government should operate. 
 
A good government should operate in such a way that all 
elected representatives could debate all important facets of 
every piece of legislation and the laws and the rules that are 
going to apply, and how business and individuals operate in this 
particular province, Mr. Speaker. And this NDP government’s 
been a total failure. They’ve been a total failure. 
 
Now this particular one integrates the three major organizations 
that regulate financial services in Saskatchewan. Here are the 
three that they’re putting together. The Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission, financial institution section of the consumer 
protection branch, and the pension benefits branch of the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Now here for the very first time — for the very first time — the 
NDP is going to create a single point of access. Now why has it 
taken till we’re in the second year of this millennium for this 
government to start to do what other governments, progressive 
governments across this world, have been doing for decades — 
have been doing for decades? 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, if you go to Ireland and see 
what’s happened there and a lot of the good things that have 
been occurring, they don’t run a government that has fluffy 
little Bills and hides everything in regulations. 
 
Those companies that came there and created those jobs over 
the last 10 years, they came there, that government was open, 
the information was there. They had no problem finding under 
the rules and regulations under which they would have to 
operate. 
 
But you get into this Saskatchewan situation where the NDP for 
the last half century — this last half century following the 
Regina Manifesto . . . And these people aren’t far away from the 
Regina Manifesto, let me tell you. 
 
Because one of the things that’s in the Regina Manifesto — and 
you, Mr. Speaker, would be very aware of it, and I know that 
everyone across there, all the NDP, they’ve been teethed on the 
Regina Manifesto — says very plainly that government needs to 
be in control of all the means of production. And I’m 
paraphrasing because I’d hate to read the thing often enough to 
know it word for word. 
 
And we’ve just seen that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a committee 
going in this building, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a committee 
going dealing with agricultural changes, agricultural changes to 
ownership. And what have we had? We’ve had a few people 
particularly from Saskatoon; we’ve got a member from 
Saskatoon right now smiling. He voted in favour of having no 
change. He wants to change this back so we have communes 
and everybody else works for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The question before the 
Assembly is Bill No. 59, The Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission Act, and I would ask members that are speaking 
. . . wish to speak to this Bill to do so and to try to contain their 
remarks as they are relevant to the Bill. 
 
(19:30) 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Another one of the aspects on Bill No. 59, 
and it’s probably an effort of this government to sort of move 
into a global economy, but it’s something they’re doing very, 
very poorly. 
 
And we need to go back to that particular agricultural piece of 
legislation and the committee that was working on that. Boy, 
they’d love nothing better, Mr. Speaker, than to limit every 
farmer in Saskatchewan to 160 acres. To 160 acres, that’s what 
they love, because that way they’ve got a better chance of 
controlling all the means of production in this province. 
 
Would they think of opening it up and let somebody else with 
some money come in, bring up the price of land so individuals 
could go ahead and have more equity in their land to go to their 
financial institutions and say, here’s the value of my land, now I 
have the opportunity to diversify? No, not these people. 
 
These are the people that have said for years, need to diversify, 
and yet every single policy they put in place for agriculture 
decreases the price of land, decreases the value of the things at 
the farm gate, totally destroying agriculture. 
 
And then they’ll stand up and say well, we’re . . . we’d like to 
see some growth and development. 
 
This particular Bill is the first very small step they’re taking. 
Unfortunately they’re two to three decades behind the rest of 
the country — as they always are, Mr. Speaker, as they always 
are. 
 
This NDP loves nothing better than . . . build walls around this 
province. This is the first crack in that wall. And as I said, the 
people of this province are watching to see this NDP 
government topple. They’re also hoping to see the walls topple 
that these socialists have built around this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the short direction that this particular Bill goes is 
something that we support. Unfortunately it is so little in so big 
a problem that I’m not sure we’re going to notice a difference, 
but maybe we’ll have to give them credit for at least going a 
small way down that road. 
 
So I recommend that Bill No. 59 move over to Committee of 
the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 60 — The 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 apportant 
des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular Bill, 
Bill No. 60, relates in a large part to the Bill that we just 
discussed. It’s basically respecting consequential amendments 
that come out of the Bill No. 59 that we just spent some time 

on, and therefore this one may as well follow the other one 
down to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 63 — The 
Members’ Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the first 
question that comes up when we look at Bill No. 63 is why in 
the world we have this Bill in front of us. We did that briefly in 
Bill No. 59 when we talked about the red tape. Now we’re 
talking about Bill No. 63, The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Act (No. 2). Why do we have this in front of us? 
 
I’ll tell you very specifically why we have this in front of us, 
Mr. Speaker. We have it in front of us because one of their 
cabinet ministers that sat in exactly that chair some very few 
years ago found himself in trouble because he had been kicked 
out of this legislature by his electorate, Mr. Speaker, as will 
most of those people sitting there right now. 
 
As I look over the group sitting across over there, I can see a 
whole lot of people that aren’t ever going to be back in here 
after the next election — a few of them by choice, a few of 
them by choice. 
 
I see the Minister of Justice, and when I watched the news this 
evening I found out that, by his own choice, he is not going to 
be here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame him. I don’t blame him. Being 
on that side of the House, in the mess they’re in, and I’m sure 
he has a TV in his house and he has watched very carefully 
what has happened in the news in the last week or two, he has 
decided to pull the pin. And do I blame him? No, no one blames 
him. 
 
The surprising thing is that a man of his intelligence would have 
stayed here that long. He tried to take over this NDP Party and 
make some sense out of it. Unfortunately, unfortunately the 
people over there that are so out of touch with the individuals of 
Saskatchewan wouldn’t give him that opportunity. They gave it 
to the present person, who calls himself the wee Premier of a 
wee province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how degrading to the people of this 
province can you be than say, you’re just a wee province. We’re 
a great province, with great people. And yet our present Premier 
will choose to call this a wee province. Well that is suitable then 
for him to call himself a wee Premier in that case. 
 
So as I said, we had the Minister of Justice, who has now 
decided to pull the pin. He’s decided to pull the pin. Apparently 
it has got to be some time in about July 1 he is going to be out 
of here, which is going to make some interesting situations over 
here, Mr. Speaker, very interesting situations. Because you 
remember last year when supposedly, according to the media, 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

the Sask Party hid in a few bushes and almost defeated the 
government, but defeated them on some of their own motions, 
Mr. Speaker — the most embarrassing moment of their lives, 
the most embarrassing moment of their lives. 
 
I remember the Whip, who now sits at the back, Mr. Speaker, 
with a sheet of paper, and these members have to ask him 
whether they can go to the washroom because they’re so 
paranoid about leaving, so paranoid about leaving. 
 
So when they lose that Minister of Justice on July 1, Mr. 
Speaker, on July 1, their chances of suffering another defeat in 
here are a whole lot greater, and as I said earlier on, that’s why 
the people of this province are watching. 
 
We heard that the member from Cumberland was on television 
as well, saying he wants to go out and get an education. We’ve 
been trying to give him an education in here for a long time, 
Mr. Speaker. We have told him many things but he hasn’t 
listened, so he wants to go to the great halls of learning and get 
an education, and we admire that; we wish him well. The only 
unfortunate thing is he didn’t tell us when he was going. 
 
Then we have another one of the members who’s apparently 
going to go and take over head of the labour department in 
Saskatchewan. Ms. Byers is now gone and you have one of 
your members, NDP members is going to go over and take over 
that job. Now that’s going to leave them a pretty decimated 
group. They’ll be as decimated in members, Mr. Speaker, as 
they are in ideas right now. They’re totally barren of ideas; 
they’re getting pretty barren of members as well. 
 
Bill No. 63, the question comes, why? It comes back, Mr. 
Speaker, to that minister, that minister of Agriculture, who sat 
there three, four, five years ago. His constituency kicked him 
out of this place. And as I’ve said, that’s going to happen to 
quite a number of those people. Then before you knew it, Mr. 
Speaker, he had his feet back in the trough of the NDP socialist 
government. He was ripping off the taxpayers of this province 
by using opportunities that he had made, connections that he’d 
made as a minister. That’s why we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I just would caution the 
members in the language they’re using with respect to 
particularly people who the Assembly and the Speaker have the 
duty to protect because they are not in a position where they can 
enter the debate in this particular legislature. So I would just ask 
the member to be judicious in his remarks when referring to 
people outside of the legislature, be they former members or 
not. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a result of that 
misdemeanour we now have Bill No. 63 in front of us because 
when the people who investigated that situation, they said by 
the fine letter of the law — by the fine letter of the law — 
nothing illegal had been done but it was basically wrong. 
 
Now a couple of things we have to remember over here, Mr. 
Speaker. That piece of legislation that was in place that this 
individual tried to circumvent was created by that group of 
NDP right over there. They created that legislation in such a 
loose way that when they lose an election they can get back into 
the trough in a real hurry, Mr. Speaker, in a real hurry. So the 

individuals who went through that particular case and looked at 
it came up with Bill No. 63 and said we have to tighten this up. 
We have to tighten this up because there’s been too much 
misuse by ex-NDPers. And heaven knows, Mr. Speaker, there 
are a lot of ex-NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and there will be a whole lot more. There will be a 
whole lot more. 
 
Let’s just recall one other thing that happened not long ago — 
Channel Lake, Mr. Speaker, Channel Lake. If we check through 
that carefully, if we check through that carefully . . . and now, 
Mr. Speaker, chirping from across is the member who 
represents a constituency of a former premier. And he tries to 
do that with pride and dignity. But he should remember it’s that 
former premier, Premier Blakeney, who created half the debt 
we have in this province, Mr. Speaker. He created that in the 
’60s and the ’70s. And when the ’80s came along and we had 
those horrendous interest rates that we remember, we were 
paying those horrendous interest rates on the NDP-CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) debt from those 
years. We paid 18, 19, 20, up to 22 per cent interest on that 
socialist debt. But he forgets that. But now he’s quiet back there 
because he’s thinking about it, something he doesn’t do very 
often. We assume that when he’s quiet he’s thinking, Mr. 
Speaker. That in itself says a whole lot. 
 
We look at Channel Lake. We look at Channel Lake, and as we 
went through that, Mr. Speaker, we found out that there’s a 
certain amount of money, a substantial amount of money that 
basically just remained unaccounted for. Unaccounted for. But 
where had it gone? It had gone through the hands of a former 
NDP MLA. It had gone through those hands, Mr. Speaker. And 
suddenly the money disappeared. Suddenly the money 
disappeared. So we worked through weeks of committee 
meetings to try and find out what had happened in Channel 
Lake. And when the thing ended up getting fairly hot for the 
NDP, they wrote the report behind closed doors. And fact is 
they even had the report written before the committee had 
ceased to sit. It shows the way that group over there works, Mr. 
Speaker. You can’t trust an NDP, you can’t trust a CCF because 
that’s what they were. 
 
The committee is still in process and they have the report 
written. They do that all the time, Mr. Speaker. They do that all 
the time. They write the report and then say, well let’s be 
sanctimonious, set up a committee, and the public will think 
we’re actually looking into something. They’re looking for an 
excuse but they’re not looking into anything. So we went 
through this Channel Lake thing. It was a disaster. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at a few more things how these 
individuals handle situations and mishandle them. We had the 
Minister of Justice today get up and make a statement that 
because his Justice department had made such a total disaster of 
the situation and made so many wrong decisions, they were 
going to have to pay an individual an amount of 1.3 million 
which had been agreed to, and give him an apology. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that individual well deserves that payment 
and he well deserves that apology. There’s another eight to ten 
more people out there, Mr. Speaker, who also suffered 
injustices in exactly the same situation, and it’s the one, Mr. 
Speaker, that came out of Martensville some years ago. 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

 

But this Justice department, this NDP Justice department, 
mishandled that in such a bad and serious way. Now they’ve 
settled with one individual — one individual. And just think of 
what that person has suffered for the last seven, eight years. 
And I know there’s no way the amount of money that he’s 
getting can buy back what that person has lost — his dignity, 
his friends, possibly his family, his health, his job. All that’s 
been taken away from him by the way this government 
mishandles its responsibility, Mr. Speaker. It’s a total shame. 
 
That’s the Martensville case. We’ve settled one; now there are 
eight to ten more to go which could go on about the same sort 
of way. And we’ll have the Justice minister . . . and I don’t 
blame him for wanting to leave and go pick up another job. 
Whoever they’ll get out of the back rows to be the next Justice 
minister is going to have to do a lot of apologizing in the same 
case. 
 
Then we have the Milgaard case — another place where they 
messed it up. Let’s take something a whole lot more similar, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s the whole Klassen situation . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(19:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
North. What is your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening for the 
last several minutes, Mr. Speaker, to the debate from the hon. 
member for Rosthern who I would remind the House is 
speaking to the Bill, The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act, 
Bill No. 53 which I have in my hand here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for the life of me I’m having a difficult time. I don’t know 
about you, Mr. Speaker, but I’m having a difficult time 
understanding the relevance of the comments to the Bill. Mr. 
Speaker, when I look at the content of the Bill it has to do with 
the enforcement of . . . Mr. Speaker, if the hon. members would 
allow me to continue, it has to do with the enforcement of 
contractual relationships between former members and the 
executive government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a fair amount of what I would call 
casting aspersions on both former members of the House, as 
you’ve just cautioned the hon. member just a few minutes ago. I 
certainly hear the casting of aspersions on the character of 
current members of the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I’m not hearing are what appear to be 
debate that’s relevant to the content of the Bill before us. And I 
would ask, Mr. Speaker, that you’d call the hon. member to 
order and direct the hon. member to direct his debate in the 
context of the Bill before the House. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the point 
of order I believe that the member from Rosthern was working 
his way to the points of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. He had already 
been addressing how they affect both past members, Mr. 
Speaker — how this change will — how it will affect current 
members, Mr. Speaker, and how it will affect future members 
of this House, and how they relate their future employment . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Members, the House leaders are 
attempting to keep the House working in an orderly fashion and 
I’d appreciate, and I think everybody would appreciate, if they 
were allowed to make their points of order in a succinct way 
and that people would give attention to the points of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
was pointing out how important it is to all members of this 
House that they know and understand and follow this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. The previous legislation to this had 
flaws in it which allowed for errors to occur. This will be 
correcting it. 
 
And the member, Mr. Speaker, is showing how, in broad 
examples, this Bill will correct the problems that we have 
already faced in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. So the member is 
speaking to the points of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for their . . . raising the 
issue. Members, on second reading debates we usually do allow 
considerable latitude. I will however ask — as I was paying 
attention to what the member was saying, and he did 
occasionally stray perhaps for longer and farther than is the 
usual custom, and the usual tradition in the House — and I 
would just simply ask him to continue to speak, but bring his 
remarks and relate them directly to Bill 63. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 63, and 
let’s deal with the specific, and then I think we have to look at 
the situations as they have developed in the past, and what 
we’re trying to make sure that it doesn’t happen again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Bill No. 63 basically extends the six-month limitation period for 
prosecution to two years — to two years. And if I’m going to 
paraphrase the purpose for this, and I asked that question when 
I stood up as you will recall, Mr. Speaker, and that is why . . . 
the why for Bill 63, puts in restrictions disallowing former 
cabinet ministers to be in association with another person for 
the purpose of circumventing this Act. 
 
So we’re dealing very specifically — very specifically — with 
former cabinet ministers circumventing the Act. That’s what 
had happened, Mr. Speaker; that’s what had happened. That’s 
what the investigation showed, and that is exactly what Bill 63 
is all about. It’s to end that circumvention of what is in place. 
 
Circumvention, honesty, truthfulness, veracity, Mr. Speaker, 
those are all . . . come to the heart of what Bill 63 is about. So 
let’s just check and see what’s happened in the past and maybe 
Bill No. 63 will be able to go ahead and correct that. 
 
I just happen to have with me, Mr. Speaker, ’99 election 
platform, building a bright future together. It doesn’t really say 
who this is . . . oh, right there in fine print. It’s in fine print; I 
think they must be hiding it. It says the Romanow New 
Democrats. 
 
Well let’s just see what this Bill might be referring to when it 
talks about people trying to circumvent; to go ahead and put 
something in place which doesn’t really exist; to try and get 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

people to go ahead and think that something’s going to occur 
that’s not occurring. 
 
So we’ll just turn to page 3, Mr. Speaker. And the statement 
made comes right down to circumventions, to veracity, to all 
those sorts of things. One of the commitments — ’99 election, 
Mr. Speaker — 30,000 more jobs. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
haven’t come anywheres near that. 
 
So we have a government over there that promised 30,000 more 
jobs but they haven’t come anywheres near it. How can we trust 
them with anything? We need pieces of legislation like Bill No. 
63. We need tough pieces of legislation to keep those 
individuals when they’re kicked out of government, especially 
the cabinet ministers, and that’s what this one applies to, Mr. 
Speaker, very specifically applies to cabinet ministers. It comes 
as a result of what NDP cabinet ministers have done — NDP 
cabinet ministers and only NDP cabinet ministers — and that 
must be known and must be understood. That’s why Bill 63 is 
there. 
 
Then we get another statement. We’re going to lower taxes, the 
NDP said back in ’99. The premier said that, in fact — the 
premier. The premier said that. You see that, Mr. Speaker? 
Platform. Romanow New Democrats. Lower taxes. 
 
Well the very first budget we had, Mr. Speaker, taxes actually 
went up — actually went up. They included a whole lot of 
things that hadn’t been in there before. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, we need a Bill No. 63 because it’s the NDP and their 
cabinet ministers and this leader in government that can’t be 
trusted. It’s because someone broke that trust. It’s because, Mr. 
Speaker, an ex-NDP cabinet minister broke that trust with the 
people of this province that we have Bill No. 63 in front of us. 
 
Let’s look at this again and see if there has been some more 
examples. It’s this sort of thing, Mr. Speaker, that laid the stage, 
put down the groundwork for misdeeds that brought about Bill 
No. 63 which is exactly what we’re discussing today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Better health care. Hire 500 more health care providers. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, if that statement wasn’t so sick, it would almost be 
humorous. Hire 500 more health . . . What have they done? The 
waiting lists created by this NDP government are longer than 
they’ve ever been in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker 
— in the history of this province. And we wonder about the 
veracity, the believability, of what the NDP cabinet ministers 
and their leaders do. That’s why we have Bill No. 63 in front of 
us. 
 
Let’s keep going, Mr. Speaker. There is a whole lot more 
commitments made here. And as we see that one after another 
of those commitments have been broken, it becomes more and 
more obvious why Bill No. 63 is a result of the investigation 
done on an ex-NDP cabinet minister, the Agriculture minister. 
Remember that. It was a point of great embarrassment to this 
government, not that they’re not used to embarrassment, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, as I have to admit, I’m surprised they don’t 
look like the British House of Lords and wear these wigs to 
hide the blushing from the embarrassment. I could tell one or 
two of them need them more than others do. 
 

Better health care. Okay. Then we’ll go to rural opportunities. 
We’re going to continue to fight for fairness for farmers. Well 
let’s just take a look at what our wee Premier said he was going 
to do. He was going to set up this committee, and he was going 
to call people in from other provinces, and we were going to 
show the feds what was going to happen. And the feds saw our 
Premier. Nothing happened. 
 
Well he thought I’m going to jump on an airplane, and I’m 
going to go down East, and I’m going to tell these gentlemen 
what they have to do for Saskatchewan. That’s what he told us 
he was going to do. Remember, Mr. Speaker, we’re about 
believability, we’re about circumventions, we’re about veracity. 
That’s what Bill 63 is all about. 
 
So he jumps on this airplane, he goes down to Ottawa, he’s 
going to get something for the farmers of Saskatchewan. He 
came back with absolutely nothing — absolutely nothing. And 
yet back in, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrat’s election 
platform, 1999, they were going to help rural Saskatchewan. 
They didn’t. 
 
Well there’s two more we’ll take out of that list. Balanced 
budgets. This gets to be very important because Bill No. 63 
comes . . . deals about money. NDP Agriculture cabinet 
minister in the past who made money from the taxpayers in this 
province that he shouldn’t have made. The investigation said it 
shouldn’t have been made. It shouldn’t have been made. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we again have some chirping 
from the member from the past premier, Regina Elphinstone, 
talking about days gone by. 
 
All the work we’re doing today, Mr. Speaker, is because of 
mismanagement and misuse of public funds by NDP cabinet 
ministers, people who worked hand in hand with the present 
NDP cabinet ministers. That’s what we’re talking about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s that kind of activity from these NDP that we’re trying to 
close the door on so they can’t misuse public funds again. 
That’s what we’re talking about — that’s what we’re talking 
about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And how do we know that whole row over 
there won’t be wanting to do the same sort of thing? Bill No. 63 
tries to close that door. 
 
So after the next election when almost all of these NDP cabinet 
ministers are going to be out looking for work, they can’t — as 
this Bill is trying to do — try to circumvent the old Act. 
 
This Act puts something in place that it extends the six-month 
limitation period for prosecution to two years. So they just can’t 
run and hide under the bushes for six months — maybe a cold 
winter, no one’s looking for them — and say guess what, we 
made it, we didn’t get caught. Six months, we just escaped. 
 
Well they’re going to have to go ahead and try that trick for two 
years. And I’m not sure they have the skills and ability — 
devious as they are, Mr. Speaker, devious as they are — to go 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

 

ahead and hide those kinds of misdeeds. 
 
The individual that caused this managed to hide it for six 
months, managed to hide it for six months. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
is very important that we talk about the length of time because 
that’s the crux of Bill 63. It opens it up from a six-month 
limitation period to prosecution to two years. 
 
Okay, we had the balanced budget bit. Well we know what’s 
happening to these balanced budgets. They’re anything but 
balanced. In fact this year’s budget is going in the glue. On a 
weekly basis it gets worse, either because we find out that some 
of the information isn’t correct or that this government didn’t 
reveal some information or that they have expenses they tried to 
hide or that they took money from various funds, as they’ve 
done. 
 
One example, just one example, Mr. Speaker — the Victims’ 
Fund. The Victims’ Fund, set up very specifically, Mr. Speaker, 
for victims of crime in this province to be helped. But who 
helped themselves to the Victims’ Fund, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Minister of Finance, to balance his budget, helped himself 
to the Victims’ Fund to the tune of $750,000. And we’ve got 
victims of crime throughout this province that can’t get help 
from this government — can’t get help from this government 
because they went ahead and took that money away from those 
helpless individuals to try and balance their budget. And I 
underline, Mr. Speaker, the word try, because it wasn’t 
balanced. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, comes from the platform, 1999, another 
situation where we have to look at what do they say and what 
do they do. It comes to the very crux and the hub of Bill No. 63 
and what it’s all about. 
 
Less crime. Oh, we had a specific number there, Mr. Speaker. 
Sometimes, you know, political promises from the NDP are 
vague, will have things such as, well we won’t have nuclear 
power, we’ll have wind generators. Who knows who’s going to 
buy it, but we’ll give them money so they can buy it from 
themselves so we can say it’s working. All kinds of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member seems to be 
re-fighting an election past. I would ask him once again to 
relate his remarks to Bill 63. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s true, Mr. 
Speaker, I did speak to some extent about the last election 
promises just to check on the veracity of the people across. 
 
But the problem seems to be when these individuals, these 
NDP, these socialists who tell the people of this province they 
have a social conscience, the minute that they’re ousted from 
this government by the electorate of this province, the social 
conscience is gone, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we have Bill 63. 
 
(20:00) 
 
We have this Bill very specifically because the electorate of this 
province booted out a member of cabinet and that member of 
cabinet misused the information and knowledge that he had to 
try and get himself a good-paying job. That’s why we have Bill 

No. 63. It’s a very important Bill. It is, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
very few Bills this government has presented that we have to 
say is a good Bill. 
 
Because anything that keeps ex-NDP cabinet ministers from 
fiddling around with the knowledge they have and trying to 
make some money out of it, as happened in this case that led to 
this Bill, that’s a good thing. That’s a good thing. The 
information and the influence they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at a lot of the companies that come 
from some nebulous places that this government drags into the 
system to say well we have a source of investment, or we have 
some companies that want to do business with government — 
as soon as that happens it’s very important, very important, Mr. 
Speaker, to check who is at the helm of those companies. 
 
And whenever we find some past NDP cabinet ministers and 
MLAs in control of those companies, we know that something 
devious is about to happen. It did last year, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why we have Bill No. 63. That’s why we have Bill No. 63. 
 
The intent of Bill No. 63 is primarily and only, Mr. Speaker, to 
force these NDP cabinet ministers when they stop being cabinet 
ministers — which could be very soon, it could be very soon — 
that the people of the province know that their investments in 
the government of this province, and in this province, will be 
well taken care of and won’t be tampered with and won’t be 
misused. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, as I said, one of the key purposes 
of Bill 63 is to make sure that no one is going to circumvent the 
Act as happened with the situation when we had that six-month 
limitation. It also expands the scope of a cooling-off period that 
prohibits former ministers from lobbying governments for 12 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some very interesting situations going on 
right now, where we have past NDP cabinet ministers who have 
been hired by companies to lobby the NDP government. I don’t 
know what scent we get from that when we sniff the air, Mr. 
Speaker, but where I come from it’s not a very pretty scent. It’s 
not a very pretty scent at all. 
 
That’s what this is all about, is to prohibit former ministers 
from lobbying governments for a period of 12 months. 
Hopefully by that time their influence, the knowledge they 
have, will be so little that it won’t do them very much good, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now on the other hand, there is one particular situation why 
Bill No. 63 probably isn’t going to do any good, Mr. Speaker. 
Because Bill No. 63 is exactly created to keep past NDP cabinet 
ministers from lobbying present NDP government. After the 
next election, Mr. Speaker, there will be a lot of past NDP 
cabinet ministers but there will not be an NDP cabinet, so all of 
those people will have to go back and find some other jobs. And 
I wish them well. 
 
The member from Cumberland is going for a better education. 
That’s good. The Justice minister is going to go back to 
university and do some teaching, and that’s fine. And we’re 
going to have the minister from . . . that was involved in Health 



2168 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

some years ago, going to go back and work in the Labour 
department, and that’s fine. So there are jobs there for them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing that Bill No. 63 does, Mr. Speaker, it expands 
the scope of inquiry, the conflict of minister . . . commissioner 
to mandate the commissioner to include comment on the 
conduct of any former member or any current or former public 
servant or Crown corp employee. Now that is critical, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have very often in this House, Mr. Speaker, raised questions 
about Crown corporations. Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and all the rest of that sort of 
thing will get up and he’ll say, I don’t micromanage. And then 
we want to go ahead and talk to the Crowns. Well is the 
minister supposed to be in charge? So they play these silly 
games, Mr. Speaker, where they hide these Crowns in an open 
never-never land because we can never ever seem to find out 
what’s going on. 
 
This says very specifically, Mr. Speaker, that the Conflict 
Commissioner, it can mandate that commissioner to include in 
his investigation comment on any former member, current 
member, public servant, or Crown corporation employee. So 
now when we want to check out what past NDP cabinet 
ministers have done, we can go ahead and use what’s been 
occurring in our Crown corporations, which is the ultimate 
hiding place for most everything that the NDP government 
does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They hide their debt there, they hide their past ministers there. 
They won’t hide all of the backbenchers there because some of 
them probably couldn’t find a job over there, but they do hide 
most of them or as many as they possibly can. 
 
We can finally do that, and that’s important. And I said earlier 
on, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 63 is a good piece of legislation — 
it’s a good piece of legislation. And it’s a total shame, Mr. 
Speaker, that the individual, the minister from whose office this 
comes is going to be leaving cabinet on July 1. The best piece 
of legislation comes from an individual who once wanted to be 
in charge of this NDP Party. They kicked him out, they 
wouldn’t let him do that. Now he wants to leave, and having 
gone ahead and presented the one best piece of legislation that 
we’ve seen this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also under Bill No. 63, former cabinet ministers may apply for 
exemption under the 12-month cooling-off period, but it’s up to 
the commissioner to grant or not to grant it. So if there is a 
particular reason that looks like it might have some concern, 
they can present it to the conflict of interest, that commissioner 
can look at it and say, okay this is on the line but when I look at 
it you stand absolutely nothing to gain from this relationship 
that you have. Go ahead and do it. 
 
And I think that’s good. That’s good, Mr. Speaker, because just 
because an NDP gets close to the trough doesn’t necessarily 
mean they’re going to have both feet in it. This Bill covers that 
exactly. 
 
This is a good Bill, Mr. Speaker. We approve of it totally and 
we’re quite prepared to let it move on to Committee of the 

Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 65 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 65 — The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
certainly a pleasure this evening to get up and say a few words 
about this Act, Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The Forest 
Resources Management Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we were led to believe, when 
the minister first brought this Bill forward, that the government 
is looking at some sense of diligence in this Bill. We’re 
certainly amused that this government has suddenly found a 
sense of diligence. It’s certainly something we haven’t seen 
from this government as long as I’ve been here, since 
September of 1999. 
 
And what actually we’ve noticed quite often, Mr. Speaker, is 
that there’s been complete lack of diligence by this government 
and all we had to do was witness the management of the 
province last week by the Premier. Rather than look after the 
farmers of the province, he was putting out fires in his own 
house so to speak. In the meantime the rest of the province is 
burning. 
 
So we get a Bill that it is alluded to as being progressive and 
looking after management of the forest products in this province 
and alludes to diligence. Diligence, Mr. Speaker, from a 
government that the member from Rosthern who just finished 
speaking about quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the 
complete lack of diligence of this government and why some of 
the Bills have had to be brought forward by the Minister of 
Justice in order to clean up to a large degree the complete lack 
of diligence by this government. 
 
Now as we get into this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we have some 
extreme concerns. And certainly as we move along in the next 
few weeks we’re going to have a chance to be able to speak to 
the minister from SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) about this Bill and why things are being 
brought forward as they are. Certainly we’re very curious as to 
why they want to approach this. 
 
We certainly notice some areas of this Bill that are very, very 
regressive, Mr. Speaker, regressive to the point that it reminds 
you of a time and place in our world where complete control of 
society was managed by government and the people were 
certainly left out of that, and we’d hate to see that process 
brought into Saskatchewan. And we see that it could be 
something like that in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that brings a lot of concern to this side of the House, 
because on this side of the House we have a more open attitude 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

 

that the people of Saskatchewan know what they’re doing, 
know what they want, and are able to do that in a prudent, in a 
prudent manner, Mr. Speaker, and a forthright manner that will 
bring about the safety of the province; that our resources will be 
there for our children and our children’s children. 
 
But when we read a Bill like this, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 65, we 
don’t see that in there. We’re very concerned that it talks about 
a government wanting to become even further involved, even 
further involved in our resources in areas of the province that 
private management has been very successful in for many, 
many decades, Mr. Speaker. And we’re wondering why all of a 
sudden this province is starting to look at this . . . this NDP 
government is starting to look at managing areas of this 
province where it is already been well managed by the private 
sector. 
 
It talks about in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, a management of the 
forest lands and it describes, it’s trying to describe the forest 
lands. And in its description, Mr. Speaker, of the forest lands, it 
talks about Crown land. It talked about the Crown land very 
clearly. 
 
And certainly we’ve come to understand in this province that 
the Crown lands are the responsibility of the government, and 
certainly they’re going to be managed much better once this . . . 
the opposition party attains power after the next provincial 
election, which as the member from Rosthern clearly indicated 
to us, it’ll probably be in the very near future with the 
departures that are being discussed already on the government 
side. And we’re certainly looking forward to accruing power 
and the opportunities that are going to abound for the people of 
Saskatchewan when that happens. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at a Bill such as this, Bill No. 
65, that talks about management of Saskatchewan’s resources 
and specifically the forest resources in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, we know and have come to accept on this side of the 
House that the Crown lands are certainly the responsibility of 
the provincial government. 
 
And there’s some clauses in this Act, Mr. Speaker, that are a 
great deal of concern to us. That first off, on one hand they’re 
abrogating power and on the other hand they’re trying to 
expand that power outside the provincial forest. 
 
In fact their definition of the provincial forest . . . this NDP 
government’s definition of the provincial forest, Mr. Speaker, 
leaves us very much unsure as to the direction they’re going. It 
talks very clearly about the Crown lands, but it also adds in 
there the term of forest . . . or provincial lands. 
 
Then does that . . . We need a clear definition of that. And 
sometime in the future we’re going to have to get that from the 
minister, Mr. Speaker. Because does this NDP government refer 
to provincial lands as all the land in the province? And if so, 
how is that going to affect this? 
 
We need to take a look at this because when we take a look at 
this Bill, if this NDP government is referring to provincial 
forest lands and they’re talking about primarily ecosystems that 
are primarily forested, and what they want to do in those areas; 
is that going to mean privately owned forests, Mr. Speaker? 

And then it gets you to wondering, and certainly on this side of 
the House it’s got us very much concerned what business this 
government has in the management of private ownership in the 
forest. 
 
Because what we know, what we know on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, very clearly is when it comes to . . . when 
it comes to the operation and the management and the pure 
prudence of looking after forests, is that private ownership in 
the southern part of Saskatchewan has worked extremely well. 
 
(20:15) 
 
And I want to give you an example of that, Mr. Speaker. In fact 
I need to give you two examples. I too have some property in 
this province. And on some of that there’s a portion of land that 
is rather low-lying. It’s not very good agricultural land if it 
comes to growing the primary grain products in this province, 
whether it be canola or wheat or barley. And certainly is not 
very good at all for those newer crops, the pulse crops, in this 
province. And so what I’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is I’ve left that 
land forested. It’s lower land; it’s often under water in the 
spring. But what it does, Mr. Speaker, is that it does provide 
protection for my cattle herd when I was running cattle. It 
provided protection for them on hot days in the summertime, 
and it certainly provided protection for them when it was 
raining — they were able to get out of that driving rain. So then 
it was very useful for me. 
 
But it is a smaller tract of land although there is several hectares 
there, Mr. Speaker. It begs the question then, should the 
Department of Environment and Resource Management 
become concerned about that small tract of land? Then are they 
going to have the right to be able to help me manage that? 
 
And I’m not sure I want that, Mr. Speaker. In fact . . . well I 
know I don’t want it, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want this government 
coming on my land telling me how to manage my small private 
forest because what I’ve noticed . . . what I’ve noticed, Mr. 
Speaker, over the many years that I’ve been there is that that 
forest continues to renew, to regenerate. We harvest it in a very 
responsible manner. The forest will be there for many years to 
come. The old trees that become diseased and are dying off, I’m 
the one that’s looking after that, making sure that the disease in 
them isn’t spread to other trees by harvesting those trees. 
 
But under this Bill — we have a lot of concern, Mr. Speaker, 
over this — is that under this Bill then when this government 
talks about provincial forests and provincial forest ecosystems, 
is that going to be . . . is that going to be included in this 
picture, Mr. Speaker? And that raises a great deal of concern on 
this side of the House. 
 
I have another very good example also, Mr. Speaker. A very 
close neighbour of mine — a fellow of some renown certainly 
in the woodworking, artistic community — has some property 
very close to me. A long, long-time family friend, a man who is 
well known for his artistic work throughout the world, and he 
makes use of a small private forest on his lands. Again a 
gentleman who controls his forest in a very forthright manner, 
who looks after the management of those trees in a manner to 
ensure that that forest is going to be there not only for his 
children’s children, but his grandchildren’s children. 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

And I think that’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that in 
Saskatchewan, on these type of lands, is that the people of 
Saskatchewan are already doing an outstanding job of looking 
after the small private forests that already exist. And it would 
concern us a great deal on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that this NDP government feels as though that they may need to 
step into these areas and start to manage that for us. And we 
certainly on this side of the House do not want that. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, there are other members on this side 
of the House who own farm land that have small forests on 
them, and they too have those concerns. 
 
Now it may be, Mr. Speaker, that members on the NDP side of 
the House, they already have acreages or plots of land and there 
are forests on them and they don’t know how to manage those 
forests in a responsible and forthright manner and they need 
their own government to do that for them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t need the government to do that. If 
they need help to do that we know very well that there are 
private consulting firms in this province that will be able to help 
them out with those concerns. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we 
know very well that there are small logging operators that will 
be able to provide those . . . that advice at a very reasonable rate 
and we don’t need the government in here doing that for us. 
 
Now they’ve tried to hide this. What’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, 
is that this little section has been hid and using the term of the 
spruce . . . not the spruce budworm, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, 
but they’re talking about Dutch elm disease. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly amused on this side of the 
House, talking about Dutch elm disease on Crown land because 
as we all know — those of us on this side of the House, maybe 
members on the other side of the House don’t know this quite 
as well, Mr. Speaker — is that Dutch elm disease does not exist 
in the wild forest. 
 
Elm trees are not native very much to the, certainly to the 
northern two-thirds of the province. There is a few wild elm in 
the southern part of the province. But generally elm in this 
province have been brought in and planted, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly around homesteads they make great hedges and 
certainly the worm that’s involved with the Dutch elm disease 
is highly mobile and is certainly getting around and is a great 
deal of concern to all of us, probably even more so to those of 
us on this side of the House. 
 
So we’re very concerned that trying to hide a management . . . 
trying to hide management of forest in this province and using 
the term the Dutch elm disease has a great deal of concern for 
us. 
 
But certainly just as prudent management, again, in this 
province would control that rather than having the government 
come in and start telling us how to manage our elm trees in this 
province. But more importantly — more importantly — we 
need to remember, Mr. Speaker, that what they’re doing is 
using this disease, Dutch elm disease, to gain control of private 
forests in this province. And we’re very concerned about that on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Because we know on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is actually more — there is actually more than Dutch elm 
disease in our forests. The one community very near me is 
Candle Lake. It has often been overrun in the last few years by 
spruce budworm, by spruce budworm, Mr. Speaker. I don’t see 
that term in this Act at all, in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 
No. 65. 
 
Now spruce budworm, as those of us on this side of the House 
are very aware . . . maybe the others on the other side don’t 
know quite as much about it, and so I’ll help illustrate this to 
some degree, Mr. Speaker. I really think it’s important that the 
members on the government side of the House understand the 
danger of not protecting our provincial forests. 
 
And certainly when you have an Act that talks about, Mr. 
Speaker, forest resource management, is that forest resource 
management must revolve around all of the problems and all of 
the diseases in the forest and not just simply Dutch elm disease, 
which is more of a southern Saskatchewan problem than it is in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly in my community of Candle Lake the spruce 
budworm problem, outbreak, is causing a great deal of concern; 
and we know that the provincial government, the present 
provincial government, is turning a blind eye to that. This 
community is spending tens of thousands of dollars every year 
to try to protect the few trees that are inside the resort village, 
and we applaud them for doing that. They want to protect that 
greenery. It is a great resort spot, Mr. Speaker. As you know, 
Mr. Speaker, there actually is members of this House who 
actually have property at Candle Lake. And the prudence of the 
resort village to be able to protect that resource, that tourist 
resource, needs to be applauded. 
 
But the problem exists not only inside the resort village. The 
problem exists outside the resort village. And that problem rests 
solely in the hands of the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management, Mr. Speaker. And their attitude towards 
this problem, when it comes to forest management is, well 
nature’s way is just to let the bug reproduce and destroy 
everything in sight. Well that’s not exactly how nature works, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What happens in old-growth forests, and we certainly have a lot 
of that in this province; we have a lot of forests that are 80 and 
90 years old. And we certainly know on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, that a 80- or a 90-year-old forest is an old-growth 
forest in this province. And actually when forests actually get to 
be 100 years old or 110 years old, they actually become 
extremely dangerous and are more like a tinderbox waiting to 
explode. 
 
But when you get those kind of ages in the forest, nature has its 
own way of taking care of that, Mr. Speaker. It controls the 
spread of the spruce budworm in the provincial forests. And 
what it does, Mr. Speaker, is a fire will go through and it will 
clean up the old growth and then new growth, a new growth 
will start again. It cracks open the cones laying on the floor of 
the forest. In no time at all we have a new forest coming along. 
 
Well of course with today’s modern efficiencies — and we need 
to congratulate ourselves and we certainly need to congratulate 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

 

those people in Environment and Resource Management who 
diligently look after our provincial forests, to save them for all 
generations — is that we’re now seeing forest accruing to a 
larger . . . becoming quite a bit older now, Mr. Speaker. And it 
is because of that that we need to learn how to manage these 
older forests. And until this government learns to do that, we’re 
going to continue to have these massive problems surrounding 
the spruce budworm. 
 
Now we certainly know on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that a plan can be put in place to harvest those mature trees in a 
prudent and effective manner, and we’ll certainly be doing that. 
But what it is going to allow is to ensure, to ensure, Mr. 
Speaker, is that a new forest will be generated for generations to 
come. And that’s the position of this party. It’s too bad that the 
NDP government isn’t able to understand that and is simply 
going to allow old growth forest in this province to deteriorate. 
 
And there are actually areas, Mr. Speaker — and one of them is 
very close to the city of Prince Albert — where there is a 
disease in that forest and nothing is being done about it, Mr. 
Speaker. That forest is aging; it is dying. It is dying as we are 
speaking here tonight, Mr. Speaker, in this debate. 
 
And what is going to happen on that horrifically sandy soil is 
that in the next few years what we could end up is nothing but 
sand dunes next to the city of Prince Albert. And that would be 
because of the lack of vision and the lack of effort by this NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker, to provide the appropriate forest 
management in the provincial forests. And that’s a shame on 
them, Mr. Speaker, because we know very well that without due 
diligence in the provincial forests is that we could very well 
lose them, and that would be a shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another area of this Bill that is providing a 
great deal of concern to members on this side of the House, and 
that’s in regards to the forest operators in the provincial forest. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already mentioned earlier that on 
Crown lands it’s the accepted way of life in Canada that 
provincial governments are the watchdog and certainly the 
managers, and should be the managers of those Crown lands 
and the provincial forests. 
 
Now we see a set of clauses in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and as we 
followed through with the speaking notes . . . explanatory notes 
that came with the Bill, and certainly listening to the minister in 
the explanation surrounding these clauses, is that we have a 
great deal of concern on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is 
that this government in its complete lack of direction, who are 
more interested in putting out fires in their own cabinets and 
caucus, is that they’re completely losing direction for where our 
provincial forests need to be managed. 
 
We see today, Mr. Speaker, where instead of the government 
setting direction and establishing how our provincial forests 
should be harvested and managed in a responsible manner, this 
government in their complete lack of wisdom and their 
complete lack of due diligence, is that they are actually turning 
that responsibility over to someone else. 
 
Now what’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about this 
direction that we see in this Bill is that on one side of the coin 
this government wants to abrogate their responsibility for 

managing of the forest, but on the other side of the coin, they 
want to remain holding the hammer, so to speak, over 
everyone’s head in order that it will hold operators in the forest 
to a position where they’re going to be left guessing as to 
whether they’re going to be approved, Mr. Speaker, to operate 
in the bush. 
 
Now certainly in Saskatchewan’s provincial forest is that what 
we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we have a couple of very 
large forest operators who provide a lot of jobs, a lot of 
employment in this province. We also see a couple of very large 
operators who because of this, a large tax base is created for this 
government. This tax base comes through royalties, it comes 
through personal income tax, it comes through corporate capital 
tax, and it comes through corporate income tax. 
 
And so there’s a lot to be gained by having these operators, 
these two very large operators, operating in Saskatchewan. And 
certainly we applaud their efforts to wanting to even be here, 
Mr. Speaker, under these extraordinary, adverse economic 
conditions that this government applies to business in this 
province. 
 
(20:30) 
 
But I think it’s important that we just take a few seconds to do 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These large operators, even though 
it’s very regressive to operate multinational corporations in this 
province, they’re still willing to come here. They know there’s 
opportunity here and we suspect maybe even, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they’re waiting for a change in government so 
they’ll be able to provide the high-quality employment and 
opportunities in Saskatchewan that we know could exist in our 
provincial forest. 
 
But what’s being expected of people who . . . of business who 
operate in our provincial forest, Mr. Speaker, as we see 
according to this Bill, is that right now as it stands, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the large forest operators must provide to this 
government a 10-year operating plan. 
 
And what they also must do is inside that 10-year operating 
plan, there must be a 5-year operating plan. And that 5-year 
operating plan has to be updated every year — it has to be 
updated every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well it seems rather odd, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and certainly it 
confuses us on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why 
we would have private business telling the provincial 
government how to look after the provincial forest. Now on this 
side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s quite clear in our 
mind who is responsible for the provincial forest. The 
government is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this weak and ineffective 
NDP government. 
 
But clauses such as this in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
indicates very clearly that we have a government here who does 
not know how to look after this province. In fact what we see 
because of this, it begs the . . . it reminds us very clearly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that we have a government over there than 
can’t even manage . . . they can’t even manage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, their own caucus. So if they can’t manage their own 
caucus it very clearly understands why they have to have Bills 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

such as this where they’re expecting private individuals to tell 
the government how to look after the forest, because certainly if 
they can’t look after their own caucus, how in the world are 
they going to look after our provincial forest. 
 
And that is a great deal of concern to us because we certainly 
know very well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when the members 
on this side of the House become government after the next 
provincial election, we certainly know that the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar is going to be in much better command to be 
able to manage his caucus, and therefore his caucus will be in a 
much better position to be able to manage the provincial forest 
with the help of people such as myself and the member from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
And it is because of people that are on this side of the House 
that opportunities are going to abound in the northern provincial 
forest, and the people in northern Saskatchewan can hardly wait 
— can hardly wait, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for that day. And we 
know that to be a fact because we’ve spoken to people and it 
doesn’t matter whether they’re from Prince Albert or whether 
they’re from La Ronge, or whether they’re from Big River, or 
whether they’re from La Loche we hear the same story over and 
over again, there will be no economic opportunities in 
Saskatchewan until the NDP government is replaced. 
 
So what is this government going to do now when we take a 
look at this clause? Well, they’re already forcing the two large 
corporations in this province who harvest a product in our 
northern provincial forest to come up with these 10-year and 
5-year plans. So how does that going . . . what is this 
government’s plan then? Well they want to extend that plan to 
everybody, they want to extend that to everybody. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take some of our small forest 
operators. And these are not full-time forest operators, these are 
small . . . some of them are only part-time operators. They do 
some logging in the wintertime or they also may do some other 
. . . have some other opportunities that they have going for 
them. Many of them in the forest fringe also run . . . do some 
farming. 
 
And so then this government, because of this clause in this Act, 
has this . . . to a great deal of concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
they’re going to force this issue of managing the provincial 
forests on these small logging operations. Can you imagine, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, someone who harvests maybe 50,000 cubic 
metres per year is suddenly going to have to be forced by this 
government to have to come up with a 10-year and a 5-year 
plan — and a 5-year plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has to be 
renewed on an annual basis before he’s going to be allowed to 
harvest in the forest. 
 
It brings us back then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at 
something like this, these small logging operations are some of 
the most efficient that we have in the province. They also 
manage the forest in a manner where they try to find forest that 
is old-growth and harvest that, in a timely fashion. But what 
they also like to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to be able to — on 
the other side of the coin — be able to harvest the forest in a 
timely manner that it falls in line with market conditions of the 
day. 
 

Now we can take today’s situation today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where we know that the price of finished forest products is 
lower than it has been in the past. And many of these smaller 
logging operations would prefer to harvest smaller amounts of 
wood in the forest. And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
know on this side of the House — and maybe members on the 
other side of the House that don’t understand the cycles of 
business — but we know on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the price of lumber’s going to rise. No it may not 
rise this year and it may not rise next year, but then again, Mr. 
Speaker, maybe it will rise this year and maybe it will rise next 
year. But we need to allow these small forest operators the 
opportunity to be able to take advantage of those situations. 
 
Now when you force a small operator who maybe only harvests 
about 50,000 cubic metres per year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
it’s going to do is create an even bigger problem for this 
province. 
 
Because we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under this trade injury 
softwood tariff that the United States has put upon our province 
and our logging operators, forest operators, is that one of the 
problems that our competitor to the south, the United States of 
America, has seen in this province is that the two larger 
operations in this province are forced to harvest lumber . . . 
forced to harvest timber in this province even though they have 
no sale for it. 
 
Even though they have no sale for it and are unable to sell it to 
anyone, this provincial government insists that they continue to 
harvest . . . continue to harvest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Saskatchewan’s provincial forest. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the United States of America then 
see this as an unfair trade advantage because it’s forcing these 
two large logging operations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to sell 
lumber simply to get rid of it. They need to sell their forest 
products simply to get rid of it because they’re forced to harvest 
it under the 10-year management plans. 
 
So what’s that going to do to the small logging operator, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Does this mean then that because of a clause 
such as this where they have to come up with a 10-year and a 
5-year plan — and a -year plan again I must remind you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that has to be renewed on an annual basis — is 
it going to force then small forest operators to harvest at times 
when forest product prices are, so to speak, at the bottom of the 
barrel? 
 
And what is that going to do to the small logging operators? 
Well they can’t afford to operate under these kind of conditions, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They need to be able to, because of the 
small profit that’s involved in this, they need to be able to 
operate in a timely fashion. 
 
So when prices are up they need to be able to have access to 
timber in the provincial forests. And when prices are down they 
need to be able to have that opportunity to be able to back off a 
little bit and maybe do something else rather than try to harvest 
timber that is unsaleable. 
 
And so we see then, with this government coming up with this 
plan, these 10- and 5-year plans, is going to unfortunately force 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

 

these small logging companies, probably in all likelihood, out 
of business, Mr. Speaker. And that would be a sad loss, a great 
loss of jobs, a great loss of tax base to this provincial . . . in this 
province that we’ve come to enjoy. 
 
And certainly we take the few people that are involved in this, 
you know, they also have to pay corporate tax and personal tax. 
They’re buying inside Saskatchewan. They’re buying 
Saskatchewan products to operate their businesses. And losing 
them . . . losing them is simply not an option. 
 
There’s just too much loss to the province of Saskatchewan. 
And it begs the question then do the people in Regina truly 
understand the impact that a clause such as this is going to have 
on forestry operations in Saskatchewan. Whether it’s the forest 
fringe in my area of the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or even 
farther north. Whether you move up towards Denare Beach or 
upwards towards La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
or maybe even Beauval. And that brings a great deal of concern 
to this side of the House. 
 
There is a second concern for the small forest operators, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’re asking men and women in this province 
who subsidize their farming income or maybe even use farming 
to subsidize their logging income to suddenly become the 
overall manager of a portion of the provincial forest. These 
small operators — I have to repeat this, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
these small operators are suddenly going to become the overall 
managers of a small portion of our provincial forest. 
 
Well it begs the question then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is the 
department doing? What is the department doing then, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? And now the member has appropriately 
pointed out to the rest of her members on her side of the House, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — the member from Saskatoon Nutana — 
is that she doesn’t know what the department does, and 
certainly then the other members on the other side of the House 
don’t know either what’s going on inside that department. 
 
We have a department set up. One of their responsibilities is to 
manage the provincial forest. So why aren’t they? Why can’t 
they do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why is it that they are 
forcing forest operators in this province to actually manage the 
forest for them? We think it’s important that if we’re going to 
be the owners of the forest, and certainly the members on this 
side of the House understand that very clearly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that if we’re going to own that forest we’re going to 
take responsibility for it. We’ll set the guidelines. 
 
This government needs to set the guidelines so that the people 
who operate in the provincial forest know what they are, they 
can go to work. We’ll set the guidelines, we’ll police them. 
That’s what they’re asking for. They want to know what the 
rules are. 
 
But do you know what this Bill is showing very clearly because 
it’s saying that this is what they’re going to do, they’re going to 
have the small logging operations suddenly become the 
manager of the provincial forest it actually does not say how 
they’re supposed to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s a 
great deal of concern to those of us on this side of the House, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Give someone who may only harvest 50,000 cubic metres a 
year, he’s supposed to come up with . . . or he or she is 
supposed to come up with a 10-year plan and then a 5-year plan 
to be renewed — a 5-year plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be 
renewed on an annual basis is supposed to guess — supposed to 
guess — what the Department of Energy . . . or Environment 
and Resource Management wants them to do. Now why . . . it 
would work much better in reverse. Why doesn’t the 
department manage the forests? Tell the forest operators what 
they have to do; here are the rules, you know, and that’s all 
they’re asking for. 
 
In fact what they’re telling us . . . We’re hearing from the forest 
operators . . . or actually we’re hearing it from all the operators 
in this provincial forest is that we can set . . . we can set 
stringent rules for protection of our provincial forest. We can 
set stringent rules for renewal of the provincial forest. We can 
set stringent rules so that harvesting in our provincial forest, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will protect our waterways, will protect 
our lakes. And you know what? They would welcome that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But is anything like that in this Bill? No there is not, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This Bill tells about downloading, 
downloading the responsibility of protecting the provincial 
forest on those people who make very little profit out of what 
they’re doing. It’s going to increase . . . it’s going to increase 
their workload for no return. It’s going to put financial burden, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on these small operators that is going to 
probably, in all likelihood, force them out of business. We’re 
going to lose jobs. We’re going to lose taxes. We’re going to 
lose spending power. We’re going to lose spending power, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in our communities, and that is a great deal of 
concern to us on this side of the House. 
 
Now what we’re doing on this side of the House is what is 
considered, Mr. Deputy Speaker, due diligence. We are taking 
this Bill out to the people that it’s going to affect. We’ve taken 
it out to a lawyer who is involved to a large degree, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in providing quality legal advice to those people who 
operate forest operations. And that’s important that we get a 
good legal advice on what this Bill is going to mean. So we’re 
doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What we’re also doing . . . what we’re also doing, members 
such as myself and other members on this side of the House, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we’re sending . . . we’re sending this 
Bill out with the explanatory notes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, out to 
those people who would be most affected by this. Now certainly 
we know that the large operators in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, already fall under these guidelines, so it’s of no value 
to be asking for their opinion. 
 
(20:45) 
 
But what is important . . . what is really important, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that those smaller operators, small- and 
medium-sized operators, who do not fall under these guidelines 
are going to have to be consulted. They need to know what this 
government is thinking about how this Bill is going to affect the 
small logging operations in this province. And it’s extremely 
prudent and that’s why due diligence is being done on this side 
of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ensure that the people 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

who are most affected by this Bill are going to know how this 
Bill is going to affect them and see this Bill before it comes into 
effect, and maybe even — maybe even, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
offer some suggestions, offer some suggestions for this 
government, that maybe they could bring about an amendment 
or two to this Bill. 
 
Now certainly we need to talk to these small logging operators 
and medium-sized logging operations in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to find out what . . . how they’re going to feel 
about it and whether . . . maybe they would like to bring some 
amendments to it. Or maybe they would feel it would be more 
timely simply to wait until after the next provincial elections 
and simply have the next government, a Saskatchewan Party 
government led by the member from Rosetown-Biggar, actually 
scrap parts of this Bill and maybe strengthen some parts of this 
Bill so that the people know what the playing field is in this 
province, the people who already operate in our provincial 
forests, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Plus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know very well that there are 
entrepreneurs in Canada that want to come here and do 
business. They want to come here and do business, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we want to ensure that that happens. And we want 
to ensure that the regressive clauses that we see in this Bill are 
actually not done by the logging operators but are actually 
going to be looked after by the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management, that the government will take 
responsibility for our provincial forests rather than become a 
behind-the-doors, in the dark-of-night regulator, bringing forth 
regulations that no one’s ever going to see until the last minute. 
Regulations that are going to affect the small logging operators 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. Regulations that these small 
logging operations are not going to get to see until they guess 
them — you have to guess what they are — and that is really 
unfortunate. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of the due diligence on this 
side of the House and the work that it . . . because this Bill is so 
new and we haven’t got all our responses back yet, it’s most 
appropriate at this time that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 72 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak on Bill No. 72, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment 
Act, 2002. This government and this Bill . . . really there is one 
word that is out there in the public’s mind is accountability and 
the problems with accountability with this government and with 
this Bill. 
 
We have seen that they . . . there’s accountability . . . 
accountability seems to be a problem widespread in the 
government but particularly with WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) and the accountability of the fiscal 
management of WCB — accountability to the stakeholders, the 

accountability to the employers and the employees, and of 
course accountability to the government and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I stress this last point in terms of the information given 
during June 3 Labour estimates, where once again the NDP 
minister stood in this House and gave the people of 
Saskatchewan incorrect information when I was asking the 
minister questions. 
 
And the minister was asked, and I quote. The question I asked 
the minister was: 
 

. . . what percentage of workers in the province does the 
$48,000 cap cover? 

 
And the answer from the minister was, and once again I quote: 
 

. . . There is approximately about 300 injured workers that 
are frozen or at the income replacement level at the cap of 
$48,000. 

 
Three hundred workers she said, with all of her advisers sitting 
right there with her during estimates, including the CEO (chief 
executive officer), Mr. Peter Federko. 
 
Well I’ve heard all kinds of numbers thrown around as to what 
these amendments would cost and the significant point at this 
time. Because of the huge mistakes in this actuary adjustment 
for the year 2001, which estimates the future costs of claims 
received in that year, a huge mistake, a $69 million mistake. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after getting various numbers tossed 
around concerning cost of these amendments, we realized that 
things weren’t adding up in many aspects, but in WCB there 
seemed to be rampant problems. We are getting estimates of 
between 35 to $100 million projected for these amendments. 
 
And after submitting a written question to the government 
requesting the exact number of workers who are at the $48,000 
cap, we found out that there weren’t 300 injured workers, there 
weren’t 400, there weren’t 500, there weren’t 600, there was 
actually 2,140 claimants in the year 2001 who are affected by 
this cap. 
 
And I thank the Minister of Labour for giving us the correct 
information in the end, although we would think that her 
officials, in full knowledge of this impending legislation 
change, would know exactly how many workers this would 
affect and what the cost would be on June 3, the day the 
question was first asked. 
 
And I would like to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I also 
submitted several other written questions concerning the 
projected costs of the wage cap amendment, and only to have 
these questions converted. 
 
And as we discussed and asked questions in question period 
today, there is a record number of questions being converted by 
this government. And again we’ve had a number of questions 
converted just today after, well it was almost a hilarious 
answers from the government during question period 
concerning their claim that we don’t ask a lot of questions. 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

 

And in reality we ask many questions, a record number of 
questions in question period, also a record number of questions 
for written questions. And the government has set a new record 
of its own by not answering the written questions in record 
numbers. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m wondering if the minister 
converted these questions to withhold this information from us 
and the very stakeholders of the Workers’ Compensation Board 
or if she converted these questions because she and her WCB 
officials really don’t know the answer? 
 
Perhaps you don’t know what this legislation . . . legislative 
changes will cost, and if the minister doesn’t know why would 
not she answer these questions? It only strengthens our case as 
to the poor fiscal management of WCB. And if the minister 
doesn’t know the cost of significant . . . that again strengthens 
our case as to the poor fiscal management of the WCB. 
 
Although these amendments rise out of the committee of review 
. . . and it’s interesting we speak of reviews. There’s been at 
least five, I believe, reviews and studies of Workers’ 
Compensation in the last two years. The Dorsey report, the 
committee of review every four years, and a number of other 
studies and reviews that take place. And it seems that the 
government likes studying Workers’ Compensation but they 
have little interest in making the changes that bring 
accountability and fairness into the system. 
 
As I was saying, these amendments rise out of the committee of 
review and in some cases perhaps are long overdue in terms of 
bringing Saskatchewan WCB in line with other provinces and 
market costs and so on. 
 
And I must emphasize that the timing is particularly bad for 
business owners who will be likely facing a premium increase 
at the end of the day. The timing is bad, very bad indeed, 
because this NDP government has just recently increased the 
minimum wage. Another cost, employers must bear the burden 
at a time when the Saskatchewan economy is hurting. The 
NDP’s answer to that is to sock it to the business owners of this 
province, to drive even more business owners out of their 
province by increasing the cost of doing business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it escapes me to see how this helps workers. How does this 
help workers? Now instead of receiving 10 hours a week 
they’re clawed back to 5 hours at a little higher wage. 
 
And I would like to note on the record that there is a delicate 
balance that a government must achieve in terms of making 
policy that’s good for both workers and business owners, a 
delicate balance. 
 
So it’s not that we dispute the fact that burial costs have 
increased. It’s not that we dispute the fact that the increase in 
the maximum wage cap was last done in 1985. Our concern, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the WCB is not accountable to the 
stakeholders, the employers and employees. Our concern is the 
fact that the government is imposing these amendments and the 
related cost increases at a time when WCB has made a $69 
million actuary mistake. Our concern is that our constituency 
offices are inundated with calls from workers and employers 

with complaints about the system. 
 
And I also note, Mr. Speaker, that we receive many calls from 
— particularly in my situation — from constituencies in 
Saskatoon where the NDP constituency associations tell people 
that have workers’ compensation problems to give my office a 
call and I’ll gladly look after their concerns. And a number of 
my colleagues also receive these calls from people right across 
the province. And the NDP MLAs are not looking after their 
own constituents, and they are just deflecting the criticism and 
the troubles onto the opposition. 
 
And like I say, we are glad to look after their problems and 
point them in the right direction to try to get help with this 
government’s problems with the workers’ compensation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, it’s really an accountability 
problem with the people of Saskatchewan concerning the 
government’s handling of the workers’ compensation, and this 
affects both employees and employers. 
 
Our concern is the fact that the government is imposing these 
amendments and the related cost increases at a time when WCB 
has made this $69 million actuary mistake. And as we know, 
the many concerns from workers . . . As we know, even today 
there is a gentleman protesting on the steps of the legislature 
concerning how he has been treated by the Workers’ 
Compensation Board in the past. And there is a number of 
people that have phoned my office saying that they will be 
arriving to demonstrate in front of the legislature. And I believe 
it’s very important that the government take a look at bringing 
in amendments that address these long outstanding complaints 
from injured workers. 
 
If the system worked properly, we wouldn’t have a two-year 
waiting list at the Advocate’s office before they even have an 
appeal. And if the system worked properly, we wouldn’t have 
hundreds and hundreds of calls from injured workers coming 
into our offices asking for help. 
 
Now what we see is a 48 per cent increase in WCB 
administration costs over a six-year period. And what we see is 
a $69 million actuary mistake — a $69 million mistake, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Yes, there is many problems within the WCB system, but I have 
to emphasize that the first order of business should be fixing the 
internal problems in WCB. Simply sprinkling money on these 
problems won’t make them go away. 
 
There seems to be a deep-rooted problem within the system, 
many of which were identified in the committee of review’s 
report. And although the Chairperson, John Solomon, an NDP 
hack, says that these problems have been addressed, the calls to 
our offices from injured workers are not diminishing nor are the 
calls from the employers, nor is the backlog of appeals at the 
Advocate’s office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult to support this Bill without full 
disclosure of the costs involved. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is very 
difficult to support this Bill without knowing what the WCB 
plans to do to address problems that exist within the system 
with a long-term plan and how will the efficiencies and 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

accountability to stakeholders be measured. It is very difficult 
to support this Bill when the government refuses to answer 
important questions concerning it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I have to emphasize that this government 
either doesn’t know what’s going on in WCB or just simply . . . 
or simply is hiding information from the public until we’re not 
sitting in the legislature to bring down their announcement of 
pending premium increases to the employers of this province. 
And I just like to emphasize that it is to the employers of this 
province, the employers fund WCB 100 per cent. So when the 
government makes mistakes with WCB it costs the employers 
of this province a considerable amount of money. 
 
And that is an extremely important concern in the economic 
environment that Saskatchewan finds itself in when we need to 
be growing businesses, growing jobs, so we need to keep the 
costs to businesses under control. And again it speaks again to 
the accountability factor that the people of Saskatchewan so 
desperately want in many areas of government, and they are not 
seeing it in the WCB through the mismanagement of this 
Minister of Labour and this government and its hand-picked 
Chairman that really doesn’t have a grasp of what is going on in 
WCB. 
 
So before we will allow this Bill to move forward, we will need 
to do much more consultation with the stakeholders of this 
province and we certainly would like the written questions that 
have been asked to be answered. Unfortunately, we will have to 
wait towards the end of the session before we can debate these 
questions once again. It seems hard to believe after making all 
the statements today in the House that they converted a number 
of labour questions again and refused to answer these very 
important questions, so we can get to the bottom of where the 
inefficiencies are in Workers’ Compensation Board and try to 
solve the problem in workers’ compensation, not only for the 
employers of this province, but also for the employees of this 
province and the injured workers of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(21:00) 
 

Bill No. 74 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 74 — The 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment Act, 
2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just have a few 
comments on this particular Bill. It may be one of the shorter 
amendments and it’s about less than 40 words long, but it 
actually asks more questions than it answers. And so I’ll be 
requesting that we move this Bill into committee. 
 
But first there’s just a couple of points that I think have to be 
made and put on the record. The Act, as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act, this 
is, as we heard in the budget, an agency that is going to be 
wound down and particularly many of the assets will be 

transferred over to Crown corporations. That in itself really 
begs a lot of questions about the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation or SOCO as it’s known. 
 
SOCO is a function of this government that has performed a 
function in this province unlike in other provinces where they 
also have lenders of last resort. For instance in Alberta it’s 
called AOC — Alberta Opportunities Corporation. They in fact 
are an agency of the government but certainly of last resort. 
And not in wanting to take any equity they are mandated to 
allow the up starting company to develop a cash flow and a 
good track record and then mandate it to turn it over to 
conventional financing. 
 
SOCO hasn’t performed that mandate entirely and that’s 
certainly a problem in my mind with how SOCO has been 
utilized in this province. 
 
In order to be competitive it has to be transparent. And when 
the assets of SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) 
are transferred over to CIC and SOCO is being wound down, it 
asks the question: what is going to happen to that function of 
the government? What happens when CIC takes it over? If it’s 
being wound down the question naturally then, Mr. Speaker, is 
who’s responsible for the debt? Does it then become a function 
of SOCO under CIC? Is it a function of this particular 
government? 
 
In the 40 words or so that is the amendment to this Bill, it 
basically is asking to strike out the words $150 million and 
substituting $170 million, which then becomes the borrowing 
limit of the Saskatchewan Opportunities. 
 
Those questions are going to have to be addressed when we get 
into Committee of the Whole, because it’s certainly not clear 
where this is leading to and what the implications are for people 
that have questions about SOCO and particularly for those 
investors that are wanting to and can invest in Saskatchewan, 
that can see a potential here and yet don’t want to compete 
against investment, and equity investment particularly, through 
either government or CIC. That’s a real question. 
 
So if SOCO is being wound down, why is this amendment 
being put into this Act at this time? Other questions that we’re 
going to have to have some response to when we get to 
Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, will be things about the 
influence of SOCO and it’s focus on the research parks in 
Saskatchewan, both Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
I think the research park in these university facilities make a lot 
of sense. I think they do in fact add significantly to the 
potential. The questions that we’re going to have to ask though 
in the committee will be things like, because the minister 
referred to the research park . . . loans for the research park 
rather, referred to them as not a grant or a straight gift from 
government, they would be loans with interest returned. 
 
So we’re wondering at what time will these research parks in 
fact be self-sufficient? Will they ever be self-sufficient? And if 
loans have already been made, how much is still outstanding? 
What kind of dollar figure is still outstanding in these particular 
loans to the research park? 
 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

 

Now there’s going to be a proposal in the remarks of the 
minister that there’s two buildings that will need to be 
purchased. Well purchased and loans seem to conjure up 
additional questions, especially when these research parks, as 
the minister claims, are 95 per cent full. 
 
My question that we’ll have to ask later on is what percentage 
of the tenants will, in fact, be private corporations and what 
percentage of the tenants are, in fact, the government or Crown 
corporation subsidiaries where rent is just being paid back to 
the Crown corporation? 
 
Those are the questions that we’re going to try to refer to when 
we get it to committee. Like I said, it’s a very small Bill with a 
$20 million increase in the limits of the lending capability of the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. And we’re prepared 
now, Mr. Speaker, to allow this Bill No. 74 to move to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:08. 
 


