















































Hansard: May 14, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1417 
 May 14, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 10 — Rural Economic Development 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope the members 
opposite have enjoyed my opening remarks, and now I will 
proceed with the body of my speech, the main body of the 
speech. 
 
I was speaking about a very interesting project in my 
constituency of Redberry Lake, the Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve, and I was just outlining all the very interesting natural 
features of this world-class biosphere, and I was proceeding to 
say what a UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific, 
and Cultural Organization) world biosphere is. 
 
And the biosphere is a centre of excellence for sustainable 
economic development, and Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
is managed by a community committee comprised of elected 
officials from the participating municipal governments and 
community boards operating as the Redberry Regional 
Economic Development Authority. A biosphere reserve is an 
internationally recognized centre for excellence and a resource 
for conservation, research, and education. 
 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve provides an opportunity for 
high-quality research into the impacts of global, regional, and 
local environmental change in human activity. This work is 
coordinated by a technical committee. 
 
Designation as a biosphere reserve is a highly honoured status. 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve is part of a worldwide 
network of UNESCO — of some 375 locations, only 10 of 
which are in Canada. Redberry was one of the two designations 
for Canada in the decade leading up to 2000, joining high 
profile Clayoquot Sound in BC. There are also biosphere 
reserves in Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta. Redberry 
Lake Biosphere Reserve is the only one in Canada that resulted 
from local grassroots effort, a matter of great significance to 
UNESCO. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan minister of Environment and Resource 
Management signed the UNESCO nomination for Redberry 
Lake Biosphere Reserve in 1999. Now the question asked by 
the people of Redberry Lake and Blaine Lake and Hafford and 
the area is why Saskatchewan should financially support the 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve’s research, education, and 
public information facility. 
 
UNESCO designations are a matter of pride for all, for the other 
provinces where they exist. They are supported accordingly. 
UNESCO decides what will be designated based upon input 
from the jurisdictions. It is suspected there are some officials 
within the government’s departments and agencies who would 
have favoured another area as UNESCO site, and they have 
either failed to do the groundwork necessary to obtain the status 
or UNESCO has rejected their proposals because they have 
failed to meet the very strict criteria. The government and the 
people of Saskatchewan benefit in a large measure from the 
existence in the province of a UNESCO designated biosphere 

reserve through enhanced profile for tourism to the province 
and the tax revenues deprived therefrom, enhancing 
opportunities from the high profile and credible environmental 
research. 
 
And the provision of a internationally connected educational 
resource, the sustainable development, proximity to Saskatoon 
as I mentioned before — its university and research facilities, 
its tourism businesses — further enhance the opportunities 
available to that city in particular. 
 
In order, Mr. Speaker, for the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
to provide the services to the province and its partners in 
research, education, and tourism, it is important that one facility 
that serves all those particular goals is able to be open and 
available to the agencies, schools, and the public. Commitment 
by the provincial government towards a facility will enable the 
province to have input into the character and substance of 
research activities carried out there and to lever additional 
federal funds to assist with its agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, providing funding assistance and a core of annual 
funding to the operation of a facility does not set a precedent 
except possibly for other, as yet undesignated, UNESCO sites 
within the province. However, the province maintains control 
over future designations and therefore over funding 
commitments in the future. This designation is not present 
within any other municipal groupings, nor does it involve any 
other municipal, regional, provincial, or national park or 
facility. 
 
Now the accomplishments of this very innovative, 
forward-looking development in Redberry Lake constituency, 
the citizens there are working hard to get rural Saskatchewan 
working again in that area. Since 1989 the local society that’s 
taken the lead in tourism and conservation development for the 
Redberry Lake communities has been the Redberry Pelican 
Project. It has undertaken a number of community and tourism 
development activities, some locally based and some directly 
benefiting the entire province. 
 
In addition, it has helped . . . it has developed and maintained a 
first-class resource centre at Redberry Lake, which is being 
used by a large number of agencies, educational groups, and 
researchers in conservation and tourism, as well as countless 
visitors to the province. 
 
Some examples of accomplishments: developed a major 
catalogue library of monographs and ecotourism development, 
acclaimed by some researchers as the best in Canada. 
Developed Internet camera systems to promote ecotourism in 
Saskatchewan and Western Canada. Initiated the 
follow-through and the development of an ecotourism 
accreditation system for Saskatchewan. The first of its kind in 
Canada as far back as 1992, it is still herald as an example of 
best practices in the industry. Obtained international important 
bird area designation for the lake and its watershed. Twice 
awarded the Tourism for Tomorrow highly commended award 
in 1992 and 1999 by British Airways in recognition of the 
society’s contribution to tourism best practices in raising the 
stature of tourism to the province’s natural areas. 
 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

The founder for the society was awarded the Conservation 
Award by the Governor General of Canada in 1992 for the same 
reasons — obtained world biosphere reserve status for the 
community. And the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve was 
dedicated by the Lieutenant Governor of the province of 
Saskatchewan in November 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this revitalization in the Blaine Lake-Hafford area 
would like a little support from the provincial government. 
Funding has been withdrawn by the provincial government only 
in the last year or two, and it was desperately needed just to 
keep the interpretative centre open. 
 
What they are wanting to do is hire a coordinator. The job 
description of a biosphere reserve coordinator for the Redberry 
Lake Biosphere Reserve, the position would assist to conserve 
biological diversity, promote research and monitoring, and 
assist the community committee in a variety of scientific, 
cultural, education, and development agencies to develop the 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve as a model of sustainable 
development in the service of the communities and the people 
of Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
The coordinator will also facilitate co-operation and exchanges 
at regional and international levels; specifically maintain the 
Redberry Lake Interpretative Centre for the use of school 
groups, the general public, the partner agencies under the 
direction of the committee; conduct and coordinate the 
development and delivery of interpretive programming to 
school groups and the general public under the direction of a 
community committee; assist at meetings of the community 
committee and its five standing subcommittees as follows: (1) 
culture, research, and education; (2) economic development; (3) 
health and social well-being; (4) equal system research and 
conservation; and also (5) agriculture. 
 
Also assist research partners through coordinating logistical 
support; assist in the preparation of partnership proposals; 
maintain accurate records including visitor statistics and 
partnership project records, and other activities under the 
direction of the community committee. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is an example of a local initiative, the 
communities getting together to revitalize their economies in 
their particular areas. And all they’re asking is for a small 
amount of funding which has been withdrawn in the past two 
years to open an interpretive centre and to help expand the 
initiative at the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve. 
 
And that is one example, Mr. Speaker, of a Grow Saskatchewan 
plan where ecotourism is considered valuable, where we have 
great potential to expand in that area. 
 
I’d like to go on now to number eight of the Grow 
Saskatchewan plan and building a strong social partnership for 
growth — a strong social partnership between business, labour, 
government, and First Nations focusing on growing 
Saskatchewan. Irish economic miracle relied heavily on a 
strong social partnership with all the major stakeholders in the 
country. 
 
The key to economic renewal in Saskatchewan is something we 
have always been pretty good at — co-operation. We need to 

build a strong social partnership between business, labour, 
government, and First Nations focusing on growing 
Saskatchewan. The so-called economic miracle in Ireland relied 
heavily on a strong social partnership with all the major 
stakeholders in the country. Saskatchewan could gain much 
from following the Irish lead in this regard and the result would 
be a stronger, more prosperous province. 
 
The game plan for growth, Mr. Speaker — new capital 
investment is the key to job creation and economic growth. A 
growing economy and a growing population of productive, 
taxpaying people will rebuild the tax base necessary to invest in 
our communities and deliver high-quality health, education, and 
social services within a balanced budget. So this is a summary 
of Saskatchewan Party’s game plan for growth. 
 
New investment is a key to economic growth and job creation 
and the growth of our province by 100,000 people in 10 years. 
A growing economy and a growing population of productive, 
tax-paying people will rebuild the tax base necessary to invest 
in our communities and deliver high-quality health, education, 
social services within a balanced budget. 
 
Game plan for growth — the Saskatchewan Party’s game . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member 
appears to be using extensive use of quotations. I would like to 
bring to his attention from page 152 of Beauchesne's sixth 
edition, item 496, this item: 
 

A Member may read extracts from documents, books or 
other printed publications as part of a speech provided that 
in so doing no rule is infringed. A speech should not, 
however, consist only of a single long quotation, or a series 
of quotations joined together with a few original sentences. 

 
So I’d ask the member to adjust his remarks accordingly. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was at 
the end of the Grow Saskatchewan presentation, and I felt it 
necessary to tell the members opposite of the Saskatchewan 
plan to grow Saskatchewan and how that fits in with rural 
revitalization — our plan to grow rural Saskatchewan, hand in 
hand with labour, business, the Aboriginal community, urban 
and rural Saskatchewan, working together for the good of the 
whole province. 
 
Getting back to the Redberry Lake reserve, it’s interesting. 
That’s just one example of many where the provincial 
government has spent millions of dollars, $20 million to be 
precise, in Atlanta-based dot-com. And just think of what could 
be done if just a small portion of the investments outside this 
province and country were put towards economic revitalization 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We could apply it to keeping the cost of having a second phone 
line or a third phone line for businesses in this province kept 
down. Right now, it’s a very, very extraordinary high cost of 
putting of the cost . . . or that’s being charged to businesses who 
want to put a second line in. Over $9,000 for a second line, and 
we feel that the money that’s being spent in other countries, in 
other areas of the world should be applied to economic growth 
in this province. 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

 

And it’s interesting to note through the whole long-term home 
care fee debate, finally the government did back down after 
incredible pressure from the citizens of this province, but it’s 
interesting to note the Premier’s remarks saying that if they 
cannot find the money through savings or for increased tax 
revenue, they are going to take that $7 million this year and $14 
million next year out of the Highways budget. And again, it 
seems that every time the government does something, it’s to 
punish someone else, and in this case they’re going to punish 
rural Saskatchewan again by not developing the highways as 
quickly as they should be and could be to help rural 
revitalization. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one more item that I want to 
discuss, and it comes up again and again in our Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings and phone calls to the office and in 
person on a regular basis. And the one thing that people of 
Saskatchewan say, how to revitalize rural Saskatchewan, how 
to get this province going, is to do one thing, and that’s for this 
government to call an election and have this government thrown 
out of power so that we can get on to the job of growing 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its dissatisfaction with the 
province’s lack of commitment in bringing forth real and 
effective policies that would have a positive impact in 
bringing about rural economic revitalization in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I stand in 
this honoured Assembly and on behalf of the constituents of 
Estevan to second the motion put forward by the member from 
Redberry Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as someone who is directly involved in agriculture 
and someone who lives in the rural area and loves that way of 
life, Mr. Speaker, speaking on rural issues is a matter that is 
very near and dear to my heart. Mr. Speaker, just this last 
weekend my grandchildren were out at our farm, and they were 
exploring every place imaginable, leaving nothing untouched or 
unturned, and I mean that in a literal sense. And my husband 
learned very quickly that when he set a wrench down when he 
was working on some machinery that it just so happened that 
that would be the wrench that they needed to fix their pedal 
tractor or their bike or whatever. So he soon learned not to drop 
anything, but they were certainly enjoying their stay out at the 
farm as well. 
 
(19:15) 
 
But bless their hearts, Mr. Speaker, to them and their worry-free 
world. That is the ideal world. And, Mr. Speaker, to anyone 
involved in agriculture, if you can just put aside the concerns 
that plague you — the cost of chemicals, fertilizer, machinery 
payments, land payments, taxes, and on top of that, the low 
price you receive for your commodity — the way of life is a 

perfect life. 
 
Even with the situation in agriculture the way it is today, Mr. 
Speaker, the farmers are out there passionate with that way of 
life and the profession they have chosen, giving their machinery 
the final inspection so that they can plant their crop and hopeful 
of a bountiful harvest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have all heard and are very well aware of the 
subsidy wars that are taking place and I’m sure no one likes 
subsidies. But what are farmers to do? All they want is a level 
playing field so that they can compete with the Europeans and 
the Americans. The Europeans heavily subsidize their farmers. 
Perhaps it is because in some European countries the people 
once went hungry and the governments have vowed that that 
will never happen again. So they look after their farmers, which 
leads us to the Americans who realize that their farmers cannot 
compete with the Europeans. So what do they do? They 
subsidize their farmers. And it may be for political reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, but they do subsidize them. 
 
But here in Canada we have an arrogant and uncooperative 
federal Liberal government who just doesn’t care about anyone 
or anything west of the Ontario/Manitoba border. Previous 
Liberal prime ministers have told us in no uncertain terms to 
sell our own wheat. The present Liberal Prime Minister, Mr. 
Chrétien, makes sure that Bombardier is looked after. That’s all 
he seems to care about. In his world, Canada has only two 
provinces, Ontario and Quebec, and as long as they are looked 
after — those two provinces — he’s assured of a re-election. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that when the member 
from Shellbrook-Spiritwood and Saskatoon Idylwyld and I were 
down in Nebraska recently, senators were told there that that 
state alone, the state of Nebraska, would receive $1.2 billion in 
payments from the United States — one state. And that was 
before this recent farm Bill was passed. And that amount is 
almost what we in Western Canada are asking for right now, 
and at this point unsuccessfully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I believe that the issues of subsidies are a 
federal issue, I must say that I was very disappointed with the 
actions of the members on the government side when the 
Leader of the Opposition asked for leave to debate the issue of 
Saskatchewan hosting a meeting of Western premiers to debate 
the subsidy issue. Now, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition 
leader requested leave, he was turned down by the government 
opposite not once, not twice, but three times. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are other issues that this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government has control over. They have and 
are hurting our people that are involved in agriculture. And I’m 
talking about the new, enhanced crop insurance program. 
Higher premiums, removal of spot loss hail, and the 
cancellation of the property tax rebate program. So you really 
have to ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, do they, the people over 
there, really care? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the farmer suffers economically, so does the 
whole community. Farmers aren’t buying vehicles or 
machinery. They can’t make a living, so they pack up and leave. 
Then the local grocery store and hardware store suffer. And of 
course, Mr. Speaker, when he and his family leave the 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

community, it affects school enrolments, and right now in my 
constituency we are facing school closures. 
 
So what we have, Mr. Speaker, is a government that just 
doesn’t have its priorities right. They have changed the crop 
insurance program and cancelled the property tax rebate 
program, but on the other hand they have millions of dollars to 
invest in Georgia and Tennessee, 28 million lost on SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), and the 
list goes on. 
 
The ethanol plants would be a very bright future for 
diversifying our province, but of course now we have the 
government playing the game they are so famous for, picking 
winners and losers, which should make the self-appointed 
instant authority on agriculture, the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle, very happy because there’s nothing than makes 
him happier than to have the government control and/or 
ownership in every area of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we take a trip down memory lane — and I 
know the members opposite shouldn’t mind this because they 
do it all the time — we can go back to the ’70s when we had 
Allan Blakeney. And his government had the land bank, and 
thank goodness this program was dismantled in the ’80s, or we 
would have been a province of state farms. 
 
Again Allan Blakeney ran up $6 billion of debt with an interest 
rate as high as 24 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and at that rate the debt 
doubled every four years. This had a very crippling effect on the 
rural sector and indeed every other sector of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government, which fortunately won’t be 
around after the next provincial election, is also the government 
that tore up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
contracts in 1993 — tore them up, Mr. Speaker, with a promise 
of bringing in a long-term safety net. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is 
now May 2002, and guess what? The agriculture producers of 
this province are still waiting for this long-term safety net. This 
government has no idea, no plan, and after the next election, 
they won’t have any worries because none of them will be 
there. 
 
They support the monopoly the farmers are forced to market 
their grain boards . . . their board grains through, and the 
unfortunate part is that they really haven’t a clue as to what the 
consequences of this monopoly are. On our farm, Mr. Speaker, 
we have been growing mostly non-board grains for the past 10 
years. It has been our only hope for survival. 
 
Just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, during estimates, the Minister of 
Northern Affairs was talking about value added in the forestry 
industry. He said it didn’t make sense to ship our raw timber 
when we could be finishing it here. And yet in the grain 
industry, we have said that very thing countless times, only to 
see the barriers remain in place that prevent things like pasta 
plants from happening. Those of us involved in agriculture 
naturally think this is senseless to ship out our durum, paying 
the freight on it, then having the finished product shipped back 
in the form of pasta, in this case, and again having to pay the 
freight. Why not process it right here and have a value-added 
product, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, someone once said farming 
is the only industry where you buy everything in retail, sell 

everything wholesale, and pay the freight both ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the present government we also have seen a 
huge exodus of people, people in their productive years packing 
up and leaving the community and in many cases, Mr. Speaker, 
the province. And as I stated before, Mr. Speaker, this affects 
school enrolment. 
 
We also have to realize that this is the same government that 
closed 52 rural hospitals with their wellness plan. This led to 
people with health problems, particularly seniors, leaving for 
larger centres so that they would be closer to a facility. 
 
This government is also responsible for closing the Plains 
hospital, the most modern facility in or around Regina. This 
hospital was built for the people of southeast Saskatchewan. It 
was convenient for the people to get to. People in my area felt 
that this was a direct attack on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The recently released ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy) report told us that the government has put out the 
welcome mat for investors. We must create an environment that 
is business friendly. Governments need to create the climate, 
provide the incentive, encourage the development, then step out 
of the way. We do not need a government that competes with 
the private sector with the taxpayers’ dollars. Too much of this 
has been happening in the past and the bureaucratic red tape 
must also be eliminated. 
 
During our Grow Saskatchewan meetings people constantly 
told us that our tax base must be broadened. The tax burden on 
the people of this province was more than they could bear. 
 
Our plan is to grow the province by 100,000 people in 10 years. 
ACRE recommended that the province needed to grow by over 
200,000 people in 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Redberry Lake who preceded 
me outlined the points on how the Saskatchewan Party will 
grow the province, and I know the members opposite were 
listening very intently — probably so that they could try and 
initiate some of our ideas as they have done before. 
 
Our plan, Mr. Speaker, is a very bold one but it is a doable one. 
People say that we all must change our attitude. That being said, 
Mr. Speaker, I am very optimistic about this province and I 
believe in this province and the people of this province. It is just 
the present government that I don’t have any faith or confidence 
in. 
 
And I’m not the only one, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what some of 
the other people are saying about this government. An 
economist for StatsCanada says: 
 

The implication of such a loss — sooner or later you stand 
to lose your hospital, school, or hardware store. The result 
in Saskatchewan’s case has been an exodus to the cities and 
out of the province. 

 
The head of a Saskatchewan Crown corporation says rural 
Saskatchewan residents shouldn’t blame outsiders for their own 
problems. No wonder people say that those in government have 
to change their attitude. We’ve just heard that again a couple of 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

 

weeks ago in the ACRE report, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s very unfair that the head of a Saskatchewan Crown 
corporation blames the rural people for their own problems. 
 
And here’s a letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m going to read, 
and it says the “NDP bus tour is too little too late.” And it goes 
on, and I quote: 
 

I would have to say . . . that Walt and his cast of Disney 
characters that (are on) this current NDP bus tour across 
Saskatchewan is pitifully embarrassing, and thankfully the 
time has come to return the bus before they totally 
humiliate themselves, if they haven’t already done so. 
 
The most amazing aspect of this farce on wheels is how 
you people actually managed to find anyone to shake hands 
with on your 10-second whistle stops across Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of rural Saskatchewan are a lot more intelligent 
than this government gives them credit for. The comments 
of one of (the) . . . Moose Jaw MLAs sums it up the best 
when it was said: “We’re finding things we never knew . . . 
before.” My question is: where have you people been 
living? If it takes you people boarding a bus for rural 
Saskatchewan to find that out, then we’re all in a lot of 
trouble. If this government was truly serious about 
reconnecting with rural (Saskatchewan) and small town 
Saskatchewan, then you should have been taking it on the 
chin, facing people in communities that have had their 
schools and or hospitals closed . . . (and) addressing this 
province’s ever-growing list of disasters. 
 
I’d like to have seen more meetings with town councils and 
rural councils so (that) you can see and hear first-hand how 
they are struggling to provide (the) basic infrastructure and 
services to their ratepayers and the list could go on and on. 

 
And then it ends by saying that . . . the writer puts: 
 

. . . support for this government is sagging like wet boxer 
shorts (Mr. Speaker). 

 
And other headlines say how the: 
 

Pessimism is stunting Saskatchewan agriculture growth. 
 
Farmers want less talk, more action from the Premier. 

 
Uncertain future for small towns. 

 
And of course, we get into the rural water needs testing, and we 
all know about the problems that we’ve had with the water, and 
the problems in North Battleford really brought this to light. 
 
We have problems with the infrastructure. Many communities 
are hauling water, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the federal and 
provincial governments initiated a program for dugouts, and 
that money was gone before many of the applications were even 
processed. Some people were denied . . . their application was 
denied for the simple reason that they started their project 
before the government approved their application. 
 

So that’s very unfair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they’re out 
there trying to make a living and need water for their cattle, and 
just for their farms and the small communities, and the 
arrogance of the provincial and the federal governments in 
denying them. 
 
And then it . . . we go on here to: 
 

NDP cabinet tells rural politicians that there is no money, 
the government is broke. 

 
And a little later on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we realize that this 
government has spent money on a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia, 
to the tune of $20 million. And how must that make the people 
of this province feel when this government will invest in people 
outside this province, but do not have the confidence of the 
people of this province to invest in them. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s another letter I’d like to just 
read you portions of here. And it’s a writer that . . . from the 
rural area and says: 
 

There are a lot of negative feelings about Saskatchewan, 
especially rural Saskatchewan. We are at the bottom of the 
priority list. As much as many of us believe that a small 
community is the best place to live and raise our children, 
today that is a difficult task. Our governments have cut 
funding to schools. School divisions are amalgamating, 
schools are closing. Funding cuts to health care, hospitals 
close, health divisions amalgamate, less personalized care, 
longer waiting lists, decreased services. Rail lines closing, 
grain elevators closing, less taxes to help our small 
communities. Increased trucking in our already crumbling 
highways. No funding for repairs so turn our highways 
back to gravel. 
 

And she goes on to say that: 
 

We are a small business, yet we are run by higher powers 
who tell us where, how, and for how much we can sell our 
product. 
 
We cannot increase the price of our product to meet the 
standard of living, and the rising cost of expenses. 

 
And this writer goes on to say that her: 
 

. . . community pride and spirit is very alive and very 
strong. Every individual who has grown up a part of a rural 
community will tell you how proud they are of their roots 
(Mr. Deputy Speaker). 

 
And she says: 
 

I am . . . proud (to be a) Canadian. I have a lot to be 
thankful for in my country. Our country is known to be 
ever so giving. To others. I feel many of our leaders have 
forgotten that they need to look (at) . . . number one first 
. . . 
 
Our positive feelings and pride in rural living continue to 
be kicked in the face. 
 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

How long can we continue to keep our small towns alive? 
To keep our schools open? More of our businesses from 
closing? More families from moving? How long before we 
are just a page in the history book, like so many other small 
communities? 
 
Negative feelings? Yes. Pride and spirit? Always. 

 
And that is basically the attitude of the people in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Despite the adversities and 
despite the attitude of this government, they are still very 
positive and they go out and try and keep their chin up when 
really a lot of them don’t know how they are going to survive 
the spring, how they are going to put their crops in. Farms that 
have been in the families for generations and they are just at the 
point where they don’t know if they can survive. 
 
And you know . . . and then another headline says that the 
government shouldn’t be surprised if farmers are suspicious and 
that is so true. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one point that was very interesting is that 
— when I read this — and that’s people aren’t happy that their 
friends, neighbours, and children are being forced to leave the 
province to find a job. They’re frustrated because while health 
care waiting lists are growing and highways are crumbling, the 
NDP has done nothing but spend money on out-of-province 
investments and grow the size of government. 
 
And then here’s the effect of the population loss. It has a 
significant impact on the people who chose to remain in 
Saskatchewan. It means a smaller tax base, less money to pay 
for important services like health and education, and that’s why 
it’s so very important, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
excuse me . . . that we turn these numbers around and start to 
grow this province. 
 
And in the Wednesday, January 16 edition of the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix, it’s got here: 
 

The NDP has a perfect track record in job uncreation. 
 
And it talks about the continuing evaporation of jobs. And it 
says: 
 

The government’s response does not reflect the sense of 
urgency that you might expect when the province is 
bleeding out. Instead of leadership, we get excuses. 
 
It’s beyond our control, says Economic Development 
Minister Eldon Lautermilch. The job losses . . . reminds us, 
are mostly in the . . . (ag) sector, afflicted by drought and 
low commodity prices. In other words, we’re to hope for 
rain and (a) $5 a bushel for wheat. 
 
This isn’t a job-creation strategy. This is a 
cross-your-fingers-and-hope-for-the-best strategy. 
 
It’s what you’d expect from children and gamblers, not 
(from) a provincial government. 
 
(If) the NDP under Premier Lorne Calvert seems to have a 
problem with governing. (And) I defy anyone to think of 

anything really decisive that this government has done in 
the year since Calvert took over. 

 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a quote, isn’t it? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Yes. Yes, it is a quote. 
 

Yes, he went on a rural bus tour. That created a job for 
the bus driver. 

 
And I will end the quote with this part, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

To pull Saskatchewan out of this death spiral will take 
dramatic and creative measures. If the Calvert government 
isn’t up to the job, it should resign, and let someone else 
have a shot. We cannot afford another year as disastrous as 
. . . (the) last one. 

 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very pleased to 
second the motion put forward by my colleague, the member 
from Redberry Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks tonight . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I started to say, at the 
conclusion of my remarks tonight I will be moving an 
amendment. 
 
But I want to start my remarks by talking about the numerous 
things that this government has done in an attempt to rebuild 
rural Saskatchewan. And I also, I also would like to indicate to 
the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
depopulation of rural Saskatchewan and the change in rural 
Saskatchewan didn’t start in 1991. 
 
I can remember in 19 . . . 1980s, Mr. Speaker, when former 
Premier Grant Devine thought of a grand scheme of taking 
thousands and thousands of civil servants from the city of 
Regina and putting them in small rural communities. In fact the 
Department of Highways was divided into nine communities 
around the small community as the hub of a wheel. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he was at that time trying to find a 
solution to the issue of rural depopulation. 
 
And it’s a problem that has been there since the 1950s or 
longer, Mr. Speaker; that in fact, the shift from a rural 
population, where family farms were on best a section of land, 
to where we are today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where many, many 
farms are in fact corporations in nature; that they farm what 
used to be farmed by 15, sometimes 20 family farms is farmed 
by a single farm today in some cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the problems facing rural Saskatchewan didn’t occur in the 
last eight or nine years; they’ve in fact been generations in 
developing. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, without doubt when the agricultural 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

 

community in Saskatchewan is hurting, the province of 
Saskatchewan is hurting. And the last few years has seen some 
difficult times in rural Saskatchewan in the agricultural 
community. That nobody is denying. But those are challenges 
that are not created internally within the province either, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
International subsidies by the European Union and the 
American national governments are not, and I stress, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, not internal problems to the province of 
Saskatchewan. But yet their impact is very clearly a very 
serious negative impact on the province of Saskatchewan. 
Nobody denies that. 
 
The fact that we’ve had several years now of very low 
commodity prices has significantly hurt the agricultural 
community in Saskatchewan. Nobody can deny that. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the last but not least of the major 
problems we’ve faced in the last couple of years — the extreme 
drought. Nobody can predict an extreme drought and there’s no 
way that a government can in fact make it rain, can make it 
change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So throughout history, throughout history our agricultural 
producers have faced drought. They have faced challenges. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone on this side of the House 
clearly understands the challenges that are facing the people in 
rural Saskatchewan, and we do care. But those challenges 
cannot be changed overnight. And we’re a province of limited 
resources. 
 
We’re a province that has more agricultural land in grains and 
oilseeds than any other province. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we have close to 50 per cent of the total production of grains 
and oilseeds in Canada in this province. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s very significant for a province of 1 million 
people. 
 
But despite the challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government’s moved to try to solve some of the problems in 
rural Saskatchewan. I want to talk about some of them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and some of the things that this government 
has done. 
 
First, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about the fact it was 
this government put forward the ACRE committee, a committee 
that was made up of rural residents, farmers, business people 
whose challenge was to go and put together a blueprint for the 
redevelopment of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And that committee has just recently reported. And that 
committee came back with a single most important issue, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and a single most important set of directions 
that we must all heed. And it was this: there is no option but 
change. Rural Saskatchewan on its current path cannot succeed. 
That we must be open to change and in fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we must be willing to lead that change. 
 
And change is very difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker. People are 
always reluctant to move from what they know, from what they 
understand, and from what they feel comfortable with, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 

But I want to talk about just a few points, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s not that rural Saskatchewan has not experienced profound 
change over time — it has. We’ve seen significant 
diversification of crops; we’ve seen significant change in our 
agricultural community. But what have we learned from that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s that that diversification and change in 
itself is not enough to sustain a viable agricultural community 
in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It means that we must 
look for value added, we must look to ethanol, and we must 
look to new industry in rural Saskatchewan in order to make it 
sustainable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Those same changes have created significant challenges of 
employment opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. As we move 
from smaller farms to larger farms — and the members 
opposite would understand this, as well as the members here 
where many of us were born and raised in rural Saskatchewan 
outside the major cities — as we’ve moved from the family 
farm into larger farms there’s been a significant challenge of 
employment in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Nobody will deny that. With the lack of employment in 
communities in rural Saskatchewan we’ve seen a depopulation 
of communities. We’ve seen younger people moving off the 
farm into our highly populated areas. Again a significant 
challenge. 
 
In order to change that trend, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to 
create base industries in those communities that keep young 
people there and provide jobs for young people in those small 
communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But yet rural Saskatchewan 
has some unique strengths that can be tracked back to our 
heritage, to our early development as a nation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are considered among the most 
capable, most energetic, and in fact an employable group of 
people that delivers more than any other nation in the country or 
any other nation in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have a 
work ethic second to none. And that goes back to our heritage, 
our development on the farm, and in fact the work ethic that we 
learned as children. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, despite all the challenges in rural 
Saskatchewan, I think we have to acknowledge that one of our 
best assets and most basic assets, fundamental assets of our 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is our large land base and our 
agriculture base on that land, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
significant part of our province and a significant part of our 
future. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also are the home of some of the 
richest resources in Canada. We have great fresh water 
throughout the province, far better than in many other 
jurisdictions in this country — in fact far, far better than many 
jurisdictions in the world. 
 
We have clean air. We have abundant sunshine. We have a very 
diverse wildlife and landscape, and we have as yet some 
significant untapped resources that we are just starting to 
discover today. 
 
But above all, we are the home to resilient, hardworking, 
innovative, and determined people, particularly in our 
agricultural community. These are the qualities of our 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

ancestors. These are the qualities of our children. And they are 
the qualities that will bring this province to its rightful place in 
the future. 
 
We recognize the challenges that were faced in rural 
Saskatchewan, but we also recognize the opportunities. And 
what we need to do is get beyond talking about the challenges 
and move to doing and delivering in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as we’re starting to do in the ethanol industry. 
 
We’re going to move forward in that industry, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, despite the opposition’s reluctance to have foreign 
investment capital in the province of Saskatchewan. We have 
heard the minister repeatedly, repeatedly say we’re moving 
forward in this industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Recognizing our challenges and our strengths, we have done 
many things to try to stimulate the rural economy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And later in my speech I’m going to talk about 
literally hundreds of things that have been done in rural 
Saskatchewan in the last decade to stimulate the economy. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are literally hundreds of things that 
have been done to stimulate the economy. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must say that again . . . once again 
that it was this government — this government — that 
established the Action Committee on the Rural Economy 
because we believe in rural Saskatchewan and we believe in the 
people of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
By listening and talking to the people of rural Saskatchewan, 
the ACRE committee has put together concrete, tangible ideas 
for creating jobs, and stimulating rural communities and jobs, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — tangible things that need to be done, 
and we need to move forward with this. The opposition 
continues to want to put down rural Saskatchewan and talk 
about how we can’t do anything, we can’t move forward. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Well if we’re always talking about how we can’t do something, 
we’ll never do it. We’ll never do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If we 
always talk in the negative about how bad everything is, that’s 
what people hear. That’s what investors hear. That’s what our 
children hear. How do you move forward in that environment, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? You cannot move forward in that 
environment. In order to move forward, you need a positive 
attitude, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And even those who have ambition to once govern in the future, 
if they say so many negative things about the province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, all the bright things they think they can do, 
they’re going to go nowhere. Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you don’t 
think positive about your province, if you don’t talk positive 
about your province, you’ll have a self-fulfilling prophecy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and you cannot move ahead if you don’t 
believe you can. 
 
And the opposition continues to talk about the negative things 
about our province. For once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 
hear them talk about positive things about our province because 
this is the province where the most dynamic, motivating, 
intelligent people in this province live. We have entrepreneurs. 

We have hard-working people, and we have a bright, bright 
work history in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we have 
a bright future. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members 
opposite don’t want to hear about good things; they’re leaving 
the Assembly. It’s unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the province put together an 
economic blueprint called Partnership for Prosperity last year, 
or two years ago, that identifies the revitalization of rural 
Saskatchewan as a priority of our government. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we took that seriously, and that’s why we put the 
ACRE committee together, the Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy. But we believe very, very sincerely about the 
importance of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The challenges we face today as a province and as a people are 
the same as those our ancestors faced more than 50 years ago 
and 100 years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To successfully 
overcome those challenges will require different tools, a 
different way of thinking, and a willingness to overcome those 
hurdles, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This province has always faced 
adversity and challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we’ve 
always moved to overcome them and build our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and only through a positive attitude, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, will we be able to do that. We have the 
resources. We have the people. We are assembling the tools 
needed to build a 21st century economy in this province. Now 
we just have to have the willingness to tackle those tough 
challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and move us forward. 
 
And I know the members on this side of the Assembly have . . . 
they have that attitude to tackle those challenges and move us 
forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I only hope the members 
opposite will become part of moving forward instead of talking 
about moving backwards, and in fact always talking about the 
negative things about our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk for a few minutes about 
some of the specifics in ACRE. ACRE, the Action Committee 
on the Rural Economy, and the creation of the Rural 
Revitalization Office are manifestations of this government’s 
commitment to rural Saskatchewan. They are actions. We 
committed an office of Rural Revitalization. We committed . . . 
we put together ACRE. We committed to ACRE, we put it 
together, and we made it happen. Those are commitments 
towards rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want to 
see results. 
 
As indicated in the 2002 Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
part of the government’s action plan to work with community 
and business groups is to reduce obstacles to rural economic 
development. Giving rural residents access to the same 
opportunities urban residents have is a priority of this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s why we’re continuing 
to expand both Internet and cell phone access to people in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I heard the member from Redberry Lake talk about how that 
they need more Internet, cell . . . pardon me, increased cell 
coverage in rural Saskatchewan for economic development. 
Well this government is doing that. 
 
But at the same time, at the same time I heard members on the 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

 

opposition side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talk about how they don’t 
know if they want to own Crown corporations. They don’t 
know if they want to make investments so we can expand 
coverage to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It is only through prudent investment that we can continue to do 
those types of things that put rural Saskatchewan on an even 
foot with urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this 
government is moving to do that. We’re expanding cell 
coverage throughout the province as we can afford to do so. It is 
only through good, prudent investment that our Crowns like 
SaskTel can actually afford to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
ACRE is really a blueprint for the future. We have to accept it 
as that. We can’t accept everything in it as being absolutely 
gospel because over the next two or three years things are going 
to continue to change. But it is a blueprint to move forward to 
revitalize rural Saskatchewan and we need to recognize it as 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what are some of the things this 
government has done in the last while to help get people in rural 
Saskatchewan thinking about moving in new directions? 
Because most importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important 
to get people in rural Saskatchewan to believe you can move 
forward to build a rural economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And members opposite keep saying no over there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s because they don’t believe we can move forward 
in rural Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government does believe that we can rebuild and revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan, and we can in fact move forward to the people in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We organized, recruited and organized . . . recruitment and 
organization of the Canadian Rural Revitalization Foundation 
Annual Fall Conference was part of moving ahead. Getting 
people to think about what you can do in revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan; get people together to talk about what they can 
do, what they believe in, and how we can move forward. 
 
As well, the organization of the Rural Economic Opportunities 
Conference. Again, get rural people together talking with 
optimism about moving forward in rural Saskatchewan. A very 
important thing to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We decreased the cost of phone service from SaskTel — the 
local businesses in rural Saskatchewan. As well, as I’ve 
mentioned previously, expanded the cell phone coverage in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Very important 
things to the infrastructure of building a rural economy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We put CommunityNet into communities. It’s a growing 
development of IT (information technology) infrastructure in 
this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It has already been linking 
numerous communities together throughout rural 
Saskatchewan, and by 2003, CommunityNet will connect more 
than 366 communities. And over the next three years it will link 
834 educational facilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 310 health 
facilities, 86 First Nations schools, and 256 government offices 
in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Significant 
movement to putting rural Saskatchewan on the same foot as 

urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to talk about one of the significant movements that 
we’ve made over the last few weeks — six to eight weeks or so 
— since we’ve announced the ethanol development in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, considering the state, the current status or 
state of our agricultural sector, this government can see the 
importance of a vibrant ethanol industry. It’s very, very 
important that we develop a vibrant ethanol industry. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as I heard the members opposite earlier, as we 
went through a debate on the issue of ethanol, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I heard them say that they didn’t want private 
investment from outside Canada. Well we need to have money, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to build an industry. And we have 
to accept that money from those who are willing to bring money 
forward to develop an industry. Many Saskatchewan industries 
were developed with money from outside Saskatchewan and 
outside Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most significant social program in 
Canada today is a job. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most significant 
social program today in Canada is a job. And that’s very 
important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Is this government supposed to sit by and let an opportunity 
pass us by if industry that’s building a viable ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan wants some government commitment and public 
investment? 
 
If they want it, are we supposed to let it pass us by because 
those major companies want a portion of government 
investment? I say not. I say we have to build rural 
Saskatchewan for those people. We have to build it for the 
people of Saskatchewan. We have to build it for those families 
that are waiting for help. 
 
We cannot sit idly by, waiting for solely private investment if 
those companies willing to put money into our province insist 
upon a portion of public investment. We will not sit by. This 
government will act. We need to act in the interest of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan does not need a government that uses 
wishful thinking as a policy platform. What it wants is decisive 
action and leadership to move forward on the plans to an 
objective to build an ethanol industry in rural Saskatchewan. 
That is what it wants; that is what it’s demanding today. And 
this government is going to move forward with that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Rural residents want investment in their communities. Where it 
comes from is not a primary concern. They need that 
investment in their communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m going to talk a little bit about tools for development in 
Saskatchewan and how they affect rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Now we’re doing a number of things as a 
government to develop rural Saskatchewan, and I think people 
need to understand that and we need to talk about it because we 
can’t always talk about the negative. 
 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

Granted, there are significant challenges in rural Saskatchewan 
today. I’m not going to pretend there are not significant 
challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The challenges we face 
because of depressed agricultural markets, depressed 
agricultural products, international subsidies in the grains and 
oilseed sectors, drought, and depopulation of rural 
Saskatchewan, are significant. But they are just that — they are 
challenges. And challenges need to be met head-on. 
 
Now what’s the government doing? We’ve put an investment 
attraction council together, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to pursue 
partnerships and seek out new businesses for Saskatchewan. 
And in particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’d like to seek out 
new businesses for rural Saskatchewan to build a vibrant new 
economy in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Tax reforms, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve provided simple, fair, 
and competitive taxes that support opportunity and growth. In 
2001 Saskatchewan residents will pay $317 million less in 
provincial income tax. This is the largest personal income tax 
cut in this province’s history and there will be further 
reductions in this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker — significant cuts. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2001 we had the single largest 
investment in highways. Again, that is the infrastructure of rural 
Saskatchewan, largely. This year again we have a significant 
$300 million commitment to highways in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those highways don’t . . . they run up to 
major cities, but what they do is they provide transportation 
routes for the goods and services provided the people in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the members opposite say we’re forgetting all about 
their highways. But to rebuild the highway structure in 
Saskatchewan — we have more highways than any other 
province in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker — takes time. We’re 
doing it, Mr. Deputy Speaker; the members opposite know that. 
 
You know, three years ago, every single day in this Assembly, 
there were significant questions about highways, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This year there are no questions, there are no 
complaints. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s because we’re doing . . . 
we’re rebuilding the highways infrastructure in this province 
and that is a significant investment for rural Saskatchewan. 
That’s a significant investment for the future of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite have difficulty 
that we’re spending money in their communities and in their 
RMs (rural municipality), Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we’re doing 
it anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a necessity to build the 
road infrastructure in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a Strategic Roads Partnership 
Program with rural RMs. We have a Prairie Grain Roads 
Program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with $29 million in it. 
 
We have Telehealth being developed for rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I can go on and on and on about 
some of the things we are doing to enhance the opportunities in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 

We have technology enhanced learning that now brings 
education to many smaller communities that wasn’t there just a 
short period of time ago, Mr. Speaker. We have a virtual on-line 
campus that we’re developing; we have CommunityNet; we 
have creation of the Prairie Ventures Fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— all things that are helping rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve put REDAs (regional economic development authority) 
in place. We have investment in new research and technologies 
to create new opportunities in rural areas. We have the 
Agriculture Development Fund, we have the Agri-Food Equity 
Fund, we have Strategic Investment Fund; we have the 
Livestock Loan Guarantee Program, Mr. Deputy Speaker — all 
designed to help rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I’d like to talk for a few minutes about some of the 
success stories in rural Saskatchewan, because there are many. 
There are many. Not that there aren’t challenges out there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But there are also significant success stories in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to talk about a few in southern Saskatchewan to start 
with. Popowich Milling Limited in Yorkton is a good place to 
start, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a company established as a 
farm-based seed cleaning plant in 1980 by founder Terry 
Popowich. The company expanded in 1998, opened an oat 
processing plant as well as a bagging and distribution centre 
and manufactures a variety of milled oat products, including 
organic oats, and exports more than 75 per cent of its products 
to the US (United States) and Mexico, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 
success story in rural Saskatchewan, providing not only a 
market for products grown in rural Saskatchewan, but also an 
export market for those products. 
 
(20:00) 
 
With recent purchases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the staff will 
increase from 70 to 82, and production capacity will triple to 
100,000 tonnes by the summer of 2003. 
 
Now even the members opposite would have to acknowledge 
that’s a success story. That’s a Saskatchewan company with the 
entrepreneurial spirit of a Saskatchewan resident building an 
industry in rural Saskatchewan that uses the products raised in 
rural Saskatchewan. That can be nothing but a success story, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about Conserva Pak Seeding Systems 
of Indian Head, with Jim Halford as the founder, and employs 
between 20 and 49 people. Produces about 60 seeders a year. 
Seeders have been sold throughout Western Canada, the US, 
Australia, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. Another 
success story in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Then we have Bridgeview Manufacturing. Employs up to 70 
people and the plant has over 17,000 square feet. It 
manufactures custom trailers, livestock handling equipment, 
and grain handling equipment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again a 
manufacturing industry for our primary agriculture industry in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A success story in a rural 
community. What more can we ask for? 
 
By the way, just as a point of interest, Kevin Hruska, 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

 

recognized in 1997 as the Entrepreneur of the Year at an awards 
ceremony in Calgary, the founder was recognized as the 
Entrepreneur of the Year in 1997. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the 
spirit of individuals like Kevin that have built this province. 
 
Fill-More Seeds Inc. in Fillmore. Employs 16 people to process 
lentils, peas, and chickpeas. Cleans and bags them and then 
ships them to markets in Mexico, Europe, and African 
countries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A significant, significant 
investment in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In July 2001 the company purchased Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
elevators in Creelman, Osage, and Fillmore which are along 
CPR’s (Canadian Pacific Railway) Tyvan branch line. The 
company accepts CWB grain, Canadian Wheat Board grains 
and non-board grains, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Investment again in 
rural Saskatchewan and a very significant investment. 
 
Husband Foods in Wawota, Mr. Deputy Speaker, — another 
investment in rural Saskatchewan, a significant success story. 
Well Mr. Deputy Speaker, that particular business in rural 
Saskatchewan is an organic farm. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have literally 140 success stories in rural 
Saskatchewan. Now I’m not going to deal with them all, but I 
do want to . . . I don’t have time, Mr. Deputy Speaker and in a 
short period of time that we would have, I could not get to all of 
them. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a shame because I think the 
people of Saskatchewan need to understand that we have many, 
many success stories in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about some of the 
recommendations from the Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy. It talks about access to capital. People in rural 
Saskatchewan need access to capital to grow a vibrant, new 
economy. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government’s committed to 
help them access that capital. We’ve established an Agriculture 
Venture Capital Fund — end up stimulating new capital. Invest 
in large farm-related and value-added agriculture — a good 
move for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re in the process of establishing an ethanol industry. I want 
to talk a little bit about the government’s actions to date, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’ve established a Prairie Ventures Fund. 
We have had Economic and Co-operative Development as a 
reviewing programs for promoting community development in 
rural Saskatchewan. Economic and Co-operative Development 
offers a Small Business Loans Association program, and 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food are examining options to 
the Livestock Loan Guarantee program to allow it to provide 
additional options for livestock feeders in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have the rural skills development 
program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Actions to date are significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now I 
could go on for some hours about the recommendation on the 
committee, the ACRE Committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the 
members opposite can read the report. If they really are 
interested in rural Saskatchewan, they could read the report, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And they could go out to their constituents and talk about the 
good work that was done by the ACRE Committee and that we 

need to move forward, and we need to move forward united. 
And we need to have a belief that we can move forward and we 
can accomplish something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
without that belief and that faith in a future, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you have a self-fulfilling prophecy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and you don’t move forward. And now is not a time to 
talk. Now is not a time for political opportunism. Now is the 
time to move forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about some 
good news stories in rural Saskatchewan from newspapers. You 
can just go through the headlines in paper after paper. “Making 
wooden pallets a growing venture at Zenon Park,” Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I can go on and on and on, through article after article, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about rural Saskatchewan. “Canola production 
centre will produce economic spinoff in Nipawin.” And there 
are good stories throughout rural Saskatchewan talking about 
economic development, day after day after day. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t hear about those things 
from the members who represent those constituencies in rural 
Saskatchewan. All we hear about is the doom and gloom and 
that things are so bad in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that there is no hope or opportunity for the future. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what they want people to 
believe, that there is no future in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But the members on this side of the House, the majority of who 
were born and raised in rural Saskatchewan, really do believe 
that there is a very bright future in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we believe that there are very good people, people who 
want to build their communities, grow their communities, want 
to invest in their communities for the future, and want to live, 
and in some cases, Mr. Speaker, they want to die in those 
communities as well. They want to go to their final resting 
place where they’ve lived their entire lives. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we on this side of the House believe that if that’s what 
they want to do, they should have the opportunity to do that. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, in that spirit 
of optimism for the future of rural Saskatchewan — and in fact 
the future of our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker — an optimism 
that I hope the members opposite catch and I hope they start to 
believe in rural Saskatchewan as much as the members on this 
side of the House do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and believe in our 
future and the opportunities for the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You have to be pragmatic; you have to move ahead with what’s 
possible to do. You cannot dream about the impossible, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. You cannot have Utopia, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You must move ahead pragmatically, taking the challenges that 
confront you, and move into the future as it presents itself to 
you. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that, I’d like to move: 
 

An amendment by removing all words after “Assembly” 
and replace with the following: 

 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

express its support of the province’s commitment in 
bringing forth real and innovative policies that will have a 
positive impact in bringing about rural economic 
revitalization in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this amendment is seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
start my remarks by a wise saying by a very wise man. Thomas 
Edison once said: 
 

Opportunity is missed by most people because it is dressed 
in overalls and looks like work. 

 
Our own Minister of Agriculture and Food and Minister 
Responsible for Rural Revitalization used this quote to make 
the point that we here on this side of the government are 
committed to working to improve the conditions in rural 
Saskatchewan. He was speaking to the 2002 Saskatchewan 
Rural Economic Opportunities Conference, March 20, 2002. 
 
It was interesting when we had the people from ACRE here 
presenting the ACRE report. And they were asked, what is the 
number one concern or what’s the number one thing that we 
could do to improve rural Saskatchewan? And they talked on 
and on about attitude. And so I thought I’d read a little bit 
about, what are some of the success stories in rural 
Saskatchewan? What were they talking about? What was 
ACRE talking about, rural projects that went really well? 
 
Well here’s one from Meadow Lake. And if you believe in 
success, it will become a self-fulfilling prophesy. Here’s 
Meadow Lake, a community 150 kilometres north of North 
Battleford, doing very well. Now what’s been the primary 
driver? Forestry. And they’ve worked really well. This group, it 
says in the report, they’ve made very good use of MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and MPs (Member of 
Parliament). 
 
What’s the number one thing that they talked about that’s so 
important? A positive attitude: 
 

Meadow Lake has a positive self-image and a positive 
attitude. The optimism has become infectious. Even when 
Clearwater Mills closed recently (and I’m quoting here) 
and 70 jobs were lost, it did not have a negative impact. 
People looked at what else could be done. They are 
confident in themselves and convinced their community 
will continue to grow and prosper! 
 

Here’s another situation — Tisdale. Tisdale, Saskatchewan. 
And the heading is, “Success begets Success. It’s not easy, but 
it’s that simple!” And here’s a community that created 
opportunities: “The most dramatic growth came during the 
1997-2000 period when four inland grain terminals were built.” 
And this helped the community create a synergy that led to so 
many other things. 

 
But what was the one problem they had to overcome? What was 
the one roadblock? Negative attitude. In here it says, I’m going 

to quote here: 
 
Despite the successes over the years, by individuals and the 
community, the pervasive dark cloud of hopelessness 
seems to hover over the community. The tendency to view 
rural communities and agriculture as victims of 
government, big business or foreign subsidies is 
self-defeating. This is reinforced, on a daily basis (Mr. 
Deputy Speaker), by both external media and in the coffee 
shops. 
 

And the solution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is: 
 

Leaders have consciously recognized that attitude is a 
major barrier to creative problem solving, change and 
adaptation. 

 
And I see that in this House when we’re constantly asked 
questions that have a negative overtone. 
 

Effective communication is critical to presenting an 
alternative message of hope and optimism that 
characterized the pioneers that settled and developed the 
community. This also involves a supportive and effective 
local media that is in tune and in support of innovation and 
growth . . . and prepared to take an alternative view to the 
provincial or national media on the local economy. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here is another example. Leroy: “Thinking 
Outside the Box — Changing Times — Can We Change in 
Time?” What was one of their issues that they felt about road 
blocks? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, pretty close. This 
is one thing they . . . I’m quoting here: 
 

Pettiness and jealousy of success can provide road blocks 
or split a community. 

 
Here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have in our member statements 
good examples of things that are going well in our province, 
and yet we seem to not be able to celebrate them. So what’s the 
solution? And I’m quoting here: 
 

The solution was good communication and an effort to 
provide benefits to a large number of stakeholders in every 
project so that everyone could win. 
 

And not just some. 
 
Here’s another example of a success story in Saskatchewan — 
Eston — and the headline here: “Re-define the Term 
Community!” And their aim, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was to make 
Eston a showcase rural community. I mean, what was their 
roadblock that they talked about? Yet again — attitude. And 
here I quote: 
 

Attitude: “What’s the use?” or “It can’t be done!” There is 
a great deal of frustration and pessimism in rural 
communities, including parts of Eston. This attitude comes 
from years of decline, less infrastructure, more 
consolidation and increasing taxation pressure on local 
government for education and municipal services. (And I’m 
quoting.) It’s really a feeling of powerlessness. 
 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

 

And here, this is what Verna Thompson says. Verna Thompson 
says: 
 

In some ways, our own community can be our worst 
enemy, and further decline becomes a self-fulfilling 
prophecy. 
 

But what’s the solution? 
 

Strong groups of leaders who support each other to keep 
positive. Ignore the naysayers. Do enough background 
work to get people to work with you. Unless the general 
attitude is positive, nothing will happen. Do not be afraid to 
try new things. Failure is required to learn because you 
never know unless you try. 

 
(20:15) 
 
And here in this side in the government, we’re willing to take a 
few risks. We’ve got a plan, especially using the Crowns. We 
take . . . We have a process in place to make sure we’re doing 
things with due diligence, but there are risks and we have to 
take a chance, and we want to support our people in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Manitou Beach, yet another example in the ACRE communities 
of success. “Pie-in-the-Sky Community Development. How the 
Community Created Opportunities.” We all are aware of 
Manitou Beach was a resort community and really had a great 
and economic miracle. It’s a wonderful place and what is their 
roadblock that they talked about? Community skepticism — it 
can’t be done. This was a major challenge particularly in the 
face of massive agricultural and rural crisis in the mid- to 
late-1980s. 
 
And what was the solution, Mr. Speaker? The solution was 
involving successful business people in the core group who 
already had a sense of the market and intuitive ability to sense 
what the community would support. 
 
Now here is another example, Mr. Speaker — Ogema. And 
what’s the heading here? “We simply choose to opt out of rural 
decline!” Now Ogema is a small village, was incorporated in 
1910. Its population though is increasing from 290 to 320 the 
past two years. But the wake-up call for Ogema came in 
1995-96 when the closures of SaskPower office, the CP 
(Canadian Pacific) branch line, and the local elevators 
combined with the impending loss of the school. This became a 
call for action. 
 
And what was the turnaround? Well the Red Coat Road and 
Rail Ltd. and at the same time the South Central Hog Group 
formed to look at a community hog venture. And these were 
great success stories. 
 
Now what did they say were the keys to success? Well in 
Ogema, they talk about the government must be a partner. And 
I quote here: 
 

Once the community was organized and focused on action, 
there was good support from government staff and 
researchers for both the Red Coat Road and Rail 
(Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation and the 

Canadian Wheat Board) and for South Central Hog 
(Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food), which helped make 
these projects successful. This help was in terms of 
information, trends, regulatory compliance, access to 
politicians and policy adjustments. 

 
So here, Mr. Speaker, are I believe six examples: Ogema, 
Manitou Beach, Eston, Leroy, Meadow Lake, and Tisdale. They 
talked about how important a positive attitude was to make 
things happen in rural Saskatchewan. Without a doubt there is a 
need for policies. And I want to talk about one policy, one 
initiative, that I think is very promising and very important in 
terms of diversification, and that is the Farm Family 
Opportunities Initiative. 
 
Now why has the government announced the farm family 
opportunities program? Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farm 
families need our support. Many are faced with having to adjust 
their business to rapidly changing environments, and our 
agricultural industry and our rural communities need the 
leadership, the dedication, and expertise of our farm families. 
And this program assists farm families to manage change 
through business management advice, training, and support 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are the program components? Well there’s 
basically three parts to this. The first is a farm business advisory 
service to assist farm families to analyze the current state of 
their farm enterprise, diversification assistance program to 
provide financial assistance to defray some of the costs of 
changing or diversifying, a training skills enhancement program 
to assist farm families to access advice in the training skills 
development required for implementing their action plan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, who can apply? Well all farm families can 
apply for the farm business advisory service. This program 
really is targeted at farm families whose net incomes from all 
sources are below 30,000 — a three-year average — and a net 
worth of less than 400,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can farm corporations apply? Of course they can. 
The farm corporation has the same status as a farm family unit. 
 
And what benefits does the program offer? Well there’s 
essentially two benefits: a 25 per cent or up to $5,000 of the 
capital costs associated with farm diversification or expansion, 
and up to $2,500 for education assistance to help farm families 
access training and skills development. 
 
Now can you have both? Yes, you can. The maximum support 
per family is $7,500. 
 
Now is there a program available to assist producers to 
purchase livestock? Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is. It’s the livestock 
loan guarantee program. And currently there is 120 associations 
in the province accessing this program. 
 
Now this one is very interesting, Mr. Speaker. Can I receive 
assistance for a non-farm diversification project? Yes, as long 
as the development occurs on the farm. And some of these 
examples are a bed and breakfast or a meat processing facility, 
and this could be covered up to a maximum of $5,000. 
 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

Now how do you start? Well you contact the business 
agrologist in your area for an appointment. And that’s really I 
think a neat . . . a very important initiative to support rural 
families in our province. 
 
Now I just want to talk just a minute about the six interim 
recommendations that ACRE asked because they felt were very, 
very important. And I think it’s important that we recognize that 
we’ve done these things. They thought these were the important 
points to get going right away before they handed in their final 
report. So this is important to realize that we are moving on the 
ACRE report. 
 
The first one, Mr. Speaker, was access to capital. And what’s 
government actions to date? The Prairie Ventures Fund was 
created. A venture capital established by 18 Saskatchewan 
credit unions, Prairie Financial Management and CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) were to invest in 
Saskatchewan business. And this fund, Mr. Speaker, is expected 
to raise up to $60 million in capital over the next five years. 
 
Economic and Co-operative Development is reviewing 
programs for promoting community development. All right. 
Economic and Co-operative Development is offering small 
business loans through the Small Business Loans Association 
program. 
 
The second point they ask for — rural skills development 
program. And what are we doing on that? 
 
Well the Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training has 
increased access to education and training opportunities to 
people in rural Saskatchewan through technology enhanced 
learning initiatives. Through this program, people in rural 
Saskatchewan can expect an increased range and diversity of 
courses and programs available at a distance and more 
opportunities to develop technical skills required by today’s 
labour market. 
 
Regional colleges are helping. And they’re also talking about a 
Saskatchewan older worker in agriculture pilot project. And this 
project is still in its early ages and it’s a very important thing 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 
 
And then I was just talking about the farm family opportunities 
initiative. Another important point. 
 
The third one was the approval process guide for development 
projects. They felt this was really important as well. 
 
So what are we doing to date? The Economic and Co-operative 
Development continues to lead government regulatory reform 
initiative. This initiative is mandated to review and reduce 
government regulations and red tape from the 1996 levels by 25 
per cent by 2006. Ongoing efforts are being made to pursue and 
address red tape and paper burden issues that affect small- and 
medium-sized businesses. 
 
Fourth . . . and there’s many more; I could talk about each one 
at length, but the fourth one is a communications infrastructure. 
They want better . . . (inaudible) . . . communications. 
Government actions to date — continued implementation of 
CommunityNet. The 60 or $70 million first phase of 

CommunityNet ensures access to high-speed Internet for health, 
education, government offices, and library facilities throughout 
the province. It has also made it possible for SaskTel to expand 
commercial high-speed services from eight communities to 46 
communities and more. 
 
Immigration policy . . . and this is an important one. I know 
we’ve talked a lot about this in this House, Mr. Speaker. They 
wanted us to take a look at the immigration policy that we have. 
They want us to develop more resources to the immigration file. 
Among the areas that they thought we should be concentrating 
on — ensuring that the provincial nominee program is fully 
utilized with a more aggressive marketing approach. Make the 
provincial nominee program a permanent agreement and 
negotiate with the federal government to increase the number of 
nominees. 
 
Well what’s our action to date, Mr. Speaker? The government 
has made this commitment to immigration through the 
establishment of the immigration branch in Intergovernmental 
and Aboriginal Affairs. And this government as well has 
extended this agreement with the federal government on the 
provincial nomination program to September 2002, and this 
agreement will provide for an additional 150 nominees for a 
total of 300. This province intends to negotiate a multi-year 
agreement following September 2002. 
 
And number six — and this is one I was referring to — is the 
education publicity program on rural Saskatchewan successes 
and competitive position. And this is really, really critical 
because we have such an opportunity, but what we need to do is 
be positive, think positive, talk positive, and be positive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — So what are we talking about? What have we 
done to date? Well the Economic and Co-operative 
Development has initiated a program called the Saskatchewan 
Dream campaign that attempts to focus on initiatives and 
activities that profile Saskatchewan positively. And the 
government, primarily through the Economic and Co-operative 
Development and the Rural Revitalization Office, actively 
participates in recruiting and organizing the Canadian Rural 
Revitalization Foundation’s annual fall conference held in 
Muenster and this conference highlights numerous successful 
rural-based businesses and attracted last time approximately 
300 participants. But I understand it was just a major success. 
 
Another program that’s really well done, Only in Saskatchewan 
contest, sponsored by the Economic and Co-operative 
Development. Youth are preparing Web sites, essays, and 
artwork telling about their success stories or dreams of 
achieving success in Saskatchewan. Many of the entries 
received so far have been rural-based and have been 
outstanding. 
 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food sponsors AgriBiz, a 
television agricultural program which highlights advances and 
innovation. 
 
And as well, and I started off my speech by talking, using a 
quote from the Saskatchewan Rural Economic Opportunities 
Conference held this spring, March 2002, March 20 and 21, 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

 

which helped participants learn at first hand the skills and 
experience of Saskatchewan’s successful entrepreneurs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing an awful lot. And I could go on, 
but at this point I would like to second the amendment and go 
on record as being opposed to the main motion. But I would 
like to second the amendment as put forward by my colleague. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 
able to stand at last to speak to the motion that was put before 
us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment right off the start that the 
motion spoke more specifically to the realities of rural 
revitalization and the issues that are facing the rural areas of this 
province. Unfortunately the amendment which was brought 
forward completely gutted the original motion and doesn’t do a 
thing in terms of rural revitalization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment itself would be 
deemed unfriendly in almost any other environment because 
what it does is lauds the government for a program of action 
which it clearly hasn’t achieved. It certainly hasn’t set out any 
clear . . . and it hasn’t delineated any clear or precise plan for 
rural revitalization, and so it shouldn’t be lauding itself for its 
great achievements. They have not been realized as yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an interesting situation here. We have the 
words rural revitalization, which produce a very nice little 
alliteration, an example of alliteration. But we come awfully 
close to an oxymoron when we talk about rural revitalization 
tied to the NDP. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a very clear failure, a record of abject 
failure by this government, this NDP government, for the last 
10 years when it comes to the rural economy. To talk about 
rural revitalization in conjunction with those three letters, NDP, 
sounds to me like a johnny-come-lately situation. They didn’t 
understand what rural revitalization was all about. They didn’t 
understand a need for it. They never once thought about taking 
any action to achieve rural revitalization until the 1999 election 
when the Saskatchewan Party made it very clear to this 
government that if they didn’t take rural Saskatchewan 
seriously, they would lose more than their seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural revitalization is a phoenix that’s come out of 
the ashes of the despair of this party. Rural revitalization is 
something that is new to this group, and they don’t know how 
to achieve it. They speak laudably about rural revitalization. 
They say all the right words, but their actions belie their good 
intentions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when rural revitalization was first dreamt up, 
when it was first conceived, when it was first brought to the 
light of day, we on this side looked at that as a very positive 
movement by this government. We thought it might have 

potential. And, Mr. Speaker, we are now sadly, sadly 
disillusioned by this government’s efforts in that area. 
 
Rural revitalization was talked about in the Throne Speech of a 
little more than a year ago. But when it came to being a 
presentation of this government, what did we get? We didn’t get 
a full-blown ministry. We didn’t even get a full-blown minister. 
What we got was a mini-ministry with a part-time minister, one 
deputy minister, and a handful of bureaucrats. 
 
And what were they charged with? What was the responsibility 
given to the department of Rural Revitalization, the so-called 
department of Rural Revitalization? Were they put in charge of 
new policy initiatives to help vitalize the rural economy? Were 
they given new opportunities, new objectives, new goals, new 
funding to achieve anything of significance in rural 
Saskatchewan? Were they asked to help stop the brain drain, the 
movement of people from rural areas to cities and to other 
provinces and maybe even other countries? Were they given 
any opportunity to put anything in place that would have 
significant and real effect? Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer is 
clearly no. It was a mini-ministry: a part-time minister, one 
deputy minister, a handful of bureaucrats. 
 
Now what was it that they were allowed to do? Well they were 
allowed to review the things done by the other departments to 
see that they didn’t penalize rural Saskatchewan in any way. 
They were given an opportunity to assist other departments in 
meeting certain objectives. They were given oversight 
opportunities to make sure that direct harm did not come to 
rural Saskatchewan because of some policy initiative by some 
other superior ministry. But in terms of having real power, there 
was none. 
 
They had to depend on moral suasion or their good will or a 
little bit of influence to achieve the kinds of things, the kinds of 
goals and objectives that were necessary to keep rural 
Saskatchewan alive. Not vibrant, Mr. Speaker, just simply alive. 
It was an attempt, virtually, to resuscitate a corpse. 
 
And I think again, that this government has failed miserably, 
not only in its inability to put effective programs in place, but 
when they did establish a mini-ministry it wasn’t given any 
authority or any power. So what we got was the mini-ministry 
of Rural Revitalization under the direction of the Minister of 
Highways in that particular government. 
 
Now the Minister of Highways changed and the government 
reorganized and then we found the deputy minister, the minister 
in charge of Agriculture and Food suddenly the new Minister of 
Rural Revitalization. But not only is Rural Revitalization a 
mini-ministry from the past, now it’s been reduced even further 
because it is now the Department of Agriculture, Food and 
Rural Revitalization. It’s all been run together. 
 
In fact I was looking at the new legislation that the minister 
handed out today. They’re going to change the name of the 
department officially, to the ministry of food, agriculture and 
rural revitalization. So Rural Revitalization will not be on its 
own in any respect, and in fact it’s now just an adjunct, now it’s 
just a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Just ask for a 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

little less noise level so we can hear the member and hear the 
member’s statements. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to continue with my comments under your watchful 
eye and we will . . . we’ll try and make these comments 
succinctly and poignantly. But maybe I should, maybe I should 
reiterate some of the earlier points just so that if it was lost in 
the hubbub in the House, people have an opportunity to catch 
the salient issues that we’ve already raised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where we were was we now have the Department 
of Rural Revitalization melded into the Department of 
Agriculture and Food. It is indistinguishable as a separate 
entity. It is part of a larger entity. And I guess the trouble with 
that, Mr. Speaker, is that in the cases where a very small entity 
is relative and proportionate and next to a much larger entity, 
guess what gets forgotten? 
 
You know the analogy of Canada being a mouse sleeping next 
to the American elephant was used very poignantly to describe 
the relationship of Canada to the United States. I would dare 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Rural Revitalization 
has almost reached that limited status. The Department of Rural 
Revitalization has now been reduced to the mouse next to the 
elephant of Ag and Food. 
 
So what hope, what hope does the initiatives of rural 
revitalization have in being realized when the minister’s going 
to be preoccupied with all the trouble that is going to come his 
way as a result of being in charge of Agriculture and Food? We 
know as a fact, Mr. Speaker, that Agriculture has many, many 
serious issues facing it — many troubling issues facing that 
particular department. And the minister’s going to be hugely 
preoccupied by those particular initiatives and those interests. I 
doubt if he will concentrate nearly as dedicatedly to the issues 
of rural revitalization that those issues ought to have. His 
attention will be clearly dedicated to the other issues that will 
take precedence in his schedule. 
 
I guess the problem I’m trying to describe here, Mr. Speaker, is 
that rural revitalization is really much more than an agriculture 
issue. And I think, frankly, that the government has made a 
mistake by lumping the two together. Rural revitalization is not 
about agriculture alone. Rural revitalization is about a wide 
number of things related to rural activities, and to lump it with 
agriculture is just a complete oversight on the whole realm of 
activities that rural revitalization encompasses. 
 
Now I . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would refer to the 
committee . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I know that there are a lot of 
people would like to help the member. But I just doubt if the 
member really needs the help at this stage. So if you’d just 
allow the member to make his statements, please, in a way that 
the member can be heard in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To make the point I 
was trying to delineate earlier, I’m going to refer to the ACRE 
report that we’re all familiar with. We all received the final 
report of the Action Committee on the Rural Economy 
submitted to this legislature a month ago. And in the report, I’d 

like to refer the members opposite to page 2 of the introduction. 
In this report they clearly, after many months and hundreds and 
thousands of hours of study, they very clearly indicated that 
rural revitalization is much more than just agriculture. 
 
Those of us who come from an agricultural area of the province 
appreciate the agricultural component, but it doesn’t stop there. 
It’s complementary, but it’s minimal in terms of what the whole 
issue of rural revitalization encompasses. 
 
Agriculture is certainly one part of it, but if members opposite 
would care to refer it, there are other very important elements to 
rural revitalization. It includes not just primary agriculture but 
agri-value enterprises. It includes resource development. It 
includes rural manufacturing and construction. And it also 
includes, Mr. Speaker, rural service. 
 
To pigeonhole rural revitalization in one department, Ag and 
Food has done the whole a disservice. And that’s the point I 
think we need to make here tonight. There’s been much talk 
about agriculture and the needs of agriculture; we don’t 
minimize that. But if you’re going to talk about rural 
revitalization and tie it solely to agriculture, you’re not going to 
achieve the results that are necessary to make rural 
Saskatchewan a vibrant, active part of our economy. 
 
And I think that we need to urge the government to make 
certain that they take rural revitalization as seriously as their 
own committee, the ACRE committee, obviously took it in the 
formation of this particular study. 
 
I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the issue of rural 
revitalization has the government talking a good talk, but they 
don’t walk that talk. And I’d like to go through a number of 
points where I think I can make that case fairly clearly tonight, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m going to go to the issue of transportation because it’s one of 
the issues that I tend to be a little more familiar with than many 
others. Transportation in this province has been under 
tremendous stress. Three years ago the condition of our 
highways was the number one public concern in this province. 
 
After 10 years of neglect, after 10 years of budget cutting, after 
10 years of deliberately setting monies outside of the 
Department of Highway’s budget and spending it elsewhere, 
our highways started to suffer tremendous cost. The toll on our 
highways was significant; the damage was real. And anybody 
who drove our highways could tell you just how bad the 
highways had deteriorated. 
 
There were exceptional numbers of claims being made against 
the Department of Highways and through SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) for damage to vehicles. We had 
truckers who were refusing to drive in the province. We had 
people who were boycotting certain highways. We had 
community activists out there fixing their own roads. We had 
any number of complaints about the condition of our highways. 
 
Now, while I’m not about to dismiss or ignore the reality of that 
problem and the subsequent attempt by the government to 
spend all kinds of money to fix those problems, again they were 
johnny-come-latelies to the issue; because those problems 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

 

developed as a result of the previous seven or eight years of 
neglect by this government. 
 
The infrastructure in this province, Mr. Speaker, is quite likely 
the most important foundational element that a government 
needs to provide in order for its economy to grow. The 
highways, the highways, Mr. Speaker, are the lifelines of this 
province. They are absolutely essential to the growth of an 
effective, prosperous economy. 
 
When your highways deteriorate and start falling apart, the 
impact is felt through every segment of your economy. In one 
way or the other every element of the economy is tied 
fundamentally to the infrastructure. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I do recall that when the issue of 
highway deterioration became such a hot political topic and the 
government rushed out to fill every pothole they could by 
suddenly increasing the budget, the minister responsible for 
Highways stood in this House day after day after day, and 
indicated that there was nothing they could do. They were 
helpless in the face of changing times and they were the victims 
of circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, day after day railway abandonment, elevator 
consolidation, and the movement of grain traffic to the roads 
were given as the primary cause for the deteriorating 
infrastructure. And the representation of that situation by the 
ministers of the day — and I use the term plural because we’ve 
had several — the representation of the problem suggested that 
there was nothing the government could have done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand here today to say there is nothing further 
from the truth. It was a deliberate, conscientious decision to 
minimize the expenditures in the Highways department that 
didn’t allow for the repairs as necessary. But it was also this 
government that decided to increase the size of trucks to allow 
heavier weights on the roads, to allow for the over-length trucks 
on the road — those were decisions made by this government, 
Mr. Speaker. They weren’t made by the previous government. 
They were made by this government. They have to take 
responsibility for that decision. Overweight trucks, over-length 
trucks, more trucks — that was a decision that was agreed to by 
this government. 
 
(20:45) 
 
So to blame the deteriorating road conditions on the excess 
weight and the excess number of trucks on the road is a direct 
result of decisions taken by this government. To blame the 
increased truck traffic on the closure of rail lines, the 
abandonment of rail lines, is not exactly the way things 
unfolded, Mr. Speaker. The blame can be laid partially at the 
feet of this government. 
 
Those rail lines were not abandoned just out of the blue. 
Railways have to go through a very clear process before they 
can abandon those tracks. It’s a well-defined process. We’re all 
familiar with it. The abandonment of rail lines in rural 
Saskatchewan did not happen by accident and did not happen 
without anybody noticing it. The process was in place. The 
government, through the specialists in the department, 
monitored the applications for abandonment. 

But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, this provincial government, this 
provincial government, the NDP of the last 10 years, did 
virtually nothing, nothing to prevent those abandonment 
applications from going forward. They virtually made no effort 
to prevent those applications from being successful. So to 
blame the abandonment of railways and the increased truck 
traffic on everybody but themselves is not quite being as 
forthcoming as the government ought to be. 
 
Now let me talk about something else. It was the consolidation 
of elevators that precipitated all this, according to the 
government. The consolidation of elevators is a process that has 
been happening for probably the last 25 or 30 years — maybe 
even longer. But business conditions and business examples or 
reasons made that consolidation much more appealing. 
 
I know for a fact that this particular government were on very 
close speaking terms with Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. If this 
government was not aware of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool’s 
plans to consolidate their elevators, I’d be very surprised. In 
fact Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was the source of most of this 
government’s agriculture policy; and in order for Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool to consolidate its elevators without this 
government’s explicit and express permission, it’s 
inconceivable that that could have happened. 
 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, as well as the many other grain 
companies in this province, undertook a consolidation process 
with the best intentions, from a business point of view in mind. 
I don’t think I agree with what they did, but they did that on the 
basis of their bottom line. For this government to stand in this 
House and say it’s all the elevator’s fault for consolidation was 
disingenuous because this government had to know from the 
start that that was the intention of the elevator companies. 
 
So we’ve got, we’ve got absolute infrastructure decay as a 
result of at least two or three factors that this government had 
some input to or would have been able to bring some moral 
suasion to in order to prevent it from happening. And to just lay 
the blame on somebody else is very indicative of the way the 
government have handled these kinds of contentious issues, but 
it is not appropriate and is not in keeping with the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about the highway infrastructure and 
touched on the rail infrastructure, but we also have other 
infrastructure needs that are evident in rural Saskatchewan if 
rural revitalization is to take hold. You can’t have the total 
decay of water and sewer systems in communities in rural 
Saskatchewan or in their water treatment facilities or in their . . . 
in their water plants without having an impact on the economic 
activity of those communities. 
 
If you, if you lose good quality water, if you lose the ability to 
treat sewage, if you lose those types of infrastructure systems, 
communities cannot prosper. The people in those communities 
are going to suffer. If they think that there’s no possible way 
they’re going to have reliable water supplies or reliable sewage 
treatment systems, they may not want to live there, and that in 
itself is a source of concern and may often in fact drive people 
out of the communities. 
 
So we would have a very clear impact on the communities so 
affected and rural revitalization will be affected very negatively. 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

It just can’t happen. You can’t have rural revitalization in 
communities where water and sewer and those types of 
infrastructure support systems are not available. 
 
I want to talk about electricity and gas service and the rates 
charged for customers in rural Saskatchewan. You know, the 
government has made much ado about the role of Crown 
corporations and how they would go out and serve rural 
communities where population numbers were small when no 
other private sector company would do that. As I understand it, 
the reason for the Crown corporations’ existence initially was to 
provide the best service for the most people at the least cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can stand here tonight and say that I believe the 
Crown corporations achieved that. That was their mandate and I 
think they achieved it. But somewhere in the intervening years, 
the mandate has changed from that very basic, very clear, best 
service for the most people for the least price. It’s changed to a 
new mandate. Mr. Speaker, the new mandate is the generation 
of revenue. The Crown corporations are best described as 
revenue generators for the provincial government now. 
 
The sad result, Mr. Speaker, is that if the mandate of Crown 
corporations is to raise money for the provincial government, 
then the impact is going to be felt on their customers. And the 
ones that are at most risk of that deliberate policy change are the 
people in rural Saskatchewan because today they have no 
alternative — they are captives to the Crown corporation 
monopoly — and the Crown corporations in all those situations 
can virtually charge whatever they need to for the services they 
provide. 
 
Now I’ll give you some examples, Mr. Speaker. I would assume 
that rural revitalization might include the need for some 
small-business operators to expand their phone service or it 
might include the desire of some farming or ranching operations 
to start a feedlot and need a new power service. It might include 
gas service to some unexpected site that’s a mile or two off of 
the main line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had so many complaints to my office over the 
last three years where individuals wanted service, a utility 
service of one type or the other, and when they got the quote as 
to what it would cost, they could not believe it. The customers 
were absolutely aghast with the cost estimate. Now the problem 
with that, Mr. Speaker . . . the problem is that those customers 
. . . the problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is that those customers 
have no opportunity to go anywhere else to find out if that’s a 
legitimate price. They have no way of comparing the estimate 
they’ve been given by the Crown utilities. They have no way of 
verifying whether that’s a realistic figure or not. There is no 
option. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of rural revitalization I can’t 
imagine anything that would stymie new initiative in rural 
Saskatchewan quicker than being forced to take your utility 
services, your most basic infrastructure services, from a 
company at twice the rate you expect to pay, and have no way 
of shopping around or comparing it to any other price estimate. 
 
Any other sector of this society, if they got a quotation on the 
installation of some service and they didn’t like it, they’d be 
able to go to a competitor down the street. They’d be able to 

check out two or three or four or maybe ten competitors to find 
out if their price was realistic. That is not an option in rural 
Saskatchewan. And when those high estimates dissuade the 
individuals from proceeding with the projects that they were 
going to undertake, rural revitalization is the casualty and the 
loss belongs to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not acceptable. And if this government 
wants to do something about rural revitalization, it needs to 
address those issues with the Crown corporations. 
 
I want to just touch on CommunityNet for a moment, Mr. 
Speaker. CommunityNet was introduced to this province with 
great fanfare by the provincial government. And I don’t want to 
stand here and say that it’s a bad idea. It’s connected a lot of 
communities to a service that is going to be important to them. 
If it’s not already important it will become increasingly 
important as time progresses. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet, as I understand it now, is 
going into selected communities throughout the province, and 
I’m sure there’s some rationale for what communities are 
picked but as yet, Mr. Speaker, I have not been able to 
determine what that rationale really is. I know that 
CommunityNet is going into schools, it’s going into health 
centres, hospitals, and going into government offices as a first 
priority. But, Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet is going into 
communities in some instances ahead of other communities that 
actually have those facilities but aren’t on the list to get 
CommunityNet. If there’s a rational explanation for how those 
communities have been selected, I’d like to hear it. I have yet to 
hear it from the government. 
 
But what’s even more important I would say, Mr. Speaker, is 
that while CommunityNet might have an important educational 
role, while it might have an important element to play, a role to 
play in transferring information between health centres and the 
health bosses here in Regina, while it might have an important 
role to play in communication generally, the CommunityNet 
system this government is so proud of does not have today an 
impact on businesses in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
How many businesses do you know, Mr. Speaker, in rural 
Saskatchewan where the individual proprietor needs computer 
service and is willing to go to his nearest hospital or his nearest 
school library to place his order, or to look up the information 
that is important to his business? 
 
As good as CommunityNet might be, it is not the tool that was 
needed for rural Saskatchewan business endeavours today. And 
if I understood the report produced by the ACRE committee 
correctly, we need initiatives in the area of business 
development not in 6 years, not in 10 years, not in 20 years; we 
need those initiatives today. Time is short. We do not have time 
to squander in terms of rural revitalization. 
 
And if the government could see its way clear to making those 
services available to rural Saskatchewan so business operators 
could make most use of them, then I would be all in favour of 
having that happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order for rural revitalization to happen, we need 
to see investment opportunities realized in rural Saskatchewan. 



May 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

 

Earlier this evening I talked about the five main areas that are 
necessary for development if real rural revitalization is to occur: 
agriculture, value-added agriculture, resources, rural 
manufacturing and construction, and rural service. 
 
We need investment opportunities in all those sectors. We need 
an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to see investment flow to this 
province. We need to remove the barriers to investment in this 
province. 
 
And I heard as part of our earlier discussions today, several 
references to the ethanol industry. And I’d like to just go back 
to that particular point again, Mr. Speaker, because the ethanol 
industry I believe is a very good and specific example of the 
kind of investment initiative, the kind of developmental 
opportunity that we desperately need in rural Saskatchewan. 
And we need to see it come to fruition. We need to see it 
develop and mature and become a contributing part of our 
economy. There is a very significant role for ethanol to play in 
the overall economic well-being of this province. 
 
(21:00) 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, when I talk to proponents of 
ethanol, when I listened to the ACRE committee’s presentation 
in this legislature, when I heard the government talk about their 
ideas for ethanol back before Christmas in informal situations, 
and more recently in the legislature here, I was quite 
encouraged. But, Mr. Speaker, what I have seen happen in the 
last few weeks on the ethanol file, in relationship to this 
government’s plan has discouraged me personally and many 
people who are very, very close to the ethanol industry in this 
province right now. 
 
I have seen many people who have dedicated hours of volunteer 
effort to making an ethanol facility a part of their community, 
seriously discouraged by the government’s seemingly inept way 
of addressing this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the budget this year it was talked about 
removing the tax on ethanol fuel to bring down the cost of 
ethanol to relatively similar level with ordinary gasoline. The 
tax would allow for the ethanol industry to compete on a level 
playing field. 
 
That was, I believe, about April 1, very last part of March. Now 
here we are just in the middle of May, which is six weeks later. 
And for the last week, at least, we have had the government 
saying that they are looking very seriously at a partnership with 
an American firm to develop ethanol plants in four or five 
communities around the province. And Crown Investments 
Corporation will invest money because that’s going to be 
necessary to keep the private partner happy. 
 
You know that is such a bizarre argument, Mr. Speaker, I can’t 
believe any rational thinking person would even buy into that. 
There is no logical reason for that argument to be made let 
alone bought by anybody in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in six weeks it would be impossible for any local 
community to secure private funding given the uncertainties of 
that file prior to the April 1 announcement. But for the 
government to go from one view of the ethanol industry to 

another in six weeks is just unacceptable. They have not given 
the industry time to develop of its own accord and its own 
initiative. The government has decided that in six weeks if you 
haven’t got your financing in place we’re going to bring you a 
plan with our own partners and this is the way it’s going to be. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing will discourage additional outside 
investment in the ethanol industry in this province, in 
contradiction to the statements made by the previous minister. 
Nothing will discourage that investment faster than for the 
government, through CIC, to get in bed with a single company 
and dictate the terms of ethanol development in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ethanol industry, if we follow the 
government’s blueprint for development, is at serious risk. I 
can’t emphasize that enough, Mr. Speaker. The ethanol industry 
in this province is at serious risk of ever materializing, ever 
developing, ever being a contributing part of our economy if the 
government moves forward with its proposed plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s too important as an industry, its potential 
is too important to this particular province to allow that to 
happen. We need to see a very clear leadership role taken by the 
government, but it does not necessarily mean the involvement 
of the taxpayers’ money in that industry through CIC. 
 
The question I’d like to ask tonight, Mr. Speaker is, has the 
government learned anything — has the government learned 
anything following its experience in the potato industry? Or are 
they prepared to relive that debacle one more time? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m only on the third point of a 10-point speech. 
But I do want to refer once more to the report by the ACRE 
Committee. You know, I think that it’ll be very hard for the 
government and the members here tonight to say anything 
contrary to the report that they commissioned. They’re going to 
find it especially hard because the Minister of Agriculture stood 
in this House and said that his government was going to 
implement every point in this report — every one of them, all of 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that happens, that will represent the greatest 
conversion since St. Paul met his Maker on the road to 
Damascus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this report is a repudiation of the NDP’s economic 
platform and policies. This report is in direct contradiction to 
what the NDP stands for. This report should make the NDP 
blush with embarrassment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just read a little bit of this report, if I may. 
Mr. Speaker, this report, on page 3 of the introduction, 
summarizes much of their work. And if I may, I’d like to read 
these points: 
 

There needs to be (a) massive investment in the rural 
economy. 

 
The size of the investment dictates that the vast majority of 
the investment must come from the private sector generally 
and out-of-province sources specifically . . . 

 
It is up to the private sector to take advantage of the 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2002 

 

opportunities. Jobs cannot be created for the sake of jobs, 
but must arise as a desirable spin-off of profitable 
businesses. 

 
The population of rural Saskatchewan will need to grow 
from 575,000 to 800,000 over the next twenty years in 
order to provide an adequate labour force. 

 
There must be a significant increase in international and 
inter-provincial migration to the province to meet this 
employment and population target. 

 
In summing up what ACRE has learned over the course of its 
work, the members of ACRE came to the conclusion that: 
 

. . . the fundamental change that must be made to revive the 
fortunes of rural Saskatchewan must come from within 
rural Saskatchewan. While the provincial government has 
an important role to play in facilitating change, (not buying 
it, not investing in it, but facilitating change) and outside 
investment in both terms of capital and people, at the end of 
the day it is the residents of rural Saskatchewan that will 
make the key difference in “turning around rural 
Saskatchewan”. 

 
There’s six more points here, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to refer 
to quickly. 
 

There are a large number of opportunities in rural 
Saskatchewan. (And this is point number 1, Mr. Speaker.) 
The report highlights many examples of entrepreneurs and 
local communities taking advantage of opportunities and 
creating wealth and employment. 

 
Point number 2, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The “status quo” or “business as usual” is not an option. 
We cannot keep doing what we have been doing if we are 
truly serious about reversing the decline. Making only 
minor changes or tinkering at the edges will not work; we 
have tried this type of strategy for years and it has not 
worked. 

 
Number 3, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The negative attitude of some Saskatchewan residents, both 
urban and rural about rural Saskatchewan is a major 
obstacle to reviving the fortunes of rural Saskatchewan. 
Many rural residents see no future in rural Saskatchewan 
and this affects their outlook in terms of developing new 
initiatives or new businesses that could impact positively 
on their lives and communities. 
 
The negativity about rural Saskatchewan does not make 
rural Saskatchewan an attractive place for new immigrants 
or for new investment. 
 
If we wish to stop the decline of population and keep the 
young people in rural Saskatchewan we need to create jobs 
in rural Saskatchewan. (That was point number 4, Mr. 
Speaker.) 

 
(Number 5) The creation of jobs will come about from 

entrepreneurs and local communities with ideas. Through 
hard work and investment these ideas will translate into 
profitable businesses which will then create employment 
for rural residents. 

 
And number 6, Mr. Speaker, I highlighted this very clearly: 
 

The role of government is not to pick winners but to set the 
proper economic and business climate and remove 
roadblocks so that Saskatchewan entrepreneurs and 
communities can take advantage of the opportunities. 

 
I pray that happens, Mr. Speaker. I will be supporting the 
original motion and not the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — I’ve listened very intently to the speakers on 
both sides, and I want to pick up on some of the same points 
that were just made by the previous speaker because indeed you 
can put whatever spin you like on whatever quote you choose. 
And I’m not going to quote at length as the members opposite 
have chosen to do in their remarks, Mr. Speaker, but I want to 
pick up in particular on point number three that was just 
referred to by the member opposite under the heading of what 
ACRE found. 
 
And what ACRE found was that the negative attitude of some 
Saskatchewan residents, both rural and urban, about rural 
Saskatchewan is a major obstacle to reviving the fortunes of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Many rural residents see no future in rural Saskatchewan and 
this affects their outlook in terms of developing new 
initiatives or new businesses that could impact positively on 
their lives and on their communities. 
 
The negativity about rural Saskatchewan does not make rural 
Saskatchewan an attractive place for new immigrants or new 
investment. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the members 
opposite by and large are the leaders in their community. And 
they are the ones, Mr. Speaker, who are fostering and 
propagating and enhancing and otherwise really impacting and 
unloading their negative attitude on rural Saskatchewan, and it 
is no wonder that there has been any sense of despair. 
 
And believe me, it’s not for lack of trying on behalf of this 
government. We have many initiatives, we have done many 
things in the past, we have many to do in the future. We believe 
in rural Saskatchewan, unlike the negative nabobs across the 
way. And, Mr. Speaker, there is so much to be said about this 
topic. Much has been said and I would appreciate the 
opportunity to say much more. But considering the time of the 
evening, I think that this would indeed be an appropriate 
opportunity to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:13. 


