















































Hansard: April 11, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 625 
 April 11, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan concerned about 
certain inadequacies in the provincial tobacco legislation. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Carrot River, 
Nipawin, Shoal Lake, and The Pas, Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition on behalf of a lot of our senior citizens in 
Saskatchewan who are concerned with where this particular 
government’s going. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners would ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by good people from Saskatoon, from Osler, 
and from Rosthern. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens throughout the 
province who would like to see all 49 recommendations of the 
Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children Through the Sex Trade implemented immediately. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signatories on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Humboldt and Bruno. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens who are concerned about the exorbitant long-term care 
fee increases. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of St. Brieux, Saskatoon, and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge, Esterhazy, and Langenburg. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens that are very 
concerned about the state of the highways, particularly 
Highway No. 35, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury or 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in that area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Wilcox, Tyvan, Francis, 
Craven, and even Regina. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about the tobacco legislation, and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Port 
McNeill, BC (British Columbia), Congress, Yellow Grass, 
Trossachs. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of the 
concerned residents of southwest Saskatchewan. And the issue 
they’re concerned about today are changes that have been made 
to the drug plan in the province of Saskatchewan. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current and the small community of Neville, south of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with a petition 
with citizens from the town of Findlater concerned about 
snowmobile policy in Saskatchewan. Prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting to Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails and obtain funding 
for this which through the sale of provincially owned 
grooming equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown 
land in the provincial parks, attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registration. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition with the citizens concerned about the deplorable 
state of Highway No. 15, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway 15 for the Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, Kenaston, 
Watrous, Weyburn, Calgary, Winnipeg, Lethbridge, Cold Lake, 
and there’s even one signature from Germany, Mr. Speaker, 
and they also added a footnote, “I drove it and was appalled.” 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly an honour 
to be able to rise in this Assembly and present a petition on 
behalf of constituents concerned with the recent changes to 
crop insurance. The prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plans to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And the signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from my 
hometown of Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have the privilege of rising in the Assembly today to bring 
forth a petition of citizens concerned about our health care. And 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
good town of Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are received as addendums to sessional 
papers no. 7, 8, 11, 16, 17, 18, and 24. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 24 ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: (1) what are the names of all 
separately identified and/or separately named funds 
administered directly or indirectly by your department; (2) 
how many of these funds had surplus and/or retained 
earnings at the conclusion of the 2001-2002 fiscal year and 
what was the amount of the surplus in each case; (3) which 
of these funds had some or a portion of their surpluses 
taken away through government action and how much 
money was affected in each case; (4) in each case where 
the government took some or all of the surplus of one of 
these funds, what is the money being used for; (5) what 
programs previously paid out of the department budget are 
now being paid with surpluses from one of these funds; (6) 
which positions in the public service that were being 
funded through the department budget are now being 
funded through one of these funds or with the proceeds 
from these funds? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also respectfully submit 16 similar 
questions for various other departments. Thank you. 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization: will the waterfowl and wildlife damage 
compensation program be administered through the 
Department of Agriculture; if not, which department will 
be responsible for administering the program? 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day 24 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transport: how much was 
the total cost of removal and installation of the two culverts 
west of Spiritwood on Highway No. 3 in the 2001 year? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
shall give notice that I shall on day no. 23 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SERM: in the event of a 
subsurface propane spill of 2,000 or more gallons of 
propane, what regulations for cleanup are required by 
SERM in the short term and what requirements are in place 
for cleaning up the environment before the said property 
could be sold? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SGI: does SGI have any 
special arrangements with Hi-Alta Capital that would be 
unavailable to any other insurance brokers currently doing 
business in Saskatchewan? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of this Assembly a group of 23 grade 7 and 8 students 
from the Cupar School that are seated in your east gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their teacher, 
Miss Glenda Elliott; chaperone Miss Colleen Dinsmore, and 
bus driver Albert Sakal. 
 
I will be meeting with them after they view the proceedings of 
the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly a group 
— and I think at this point I’d describe them as very patient 
public servants — who are touring the legislature and are now 
seated in your gallery. We had a slightly longer preamble today 
than usual. 
 
The participants are employees from the Department of 
Government Relations, Industry and Resources, Health, 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization, Finance, Social 
Services, the Public Service Commission, Crown Investments 

Corporation, Executive Council, and the Legislative Library. 
 
And I look forward to meeting with this group after question 
period, and I’m sure that all the members want to join me in 
welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
behalf of the official opposition I, too, would like to welcome 
the public servants to the legislature today and I hope you enjoy 
the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
this House an esteemed guest that we have here from Manitoba 
today who is behind the bar on our side. This is Minister Steve 
Ashton. He’s Minister of Transportation and Government 
Services, and Minister Responsible for Gaming for Manitoba, 
and is here for the Gaming Commission — pardon me the 
gaming meetings here, conference. 
 
And I would also like to just note that Mr. Ashton has been a 
member of the legislature in Manitoba since 1981, and I would 
ask all to join in welcoming him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition we, too, would like to welcome the minister 
from Manitoba, Mr. Steve Ashton, who is visiting with us 
today. This morning, myself, and some other members of our 
caucus also had the opportunity to meet with the minister of 
liquor and gaming from the province of Alberta who is also in 
Regina attending the gaming conference. 
 
So again, welcome to our Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, seated in the east 
gallery there are 13 students from my constituency. They are 
from the Shellbrook and District Homeschoolers, and I 
welcome them here today. They’ve had some vehicle difficulty 
getting down here — and it is a way from Shellbrook down 
here — but they are here, and I welcome and I will meet with 
them after the question period. 
 
And I just want to reiterate, question period every now and 
again gets a little lively and today will be no exception. 
 
So I want to say welcome to the chairpersons, Steve Clark, 
Marcella Teichrob, and Mr. and Mrs. — now correct me if I’m 
wrong in the pronunciation — Lepard, and I would welcome 
them here and ask all members to welcome them here also. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce some very special people in my life to you and 
to all members of the House. 
 
Seated in the east gallery is my father and my stepmother, Peter 
and Sophie Krawetz from Invermay, and Sophie’s daughter, 
Yvonne Mackie is also in attendance today. Yvonne, of course, 
is a long-time registered nurse here in the city of Regina. 
 
My dad is . . . has been a long advocate of municipal affairs and 
has been involved in municipal government, and I know he 
watches almost every day and makes sure that my tie is straight 
and everything else. And he lets me know whether or not I have 
used the correct words in my questions. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome very special people to 
the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

More Good News for Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hang on, here’s some 
more good news for Saskatchewan. Good news as reported 
yesterday on private sector radio by independent commentator, 
Paul Martin — Saskatchewan’s Paul Martin, not Ottawa’s. 
 
What did Mr. Martin have to say? Well, for openers, he said 
that so far this year equipment manufacturers are enjoying a 
robust year. Shipments are up more than 30 per cent in the first 
quarter. Manufacturing, he said, seems to be in the midst of 
something of a resurgence. 
 
What else did he have to say, Mr. Speaker? I could have written 
it myself, Mr. Speaker, but I didn’t. Martin did. He said, quote: 
 

Underlying all this is a high level of confidence in the 
manufacturing community in Saskatchewan. When 
StatsCanada recently polled business on its investment 
intentions — a sign of confidence in the economy — this 
province’s manufacturers seemed downright giddy. They 
were projecting a 200% increase in their investment plans 
for the coming year. In fact, the figures in this sector were 
so strong, Saskatchewan is now projecting the highest 
growth in capital investment in the country this year. 

 
When a cautious, clear-thinking, measured commentator like 
Paul Martin uses words like robust, resurgence, and giddy to 
describe what’s happing in our province, you have to assume 
that the signals for growth are pretty strong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So who do we trust, Mr. Speaker? Paul Martin or the members 
opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Resident Receives Caring Canadian Award 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I would like 
to congratulate Norman Duerr of Humboldt. Norman is one of 
72 recipients of the Caring Canadian Awards as was announced 

by Governor General, Adrienne Clarkson in Ottawa. 
 
A career teacher, Norman Duerr spent hours with his students 
putting on dramatic performances of the highest quality. An 
activity he has continued even after his retirement. Mr. Duerr 
directed a number of fund-raising plays and performances to 
help Saint Elizabeth’s Hospital Foundation. He has also worked 
tirelessly researching local heritage sites and speaking to 
various organizations on the benefits of preserving Humboldt’s 
heritage. 
 
Following a trip to Terracina, Brazil, Mr. Duerr organized a 
Toys for Terracina campaign that netted some $100,000 worth 
of toys for the city’s street children. 
 
The Governor General’s Caring Canadian Award is presented 
to people and groups whose voluntary contributions provide 
extraordinary help to people in the community. Recipients will 
normally have served their communities over a number of years 
and will not have been previously been recognized by a national 
or a provincial honour. 
 
The award consists of a framed certificate and a lapel with a 
symbol representing Canadians, who selflessly give of their 
time and energy to others. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
Norman Duerr of Humboldt, a very worthy recipient of this 
award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Envista Technologies 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, another innovative Saskatchewan 
company doing innovative things at Innovation Place in my 
constituency. 
 
Envista Technologies was recently awarded a United Nations 
five-year funded project to design, develop, and implement a 
comprehensive environmental data management, reporting and 
assessment system for the government of Kuwait. The project 
started two years ago at a trade show in Vancouver and will 
incorporate a multi-theme relational data management system 
that encompasses the technical, legal, and administrative 
aspects. 
 
With the assistance of STEP, Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership, Envista was selected during an international 
competition. Envista’s vice-president, Kevin Clifton, accredits 
Envista’s complete system solution for why Envista was 
selected. The complete solution is a multi-level design and 
development directive that will instruct the Kuwaiti government 
through each stage of the system’s development. 
 
The five-year project will involve a diversified team of 
specialists in environmental management, information 
technology, environmental sciences, and training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another example of how the public sector 
creates the environment and the private sector thrives, allowing 
our province to achieve excellence in new areas of our vibrant, 
diversified economy. 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Editorial in The Melville Advance 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to read from a recent editorial in The Melville Advance. The 
headline reads, and I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker: “Arthur 
Andersen, meet Lorne Calvert.” 
 

The fifth largest accounting firm in the world, 
Chicago-based Arthur Andersen . . . knows what happens 
when jiggery-pokery finds its way to the balance sheet. 
 
Andersen knowingly ignored problems on the balance sheet 
. . . abrogating (his) responsibility to provide accurate 
information to Enron stakeholders. 
 
The result is . . . not only . . . Andersen’s future (is) in peril 
. . . so too are the futures of thousands of Enron employees 
and investors who believed they were getting the straight 
goods. 

 
And I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That’s a point . . . Lorne Calvert should keep in mind . . . 
 
While the budget would be “balanced” according to the 
definition of the NDP government, the actual facts suggest 
we’re hundreds of millions of dollars in the red and 
political sleight of hand by (this) government isn’t going to 
change that. 
 
While most would see the whole picture as a $225 million 
budget deficit that uses a $225 million loan to bring the 
budget to zero, the Calvert government prefers to see its 
budget as balanced. 
 
The Calvert government has chosen not to . . . let the true 
state of affairs be shown, evidenced by its trying to 
masquerade a deficit budget as a balanced budget. 

 
It’s what Arthur Andersen would have done (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Mr. Speaker, now everyone knows the books won’t balance for 
the second straight year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Four Directions Film and Video Festival 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last session I was 
proud to bring to the Assembly’s attention the formation of an 
Aboriginal youth drama group in my constituency whose 
purpose is to promote community development and social 
improvement through an aggressive and thoughtful use of the 
arts. 
 
This group already has been instrumental in creating and 
presenting two major dramatic productions as well as several 
workshops. And they are at it again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last night at the McKenzie Art Gallery I attended . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order. 
 
I recognize the member for Regina Elphinstone. You’ve got 
another minute. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Encore performance, Mr. Speaker. This group 
is at it again. Last night at the McKenzie Art Gallery, I attended 
the production of a play called The Longest Bus Ride. And we 
all know how much we like bus rides on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. It was performed by the cast of the 4 Directions 
Youth Theatre Group. 
 
This play, incidentally, was part of this week’s Four Directions 
Film and Video Festival, the first edition of what its sponsors 
hope will be an annual event to engage First Nations youth in 
the appreciation and process of film and video-making. Films 
and discussions have been taking place throughout the city at 
several venues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to talk about the group. The Longest Bus Ride was 
directed by Mark Dieter and was put together collectively by 
the cast with the assistance of renowned guest artist Gary 
Farmer. The play follows eight Aboriginal youth as they 
journey across Canada to Ottawa for a rally. 
 
It was a great show, Mr. Speaker, and I want to give a quick 
shout out to the excellent cast: James Donais, Ryan Atimoyoo, 
Kristen Friday, Tania Alexson, Tara Black Sioux, Jenny 
Labelle, Gabe Kinistino, and Candy Fox. 
 
There’s a crow hop wrap-up tonight, Mr. Speaker. A good time 
will be had by all and I encourage all members to get on down 
to the Exchange. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Girvin United Church Fire 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with sorrow that 
I inform this House of a tragedy that occurred in my 
constituency early this morning. The United Church in Girvin 
burnt to the ground around 3:30 a.m. 
 
This beautiful old church was built in the early 1920s and 
reflected the heart and soul of this rural community. Over the 
years, this church was a centre of community activities, 
gatherings where fellowship was enjoyed by hundreds of 
families in the Girvin area. 
 
Sadly, as the community declined in population and became 
more centred in the community of Davidson, seven miles north, 
the congregation had dropped to about 20 members. 
 
In January of this year, a board of trustees was established to 
begin the tough task of closing this elegant old church. My 
constituency assistant, Clark Puckett, is vice-chairman of this 
board who told me this morning that it had been a difficult task 
to follow the process of itemizing the contents of the church. 
any of the older church members have strong emotional ties to 
this church community. The loss of this church has been 
devastating to them. 
 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

Mr. Puckett indicated the church had scheduled the last service 
for June 30 and the contents and the church itself would be sold 
on August 10. So this has been . . . understandably come as a 
severe blow to the entire Girvin United Church community to 
see their church burn to the ground. 
 
At 6:30 today, there will be a memorial service conducted at 
this site by the Minister of the Davidson-Girvin Pastoral 
Charge, Reverend Nobuko Iwai, to begin the process of healing 
those deeply hurt by this tragedy. 
 
I would ask that all of the members of the House join me in a 
show of support to the Girvin United Church during this sad 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Housing Starts Rise 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news, 
more good economic news for Saskatchewan. Today I would 
like to draw all members’ attention to housing starts throughout 
this province. Economists tell us that growth of the housing 
construction is a good indicator of a robust and vibrant 
economy. 
 
We heard yesterday from the member from Saskatoon Eastview 
about how manufacturing is growing all over Saskatoon, 
another indication of a growing economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, housing starts rose in Regina by 33 per cent in the 
first quarter of the year with a total of 102 starts, and Saskatoon 
followed suit by reporting an increase of more than 50 per cent, 
to 224 starts. Across the province, housing starts increased by 
38 per cent in the first three months of 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an increase in home construction further indicates 
that there are families in this province and they are choosing to 
live and to work here. 
 
Quoting Mr. Ken McKinlay from the Saskatchewan Home 
Builders’ Association: 
 

There’s optimism especially in Saskatoon, we don’t see 
anything that would change that. 

 
However, Mr. Speaker, there is still more good news. The Bank 
of Montreal commodity index rose 9 per cent in March; gains in 
the oil and gas commodity index will help to further strengthen 
and solidify our economic position. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, a growing demand for Saskatchewan 
goods leads to a consumer confidence which in turns leads to 
consumer spending as we see in recent home building figures. 
Good news indeed for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Effect on Agriculture of Government Policies 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, farm 

families throughout the province are just now starting to realize 
the full impact of the NDP’s cancellation of the property tax 
rebate and the NDP’s massive increase in crop insurance 
premiums. I received a letter, Mr. Speaker, from Arden 
Roulston, a Langenburg area farmer, and he writes: 
 

The combined cost of . . . (the) two program changes will 
result in a total increase of (get this, Mr. Speaker) 21,860 
dollars. 

 
That’s how the NDP is helping farm families — by taking 
thousands of dollars out of their pockets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP jacking up crop insurance 
premiums and farm property taxes by thousands of dollars? 
Why is the NDP once again attacking farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to take the 
question from the new Ag critic, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say 
to the member opposite, first of all, that in Saskatchewan today 
these are the numbers regarding the crop insurance program. 
And for the last several weeks, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite and that party has been misleading Saskatchewan 
farmers in a major way. 
 
And let me tell you . . . 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’d just ask all the 
members to measure their language very carefully — using 
words which they know have been ruled unparliamentary in the 
past. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the party opposite has 
been advising farmers about what the costs and the returns of 
the crop insurance program have been, which, Mr. Speaker, 
have been exaggerated by an extensive way. 
 
Let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
that if I just look, Mr. Speaker, at the Saskatchewan spring red 
wheat, Mr. Speaker, the average liability this year over last year 
has gone from $95 per acre to this year it’s gone to $102 per 
acre. So the increase of coverage has gone up, Mr. Speaker, by 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $7. It’s gone up, though, 
Mr. Speaker. And the premium, Mr. Speaker, has gone up 
accordingly. 
 
When you take a look at durum wheat, Mr. Speaker, durum has 
gone from $92 per acre to $111 per acre. And when you take a 
look at canola, Mr. Speaker, canola has gone from $94 an acre 
to $138 an acre, Mr. Speaker. And they’ve been saying that 
coverage per acre hasn’t gone up at all. On all of the grains and 
oilseeds, Mr. Speaker, the cost per acre on every commodity, 
Mr. Speaker, per acreage cover has gone up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister. The farmers of Saskatchewan know 
the one thing that has gone up is their costs because of that 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

 

government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, Arden Roulston sat down and 
figured out exactly how much the NDP is taking out of his 
pocket this year. His crop insurance premiums are up 35 per 
cent. That doesn’t include the spot loss hail which will bring the 
total increase up to 77 per cent. That’s a total increase of 
$17,700 just to get the same coverage he had last year, Mr. 
Speaker. Plus the NDP’s cancellation of the property tax rebate 
will cost him another $4,100 for a total increase of nearly 
$22,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just one farm in Saskatchewan. Every farm 
in Saskatchewan is getting hit with the same kind of increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP Saskatchewan government 
attacking farm families with thousands and thousands of dollars 
in increased costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to point out to the members 
opposite today that when we talk about what’s happening in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker — and that’s what this member is 
talking about here today, Mr. Speaker — on this side of the 
House, not more than four or five months ago, our Premier sent 
the report, which is a report to all of the premiers that talks 
about a fair deal for Canadian farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This document, Mr. Speaker, was piloted by our government, 
Mr. Speaker. And what this document talked about is the 
unfairness that Saskatchewan farmers today are experiencing in 
the war against the subsidies, Mr. Speaker, in the war against 
the subsidies. Our Premier submitted that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, across the land our federal Minister of 
Agriculture has said Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers are 
disadvantaged, Mr. Speaker, because of the subsidies — 
because of the subsidies, he says. And he says we should be 
mitigating the subsidies. And every farm organization, every 
group in Saskatchewan today, this side of the House, says it’s 
the subsidies that are dampening the work that we’re doing 
today — except the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, except the 
members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I find that minister amazing. He’s blaming the federal 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — He’s blaming the federal government; 
whining and complaining constantly about the federal 
government for the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what does he and his government do? In 1992 they 
cancelled GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) and you 
know what happened, Mr. Speaker? They sent back over $250 
million of farmers’ money from Saskatchewan back to the 

federal government. Now they get their books this badly in 
trouble again and what do they do? They cut crop insurance; 
they send another 17.4 million of Saskatchewan farmers’ 
money back to Mr. Vanclief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will that minister admit he’s made a mistake, get 
back on the phone to Mr. Vanclief, and ask him to return the 
$17.4 million to our Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — This is now the second time that I’ve 
heard this response, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I listened to the Premier . . . or to the previous member from 
Kindersley, the previous member from Kindersley . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I recognize the kind of . . . I 
recognize, Mr. Speaker, the kind of joy they display when I 
refer to the member from Kindersley, Mr. Speaker, because he 
had his sights, as you know, Mr. Speaker, on a far larger parcel 
here for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this is the 
second time in the last two weeks that I’ve heard the 
Saskatchewan Party say that in fact we’ve sent money back — 
17 million. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the money that come out of the 
crop hail insurance spot loss, Mr. Speaker, was reinvested in the 
crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker — and the federal 
government will confirm this. And the only people who don’t 
know, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened with the Saskatchewan 
crop insurance, hail insurance dollars . . . Not one penny, Mr. 
Speaker, was sent anywhere except reinvested for the farmers in 
the crop insurance program this year. 
 
They have it wrong, Mr. Speaker. They don’t support 
Saskatchewan farmers and they don’t support the process, Mr. 
Speaker, of building a strong agricultural policy in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d like, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister to tell farmers of Saskatchewan just where 
he’s reinvesting that money. Farmers in Saskatchewan don’t 
trust that government. They haven’t for 10 years and they 
certainly won’t be starting now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, farmers across the province 
are telling us the impact of the crop insurance rate hike and the 
property tax hike comes to about $4 an acre. That’s a huge hit 
for farm families to absorb just a few weeks before spring 
seeding. On a 1,000- acre farm, Mr. Speaker, that’s about a 
$4,000 increase, and many are far larger than that. On a 
2,000-acre farm, $8,000. On Arden Roulston’s farm — get this, 
Mr. Speaker — $22,000 more in premiums and cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the NDP promised to do something about 
high input costs and this year the NDP is raising input costs by 
thousands of dollars. Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP justify this 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

massive attack once again on farm families in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members 
opposite and to the House, Mr. Speaker, it was about 10 or 12 
months ago that I said to this House and farmers in 
Saskatchewan, that in this province we have a huge issue when 
it relates to the value and return that farmers are getting in 
Saskatchewan for their commodity, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, what Mr. Vanclief says to 
Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
need to increase some return on the subsidies for Saskatchewan 
farmers. Now he says that; Mr. Vanclief says that. Finally they 
recognize the subsidies and need to provide greater incomes for 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, The Leader of 
the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is on record where he doesn’t 
support subsidizing Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers — 
doesn’t support it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what’s happened, Mr. Speaker, now is that the federal 
Liberals now say we should be providing mitigation for 
farmers. Farm organizations in Saskatchewan say that we 
should be providing mitigation. The Canadian Alliance, Mr. 
Speaker, now says . . . the Canadian Alliance says we should 
now be providing subsidies — except the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, who don’t support . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Quality 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most startling and disturbing 
revelations in Justice Laing’s report into the North Battleford 
cryptosporidium outbreak was that the North Battleford water 
treatment facilities in that city had not been inspected for 10 
years prior to the outbreak. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that this government deliberately 
made choices that resulted in the reduction or elimination of 
programs for water quality, that resulted in the reduction or 
elimination of budgets for water quality. But, Mr. Speaker, what 
level of incompetence needs to be reached in order that the 
water treatment facilities in North Battleford weren’t inspected 
for 10 years prior to the outbreak? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a excuse. But 
in the early ’90s we were so busy cleaning up his cousins’ 
party’s mess for the last 10 years that we had a lot of challenges 
ahead of us during that period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will point out, there has been some good progress made 
over the last several years, Mr. Speaker — good progress made. 
And there’s going to be greater progress yet to be made, Mr. 

Speaker. We are working very closely with many communities, 
and we’re going to continue working closely. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked that member to stop playing 
politics with this issue. I’ve asked that member to respect what 
the people of North Battleford want, and that is to get on with 
their lives and to build that community, to build that economy, 
Mr. Speaker. And yet day after day he gets up here and he 
fearmongers, he plays politics, he blames all kinds of people out 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time that they stop whining and they join us 
on this side and start building and rebuilding our system so in 
the future we all have safe water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, Justice Laing links the lack 
of an inspection over the last 10 years directly to the outbreak in 
North Battleford — the lack of an inspection, the lack of 
technical services. 
 
Now what’s the NDP’s response to that, Mr. Speaker? They’re 
going to restructure Sask Water. They’re going to turn it into a 
consultant. They’re going to compete with the private sector. 
There are private sector consultants that can do those things out 
there, Mr. Speaker. But after this, they will be leaving the 
province as well. 
 
Now, over and above, Mr. Speaker, they are asking, they are 
asking communities to pay for those consulting services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do they expect to get communities to pay for 
consulting services from Sask Water when they have 
completely, completely undermined their ability to do so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. And in 
that plan, we talk about watershed protection. We’re 
transferring a whole pile of people from Sask Water to help 
with the protection of water at source. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to put some rules and 
regulations in place to make sure that if anybody wilfully and 
continually disregards the rules, that there are penalties for 
them. We’re not going to put people in jail. We’re going to 
work with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And secondly, we have the Municipal Finance Corporation is 
going to offer some financial help, Mr. Speaker. We have the 
CSIP (Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) program, 
so that’s part of the plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to let any community, 
no matter how small or large they are, we’re not going to let 
them stand alone. We’re going to continue to work with them. 
And that’s why Sask Water is saying, if you don’t have 
anybody out there helping you, we will help you; if you do have 
a private contractor or an engineer that’s going to help you or 
the private firms, well we’ll work with them as well. Sask 
Water will work with everybody to make sure that we have a 
good system in place for all people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

 

Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, I think most people would 
realize that the government attempting to generate revenue from 
the very same agency that is going to be responsible for 
regulating water quality in this province is a conflict of interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister refers to the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program. Well the other day, the minister was 
suggesting that that now is in fact a way that these communities 
can pay for their new consulting services from Sask Water. 
They can apply to the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program and they can use that money to pay the government for 
the technical services that Sask Water is going to provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is this NDP government going to stop 
downloading all of the costs onto cities, towns, and villages in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — . . . very important that once again I tell 
the people out there that there are many challenges, as we’ve 
often maintained in this Assembly, when it comes to safe water. 
And I’m looking forward to standing up in the coming weeks 
explaining what the plan is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, is we’re not 
going to fearmonger. What we’re not going to do is we’re not 
going to play politics, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to work with 
every small community and every private sector person out 
there to help meet some of the challenges, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what we’ve been saying on this side all along, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I point out, last year 23 of the communities that were on a 
boil-water advisory, they applied for a CSIP program, and guess 
what, Mr. Speaker? They got funding and that system is being 
worked on as we speak — all those systems. This year, my fine 
friend will be making an announcement here within the next 10 
days about a new CSIP program and that program is going to 
help many small communities. 
 
So once again I ask you to stand up in this Assembly and join 
us in this battle to make sure we have good water for all people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of the Environment. Yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister confirmed that the NDP is raiding the Fish 
and Wildlife Development Fund for the purpose of financing 
other programming in the Environment department. 
 
Steering committee members of the fund are outraged and they 
say the minister is wrong when she says they were consulted 
about this move. In fact, by confusing the department’s own 
Fish and Wildlife Fund with the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, Mr. Speaker, the minister has proven that she 

doesn’t know what she’s responsible for and what she’s not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP not consult with their own 
steering committee about using the fund surplus before they 
emptied it from underneath them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I will of course have to go 
back and review very carefully what the Hansard record said. 
But what I believe I was trying to communicate to the members 
opposite was that we consult with the steering committee on the 
broad, general programs that are funded through the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question of a budget is an extremely complex 
one and it is one that is revealed on budget day by the Minister 
of Finance of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I want to be able 
to hear what the minister has to say. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, on budget 
day the Minister of Finance of the province of Saskatchewan 
revealed the budget. That very same day when the budget came 
down, I spoke with representatives from the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation and said to them that we would have to talk 
about the Wetland Conservation Corporation and the wildlife 
. . . Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
As well, that very same day, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Dennis Sherratt 
from my department contacted by telephone or in person 
several members of the steering committee. He subsequently 
sent a letter out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, members 
of the environment committee or the development committee 
feel that they are a steering committee without a steering wheel. 
 
By draining the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund surplus, 
the NDP have wiped out any habitat or endangered species 
projects the steering committee was planning and proven, Mr. 
Speaker, that the NDP will go to any lengths of jiggery-pokery 
to fudge a balanced budget. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, Elmer Henderson on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Radio this morning said, and I 
quote: “This really comes very close to being fraud.” 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Once again, members, I 
ask you . . . Order, order. Members, I have asked repeatedly to 
be very careful with the language that is used in the legislature 
and you can no . . . I would also bring to the members’ attention 
that you cannot do indirectly what you should not be able to do 
directly, which involves quotes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — . . . Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the budget briefing 
document informs steering committee members that this fund 
will now have to pay the annual grant to the Wetlands 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

Conservation Corporation, and this year only will cover the 
salaries of 18 full-time staff members in the Environment 
department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are borrowing from this fund and 
cancelling the plans for wildlife projects to keep other areas of 
this department going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the minister explain how this 
can possibly benefit the department and wildlife habitat 
protection efforts in the long run? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you and all 
members of this House that this government and Saskatchewan 
Environment care very much about the environment and about 
habitat protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a surplus in the Fish and Wildlife Fund. 
Over the last five years, in each of those years, in excess of 
$300,000 was not used. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have 
transferred that . . . we have used that money this year for the 
salaries of 18 employees, and to pay for the $503,000 for 
Saskatchewan Wetlands Conservation Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you that the good works that are 
funded through the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund will 
continue. All that members need to do is obtain a copy of the 
current hunting and fishing guide — Hunters’ & Trappers’ 
Guide, and the Anglers’ Guide — and they will see the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 

Water Quality 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is 
absolutely nothing in the $2 million water inquiry report 
concerning the province that the government hadn’t previously 
been told in its own CDI (cabinet decision item) of September 
2000. 
 
At that time the government was told that there were at least 
121 communities in rural Saskatchewan with inadequate water 
systems and it was told it could be sued by people getting sick 
from unsafe water. One of the proposals in the CDI was that the 
province start a new $15 million fund to finance water projects. 
 
This fund was asked for by SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) as far back as 1994 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Members, I’d ask you to 
come to order, please. The member has a strong voice but I’m 
still having trouble hearing him. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — This year the Finance minister started a new 
$90 million corporation to finance new schools in the cities. 
The Minister of Finance says this was a great time to borrow. 
My question is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Why was the proposal for a $15 million water finance program 
killed by the Treasury Board? Why, if this is such a great time 
to borrow for new schools in the cities, is this not a good year to 
provide money for communities with substandard water 
treatment plants? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see that that 
member, and perhaps some of the other members and some 
people in the media, finally have realized what we’ve been 
saying for weeks. And that is the kind of financing that is being 
made available to school boards and universities is available, 
Mr. Speaker, to communities to work on their water and sewer 
systems. 
 
I want to reiterate again, Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent financing 
for sewer and water projects is available through the Municipal 
Financing Corporation. Any community in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that wants to upgrade its water and sewer, we will 
work with that community through the Municipal Financing 
Corporation. 
 
And my question to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is if 
they truly believe that communities should be assisted in this 
way, why are they opposing this same method of assistance for 
school boards and universities, Mr. Speaker? One minute 
they’re saying it’s a good thing to do; the next minute they’re 
saying it’s something we shouldn’t do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal the Minister of 
Finance killed was for 50 per cent funding to the municipalities, 
not for debt. In September 2000 the government was told we 
had at least 121 communities with inadequate systems. With 
beefed up inspections, that can only increase. 
 
Now the government says that municipalities that knowingly 
operate substandard plants are liable for prosecution. But we 
know communities are doing precisely that because they have 
no money. They have no money because the government 
refuses to follow its CDI of 2000. 
 
The government said it has followed all recommendations in the 
Laing report but it has not. The report says that along with 
inspections and enforcement, we need adequate funding. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Justice: what is his advice to 
the mayors of towns with poor water systems? Should they 
remain at their posts and do what they can or should they resign 
quickly before the Minister of the Environment has them 
arrested? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this is how phony 
this opposition is. One of them gets up at the beginning of the 
proceedings today and quotes from The Melville Advance 
saying: we’re spending too much money; we’re in deficit. 
 
Then another one gets up and says, why don’t you spend some 
money on water? Then one of them gets up and says, why don’t 
you let the municipalities borrow money, make this available to 
them? 
 
I get up and I say we will do that, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
say to that member from North Battleford, who last week said, 
why don’t you go to North Battleford — I’ve been there twice 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

 

in the last week and I met with the mayor of North Battleford 
and I met with the chamber of commerce and community 
representatives. 
 
And this is what I said, Mr. Speaker. I said let’s work together 
and fix the water system. We will make the funding available 
on a 100 per cent basis through the Municipal Financing 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And instead of playing politics, let’s all of us in the community 
of Saskatchewan borrow the money, fix the water system, and 
we will pay for it over time together but we’ll have clean water, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 24 – The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002/ 
Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 24, The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 

POINTS OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, during question period the 
Agriculture minister, the member for Yorkton, I believe used 
some unparliamentary language in reference to members on this 
side of the House, in particular the member from Saltcoats. 
 
Beauchesne's 6th Edition, rule 489, clearly outlines the words 
that are and are not allowed to be used in this House, including 
the word “misuse” which was ruled in 1958, 1960, 1964, and 
1966 as being unparliamentary. 
 
I ask that the minister both withdraw the use of that word in 
reference to the members of the opposition and apologize for 
the use of that word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Moose Jaw on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — To respond to the point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member of Moose Jaw respond. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member correctly 
refers to the rule of the Assembly. However, what he fails to 
mention, Mr. Speaker, is that when looking at the precedents 
and the rulings that he references, that all of those have been 
made by looking at the context within which the language is 
used. That’s a long-standing practice, Mr. Speaker. It is not the 
word itself which causes the violation of the rule of the House, 
but the context and the intent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would humbly suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when you 
review the remarks made by the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food that you will recognize that he was referring not to 
comments made in this House in debate. He did not make that 
reference and he was not, he was not making reference to 
intentional misleading, Mr. Speaker. And therefore, I would ask 
that you would find the point of order out of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for their comments in 
bringing this to my attention and I will review the record and 
bring back a ruling. 
 
Why is the member for Cannington on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s been the tradition of this House to permit quotes from 
various publications as part of the deliberations of this House. 
 
The quote used by the member for Moosomin regarding fraud 
by the Minister of Environment was broadcast this morning 
publicly on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is part of the general record, the public 
record of that interview that took place this morning where the 
word “fraud” was used. 
 
And I ask that the ruling deal with that, Mr. Speaker, and the 
use of quotes in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to speak to the point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when referencing the use of 
quotes in this House, it is, it is a precedent which has been long 
established that the rules of the House here are guided as well 
by the rules of the House of Commons. And the House of 
Commons Procedure and Practice says on page 517, and I 
quote: 
 

Generally, the reading of articles from newspapers, books, 
or other documents by a Member during debate has become 
an accepted practice and is not ruled out of order provided 
that such quotations do not reflect on past proceedings in 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

the House, do not refer to, or comment on or deny anything 
said by a Member, or (and I quote here, Mr. Speaker, I 
underline this) or use language which would be out of order 
if spoken by a Member. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it has long been the practice of this House that 
members are not permitted to use language which . . . or to 
conduct themselves in a way which they demonstrate that they 
are doing indirectly which is not permitted directly. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I humbly suggest that you would find 
the member out of order in his language that he used while 
using that reference to a quote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I would like to 
make a comment on the request on the point of order just 
recently raised by the member for Cannington and spoken to by 
the member from Moose Jaw, for clarification. 
 
In the first instance, a ruling once made by the Speaker stands. I 
would like to make a brief explanation of my ruling for 
purposes that might help clarify. 
 
I did indicate that it was a matter of not using . . . of the 
language use indirectly rather than directly through a quotation. 
I believe that has been the practice of this House and it is a 
practice I intend to continue with the one exception to that rule, 
and that has been over a long-standing practice where members 
have been allowed to quote names of other members or use 
members’ names in quotations. 
 
But in terms of parliamentary language, I will continue to use 
the, to use the interpretation that I did today. 
 
Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to 
introduce to you four gentlemen who are seated in the east 
gallery. The gentlemen are here attending a gaming summit. 
They come from the province of Quebec, and some of my 
colleagues and I had the pleasure of having dinner with them 
last night at the gaming awards. And so we’d like to welcome 
Guy, Kevin, Carol, and Denis to the Assembly today and to the 
province of Saskatchewan. We hope you enjoy your stay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melville on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Also permission with request . . . with 
leave to acknowledge a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 

to say on behalf of all the members, bienvenue à Regina. As the 
minister for Liquor and Gaming, I too would like to add my 
welcome to these gentlemen to our great city of Regina and this 
great province of Saskatchewan. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move that we 
convert question no. 88 for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 88 has been converted to orders for 
return debatable . . . motions for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will provide the same protection 
from disclosure for statements made during the pretrial 
settlement conference conducted by a judge, as exists for 
statements made during mediation. 
 
The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 provides that evidence of 
statements made in the course of mediation is not admissible in 
any court proceeding. The Queen’s Bench rules of court 
provide that all communications in the course of the pretrial 
conference are privileged and should not be admitted as 
evidence in any proceeding. 
 
That rule, Mr. Speaker, has been called into question in recent 
court rulings. This amendment will codify that rule and ensure 
that pretrial settlement conferences can continue to operate as 
they have in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pretrial settlement conference conducted by 
Queen’s Bench judges in Saskatchewan provides an additional 
opportunity for parties to resolve their legal disputes without a 
trial and in a manner that the parties agree with. 
 
It’s essential that parties be able to discuss settlement options 
candidly without fear that their statements might be later used 
in the evidence against them. Codifying the existing rule will 
ensure that candid discussions can continue to occur, and this 
will result in more settlements and fewer trials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

 

believe that the intent of this Bill is indeed very appropriate. 
The use of pretrial conferencing and mediation services is 
extremely important in trying to come to a fair and equitable 
solution to the difficulties that are being faced by the parties 
involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any time that you can settle this outside of the 
court it can only be of benefit to the parties because it starts the 
healing process to take place, Mr. Speaker. Not only does it 
start the healing process, but it also saves costs — costs to the 
parties involved, both sides, and court costs, Mr. Speaker, to the 
province. All of those things are very beneficial and 
worthwhile, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we need to investigate this further, Mr. Speaker, to 
determine if there are not any hidden pratfalls in this particular 
piece of legislation, that those involved are in agreement as we 
believe they will be but we still need to investigate that 
procedure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would move at this time that we adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Independent Officers’ Remuneration 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Independent Officers’ 
Remuneration (Amendment) Act, 2002. 
 
The proposed changes to the legislation confirm the current 
salaries of the Ombudsman, the Children’s Advocate, and the 
Chief Electoral Officer and provide a formula for future salary 
changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 2000, at the direction of the Board 
of Internal Economy and cabinet, a committee was established 
to review the salary levels of certain independent officers of the 
Legislative Assembly. The review responded to the lack of a 
common standard for determining the salary levels of these 
officers and the resulting ad hoc approach that has been in place 
for setting some of the salary levels. 
 
It was determined that a consistent and transparent approach to 
setting salary levels of the independent officers is desirable. The 
resulting report on independent officers’ remuneration provides 
the first comprehensive analysis of how current salary levels are 
determined and makes recommendations for how the salaries 
should be determined in the future. 
 
The committee recommended that the salary levels of 
independent officers be linked in their respective Acts to an 
appropriate salary level within the Saskatchewan public service. 
The committee recommended that the salaries of the 
Ombudsman and the Children’s Advocate be linked to the 
average of all deputy ministers’ salaries as at April 1 of each 
year. 
 
The committee recommended that the appropriate linkage in the 
public service for the position of Chief Electoral Officer is at 
the maximum of the senior executive 2 range. The proposed 
changes to the legislation will confirm their current salaries and 

provide a standard for future salary changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee’s report states that setting out the 
formula for determining the salary level of independent officers 
will ensure that the salaries are reasonably fixed and supports 
the principle of independence. The public nature of the statutory 
provisions ensures that salary levels are easy to determine and 
that salary can only be changed in a very public manner through 
legislative amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Election Act, 1996 and The Ombudsman and 
Children’s Advocate Act for the purposes of ensuring the 
independent status of certain officers of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal 
of pleasure I’d like to speak on Bill No. 16, An Act to amend 
The Election Act, 1996 and The Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate Act for the purpose of ensuring the independent status 
of certain officers of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I understand that the Board of Internal Economy has looked at 
this and we would like to just check the wording of the Bill and 
make sure the intent of the Bill is what was discussed. And at 
this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan Learning connects Saskatchewan people to 
opportunities through quality education and training including 
apprenticeship. The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act, 
1999 was proclaimed in October 1999 to establish the 
Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission or ATCC. 
 
The Act was designed to ensure apprenticeship training and 
certification meets the needs of industry and labour. 
Amendments are required, Mr. Speaker, to help the commission 
meet the needs of employers and apprentices in a rapidly 
changing labour market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ATCC board and commission has reviewed 
and identified amendments to the Act which are required to 
number one, help industry meet its need for skilled workers; 
and two, help apprentices gain the knowledge and skills they 
need for jobs. 
 
These amendments update the Act to ensure the proper 
authorities are in place to administer the apprenticeship and 
training certification system in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
are amending the Act to allow employee and employer 
representatives, not just employees and employers, to sit on the 
ATCC board. This amendment strengthens the board because 
employers and employees will have the flexibility to choose the 
person they believe will best represent their interests. 
 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also proposing amendments to enhance 
public and occupational health and safety by tightening up the 
rules for compulsory trades or sectors. With the amendments, 
only qualified people can work in compulsory trades, Mr. 
Speaker. Businesses in these trades must hire journeypersons, 
special permit holders, or apprentices. There are also changes 
that allow us to make regulations that require employers of 
designated trades to hire only certified employees. 
 
Another proposed amendment will allow us to make regulations 
that ensure there is an appropriate ratio of apprentices to 
journeypersons in compulsory trades. This will ensure that 
employees are properly trained and that the public and 
occupational health and safety standards are maintained. This 
amendment also ensures timely designation of trades. 
 
Another proposed change, Mr. Speaker, deals with who can 
work in compulsory trades. These changes will allow the 
commission to issue special permits to comply with the 
agreement of internal trade. It is also consistent with the current 
regulations which allow people wanting to become an 
apprentice to be on probation in a compulsory trade before they 
become an apprentice. This period will help them determine if 
they have the skills and aptitude needed for that trade. 
 
(14:45) 
 
We are also proposing some housekeeping amendments to 
clarify the commission’s authority to enter into agreements to 
administer benefit programs, such as the skills training benefit 
to apprentices and tradespersons. This change will ensure 
efficient service delivery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other proposed changes include making regulations that allow 
workers in one trade to perform similar work in a similar trade. 
For example, barber or stylist and a cosmetologist, or electrician 
and refrigeration mechanic — they do a lot of similar things and 
this would allow for cross-referencing for that. 
 
This amendment will increase the span of opportunities for 
skilled workers and still maintain public and occupational 
health and safety standards. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, there is an amendment to repeal all 
references to the Provincial Apprenticeship Board which no 
longer exists since the ATCC Board was set up in October of 
2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apprenticeship training and trade certification is 
one of the cornerstones of our post-secondary education system 
in Saskatchewan. I commend the commission for their diligent 
work to move this important initiative forward. These 
amendments will help the Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission to better manage a training and 
certification system that responds effectively to Saskatchewan’s 
changing and future needs in the labour market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I am pleased to move that Bill No. 5 to amend The 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act 1999 be now read a 
second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 5, the Act to amend the Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Act looks like it’s moving in the right direction. 
There are a couple of questions, though, that just listening to the 
minister that I think I would have along with a number of 
people in private business, and how that’s going to affect them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think if you look in our province today that 
private business is the main engine to our economy. It is 
significant that any time that there is an Act that comes forward 
that may affect them, it is only appropriate that we give it 
enough time so that people in business can get back to us and 
let us know how the Act will affect them and whether it’s good, 
in their interests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think any time . . . Again, the Act looks like it’s moving 
towards getting more people into the workforce and giving 
them the lead time, the training time to move forward; we think 
that would be a good idea. But until we’re able to check with 
other interested parties, Mr. Speaker, we have to hold it up for a 
little bit. 
 
The other area that I was interested in is when the minister was 
talking about professionals, tradespeople in one industry being 
able to move over into another industry. And he mentioned the 
electricians and refrigerator electricians and how they can 
overlap, and there’s some overlapping there. 
 
And I think . . . I know talking to a number of people in the 
different business areas, where it seems funny that they can’t go 
anywhere past their boundaries. They can’t move over even 
though there is lots of overlap. Because it may not fit into their 
exact category, they can’t operate in that area. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that on first blush, looks like it’s probably 
moving in the right direction. But until we’re able to check out 
a number of these concerns and see how it does affect the 
people in the province, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this plan was established in October 1977. It is a 
defined contribution pension plan. The member contributes to 
the plan and so does the employer. At retirement, the member 
purchases a retirement benefit with his or her pension money, 
consisting of employer contributions, member contributions, 
any voluntary contributions made by the member, and accrued 
investment returns on those contributions. 
 
About 39,000 active and inactive members participate in the 
plan. The total value of the Public Employees Pension Plan at 
December 31, 2001 exceeded $2.5 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the proposed amendment to The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Act is to allow the ex-spouse of 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

 

a member to purchase a retirement benefit at age 50 under the 
plan’s marital breakdown provisions. 
 
The plan was amended in 2000 to allow the member to 
purchase his or her retirement benefit at age 50. The difference 
in the provisions is not justifiable and it is desirable to amend 
the plan accordingly so that the ex-spouse of a member of the 
plan would have the same right as the member of the plan 
himself or herself. 
 
Essentially, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment allows the 
ex-spouse of a member to purchase his or her retirement benefit 
as early as age 50, just like the member can do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the move by the Minister of Finance to reduce the age at which 
access to the pension plan would be accomplished from 55 to 
50, I think is a very good move and gives people the 
opportunity then to direct their pension funds in a manner they 
feel is appropriate which would, perhaps, be leave it with the 
Saskatchewan employees pension plan or do some other thing 
with it — move it into a different kind of financial instrument 
perhaps. 
 
There is one concern though that I do have with it and it is 
mentioned a little bit in the explanatory notes, but I’m not sure 
how it fits in with the Bill since the only change that’s really 
taking place here is moving it from age 55 to 50. And that is 
how does the employee’s pension plan deal with the pension in 
case of marriage separation? How is that dealt with? Is there the 
availability of a member of this pension plan to split that 
pension with their spouse? Can they do that and move that over 
to the spouse’s name without incurring any penalties? 
 
And that’s one of the areas I think that the government and the 
Minister of Finance should be looking at on this particular Bill 
and perhaps that could be introduced as a House amendment at 
some time if it’s possible to do it. 
 
I know that there are some legal implications in dealing with 
that. But it’s one of the areas that is causing problems with 
members of the pension plan, those that are unfortunate enough 
to be going through marital difficulties and a separation, that 
they be able to split their pension. The assets of a person 
involved in the pension plan, in a lot of cases, Mr. Speaker, has 
to be split 50/50 with account being taken for the children 
involved in a marriage. 
 
So how do you divide those assets when a part of your assets is 
your pension plan and there’s no provision made to split that 
pension without withdrawing the entire amount, paying the tax 
penalties that would be involved which, at the end of the day, 
then reduces the pension plan to almost a useless amount, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
So if the Minister of Finance could look at some sort of a 
provision that would allow for that transfer between spouses in 
the distribution of assets, I think would go a long way to aiding 

this particular plan. 
 
So until we get a chance to talk to the minister about that kind 
of a situation, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 18 – The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I also rise 
to move second reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan Act. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan has almost 30,000 members 
and $197 million under trusteeship. This plan is an integral part 
of the retirement savings plans of many people in 
Saskatchewan. The plan is a tax deferred plan available to 
anyone between 18 and 69 years of age. 
 
Member funds are professionally managed and the plan has 
generated a competitive rate of return averaging 10.7 per cent 
over the past 10 years. There are no minimum contributions or 
fixed payment schedules. The money is protected from seizure, 
claim, or garnishee by creditors. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is administered by a board of 
trustees appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council and 
presently consists of five members. Two of the trustees are plan 
members. 
 
The changes announced in this Bill are administrative in nature. 
They will clarify the duties and powers of the board of trustees, 
clarify the payment frequency of small pensions, allow death 
benefits to be transferred tax-free to a dependent child or 
grandchild, and eliminate the six-month revoking period for 
new retirees. Elimination of the six-month revoking period will 
give members more options at retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
enter into, I guess debate on An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act, Bill No. 18. 
 
And just listening to the minister it seemed like it was more of a 
housekeeping issue. Looking at some of the explanation notes it 
talks about some of the provisions that were left out perhaps 
when the Act was last amended in the year 2000. So it does 
look like it’s pretty much a housekeeping piece of legislation. 
 
I think any time though that we start talking about 
Saskatchewan pension plans . . . And this plan was set up many 
years ago to help a lot of people such as myself that may have 
been on a farm — only income was farming, not really having 
any sort of a pension plan available to them — and that’s why 
this . . . one of the reasons why this plan was set up. 
 
It’s interesting now, Mr. Speaker, since the last budget though, 
how people are certainly a lot more aware of their pension 
plans, what they have in the pension plan, and how much 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

income that is going to garner them on a monthly basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in particularly a number of seniors in our 
province that are in long-term care homes are finding it ever 
increasingly hard to survive with the recent increases in 
long-term care fees. Fees that have gone from 50 per cent of 
their income through pensions up to 90 per cent, leaving them 
with virtually very little money to survive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So any time we start talking about pension plans and Acts that 
alter them at all, I think it’s of great interest. And it’ll be very 
interesting to see in the near future how much money is left in 
some of these pension plans with the way that the government 
is dipping into the seniors’ pockets a little bit more to fund the 
long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So without giving this more thought, and allowing a number of 
people more discussion on this plan, the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on this. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today 
to move second reading of The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act pertains to the following defined benefit 
pension plans — the Liquor Board Superannuation Plan, the 
Power Corporation Superannuation Plan, the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Superannuation Plan, and the Public 
Service Superannuation Plan. 
 
The Public Service Superannuation Plan also encompasses the 
Anti-Tuberculosis League Superannuation Plan and the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company Superannuation Plan. 
 
Each pension plan has a board of trustees that oversees the 
operations of the plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these plans were closed to new employees in 
1977. Over 80 per cent of active members are now between the 
ages of 45 to 59. In 20 years, all active members will be in 
receipt of their pension. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to this Act do not result 
in any policy or procedural changes for the pension plans to 
which the Act pertains. The purpose of the amendments is to 
provide clarification on specific provisions in the Act to ensure 
continued compliance with the federal Income Tax Act. It is 
imperative, Mr. Speaker, that the pension plans comply with the 
federal legislation in order to sustain their registration under 
that Act. 
 
It is necessary therefore, Mr. Speaker, to amend The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act to clarify that 
any severance payments and retiring allowances paid to a 
member on retirement are payments made by the employer and 
not payments out of the pension plan. Provisions regarding 

severance and retiring allowances are included in the pension 
legislation to consolidate retirement information. Alternatively, 
participating employers would need to amend their governing 
legislation to provide for these payments. 
 
It is essential, Mr. Speaker, to clarify that the term disability has 
the same meaning under The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Act as it does under the federal Income Tax Act. To 
retire due to ill health, the member must be totally and 
permanently disabled in accordance with section 8500 of the 
income tax regulations. 
 
Upon the death of a pension plan member, Mr. Speaker, the 
member’s surviving spouse is entitled to 60 per cent of the 
pension allowance the member was in receipt of or entitled to as 
at the date of death. In addition, each dependent child of the 
member under age 18 is entitled to 10 per cent of what the 
member was in receipt of or entitled to as at the date of death to 
a maximum of 25 per cent on behalf of all dependent children. 
 
The Canada Customs and Revenue Agency has requested that 
the Act clearly identify that the maximum benefit payable to the 
spouse is 60 per cent and that the additional benefit payable on 
behalf of surviving dependent children is payable to the spouse 
on behalf of the dependents. In addition, it is necessary to 
clarify that where a spousal benefit is to be paid to a dependent 
child in the absence of a surviving spouse, the benefit payable 
cannot exceed the maximums provided under the Income Tax 
Act of Canada. 
 
Essentially, Mr. Speaker, the amendments as proposed do not 
result in any policy or procedure changes for the pension plans 
to which the Act pertains. The changes are a result of 
discussions between officials of the Public Employees Benefits 
Agency of Saskatchewan and officials of the Canada Customs 
and Revenue Agency. Pursuant to these discussions, 
clarifications in the Act were deemed necessary to ensure that 
the pension plans continued to comply with the Income Tax Act 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend the 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak on 
Bill 19, the Act to amend the Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Act. It seems like it’s a . . . merely a housekeeping 
Bill which just updates things to suit the federal income tax 
department but I noticed that the amendments, one of the 
amendments, 21.2 is striking out the word disabled and 
substituting total and permanent disabled. And I worry that 
some of these changes like that do not take into account the 
individuals and the families that they may affect negatively. 
 
And I also notice that when the Bill comes into force that there 
are provisions to come into that are retroactive that . . . section 
6(1) and (2) are deemed to be in force from December 31, ’91 
and (3) section 5 comes into effect retroactive to June 28, 2001. 
 
And this government has a history of not looking into the 
details and the effect of certain Bills have on people, 
particularly pensioners. And I’d just like to make a comment 
concerning what has happened in the past about the 
disenfranchised widows. And this Bill seems to really bring up 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

 

that matter where the government did not do its homework, did 
not contact the Finance department and get a waiver concerning 
their compensation package and left the widows short over 
$5,000 because of the effect it had on their pensions. 
 
And I’d like to discuss this further with my colleagues and 
individuals that this Bill affects and also the effect this would 
have on the superannuation pension and the whole system of 
the pension plans. 
 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Justice to introduce 
his officials and make a brief statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me 
introduce and ask the House to welcome familiar faces, I think. 
 
On my left, the deputy minister of Justice, the Deputy Attorney 
General, John Whyte. To my right, Doug Moen, who’s 
executive director of public law and community justice. Behind 
him, Murray Brown, who is the acting executive director of 
public prosecutions. Behind me is Elizabeth Smith, the director 
of administration. To her left is Colleen Matthews, who is the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister. And to her left, Betty 
Ann Pottruff, who is the director of policy, planning, and 
evaluation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And a welcome to 
the minister and especially to his officials. 
 
I think this is the first estimates of the year, and so I guess we 
get the chance to set the stage. Having gone through this with 
the minister in the past numbers of years, I must say I’ve always 
appreciated the adequate answers that we received on at least 
the majority of the questions that we asked. 
 
I would like to start off, Mr. Minister, with asking you to 
outline the purposes behind the sort of dividing up of some of 
the part of your Justice department. You now have created 
Corrections and Public Safety and just to basically . . . a mission 
statement as to why you’ve done this and what you see each 
one doing. And possibly also what you hope to accomplish 
through those changes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In response to 
the member’s question, I think he’s probably referring primarily 
to the taking of adult corrections out of Justice and placing it 
into the new department, along with youth justice and some 
other public security areas. 
 
And I think the member could . . . can probably gather that 

there was a thought that it would be better to have all 
corrections under one ministry — that there would be benefits, 
one to the other, in terms of programming and in terms of 
capacity and expertise and so on. And the hope and anticipation 
is that this new department, comprising all of corrections as it 
does, will be . . . will provide a stronger, a stronger focus on 
corrections and end up with a better Corrections department in 
the process. 
 
And the . . . in that process the decision was made to ensure that 
in order to minimize costs, Justice and the new department will 
share administrative services. And so there will be the ability 
not only to be efficient but also to have some continuation of 
expertise and participation in the overall scheme. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. There are these two parts to your 
answer that I would like for us to expand on a little bit. You 
mentioned the concept of terms of capacity and I’m wondering 
if you could just enlarge on that and specifically what you’re 
referring to by that phrase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I think we have as a result of 
pulling adult corrections and youth corrections together, a larger 
cohort of expertise focussing on corrections in one department 
rather than two departments; the opportunity to more easily 
share issues. 
 
We know that we tend to respond rather differently to young 
people in a correctional facility for the first time over those in 
adult facilities who might have been there on a number of 
occasions. But to share that kind of expertise and to really to 
pull it all in one place and I think, you know, we can see that 
there is the possibility then of having an even better correction 
facility, a service. 
 
I would say that the people we have running our correction 
facilities are really top-notch people. Don Head, for example — 
you’ll be able to deal with this with the Minister of Corrections 
and Public Safety — but he is frequently called upon to provide 
advice to other correctional services. He is a former member of 
the . . . of Corrections Canada. There are always links between 
the two, and his expertise and links with those . . . with his 
former colleagues, obviously very useful. But I would say that 
he’s frequently called upon to share our experience in other 
places. 
 
And of course we can always make our system better, but we do 
have a well-regarded system across the country. And I think the 
same goes for our youth facilities in which we have Maureen 
Lloyd, who’s the acting director. 
 
But I’m sure the member can pursue some of those more 
specific matters with the Minister for Corrections and Public 
Safety. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And you mentioned a part that 
I’d like to just comment on briefly and that was the quality of 
people in some of the facilities, people that are working there. 
 
I had the opportunity this last summer and fall to visit the 
corrections centre in Saskatoon and had a tour of the place. It 
was a short tour. And it was probably a rather enlightening 
situation for myself, not having been there before and also 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

hoping never to get back there again, unless it’s for a visit. 
 
But I think some of the concerns that have been out there that 
have been voiced in many cases as far as a crowding situation 
and people not being able to get into some of the rehabilitation 
programs that are there, I think those things were very obvious 
to me as I had the tour, as well as the security. 
 
(15:15) 
 
You will recall probably a year or two ago when there was an 
escape made through the one corner of the fence and some of 
the escapees skedaddled across the highway into part of the city 
of Saskatoon. That created quite some concerns. 
 
I had an opportunity to sort of look at what was happening there 
and why that had happened. And also had expressed to me, by 
the people doing the tour, that there’s still some definite 
concerns for safety and security of the people that work there as 
well. 
 
I guess the one part that became most obvious to me is when 
individuals come in they’re waiting, sort of in a . . . almost like 
a holding area to get into their rooms, to get into their programs, 
and those sorts of things. And that was a very stark situation 
just to see four or five military cots in one small room. Not that 
there was a lot of sympathy on my part, but it obviously wasn’t 
accomplishing what we hope that will happen there, and that’s 
rehabilitation. It was just a holding cell, and obviously wasn’t 
going to accomplish much in that particular area. 
 
The ability to go ahead and share expertise, as you mentioned, I 
think is definitely a positive on the changes that are there. And 
to date, I haven’t heard anyone voice any concerns about the 
direction that changes are going. I think it’ll be something we’ll 
have to watch and see how it works out. But I think the concept 
and the philosophy behind it is probably good. 
 
In this sharing of expertise that was mentioned in your answer, 
is there a possibility of some cost savings in that area or is that 
not really a part that will exist in this sharing of services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I’m glad that the member had 
the opportunity to visit one of our correctional facilities. And I 
think he could . . . he’s voiced some of the challenges that exist 
in any correctional facility, and we certainly have them in our 
own. 
 
He asks specifically the question about cost savings. I hope he 
won’t think of me as shirking any responsibility here, but the 
minister responsible will be more than happy to explore those 
issues with the member. 
 
And certainly over the years in which I was responsible for 
corrections, we certainly did our best to hold costs down as 
much as possible. But there clearly are drivers outside of our 
control. And we have to do the best we can to ensure that the 
public security is protected; and there is the opportunity for 
those people spending time in the facilities to be able to have 
access to programs to improve the likelihood that once they 
re-enter our society they will be more responsible and 
contributing members of that society. 
 

But the member quite rightly identifies some of the challenges 
that exist in those facilities and in fact in those facilities across 
the country. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’d like to go down that road a 
little bit further. The areas that have been set up there for what 
you said are rehabilitation or training programs — welding 
shops, carpentry shops, and those sorts of things — weren’t 
being utilized in a very efficient sort of way. There weren’t any 
particular programs going on — major programs, long-term 
programs. 
 
And I’m wondering if there’s any view to sort of making some 
changes there so that individuals coming out after their time are 
somewhat better qualified to go ahead and apply for jobs and do 
those jobs well enough so that the tendency to get involved in a 
crime situation and get back in there are lessened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member again, I think, identifies 
an interesting challenge within the facilities. Most of the 
inmates are there for a very short period of time and so the 
opportunity to do a whole lot with them is not there. But they 
go through significant needs assessment, significant 
programming opportunities while they’re there. 
 
We’ve reinvested and invested more in programming over the 
years. And wherever possible, they have access to the kinds of 
programs he was talking about — welding shops and 
short-order cooks and so on. And we have significant success 
amongst those inmates who spent time there. 
 
The challenge of course is to have access to supports and the 
kinds of things that will enable a person to have the opportunity 
to be a more functioning member of society before, like in the 
society, and then if they happen to find themselves in a 
correctional facility, there too, and then once they leave, to 
continue their rehabilitation. And plainly it’s a lot more 
effective to attempt to work with someone in a rehabilitative 
way when they’re in their community rather than when they’re 
in an institution. 
 
But the . . . primarily the inmates are there for a relatively short 
period of time and we provide as much as we possibly can 
during that time. 
 
And the member might be interested to know that up in Prince 
Albert, the welding shop there when I visited, they were making 
bars for prison cells — not their own prison cells but other 
people’s prison cells. But they were providing a, providing a 
service there to the correction facility. But they also, as you 
know, compete with others outside and on a competitive, fair, 
competitive basis, and provide services to the community at 
large. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It’s good to hear that the minister 
has also spent some time in a corrections facility. 
 
The one thing that was somewhat frightening when I was in 
there and did that visit is that as we went out into the outer 
playground area, the various activity areas had coloured ribbon 
tied around them. And when that was explained to me, it was 
that a certain gang had sort of identified this was their territory 
and they had sort of taken over, this sort of thing. 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

 

And I’d like for the minister to comment how, how serious a 
challenge gang activity in corrections is. And specifically, what 
the department’s doing to sort of lessen that. 
 
Because somebody coming into a situation like that, not being 
involved in one gang or another is obviously going to have a lot 
of pressure put on them to sort of join one side or join the other 
side. And I don’t think that’s what we send people to 
corrections for, to become involved in gang activities. But it 
was definitely obvious as to what was happening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member identifies another 
serious concern for us both in correctional facilities and outside 
— the size and the impact and the seriousness of gang 
involvement amongst, amongst our offenders. 
 
And again we know that not only is it a challenge dealing with 
those particular people, but it’s also a challenge in dealing with 
those on whom they prey, both in the institutions and outside. 
And it’s, it’s, as I say, another challenge which we have to 
meet. We certainly take it seriously and have various 
mechanisms to ensure that we keep tabs on what’s taking place 
and to ensure that it is not being expanded into other, into other 
people in the institutions. 
 
But I would, if I could, urge the member to ask . . . to deal with 
the specifics of these kinds of issues with the new minister who 
will plainly be able to help him. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as you sort of clarified at the 
end, it’ll take us probably this session to get used to the dividing 
of authorities that have taken place there. 
 
The people of the province, I think, have become used to a 
certain system, and that’s a system that has existed in 
Saskatchewan for a long time. The one that the new department 
that is now taking over. 
 
And I’d like for the minister to explain how the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to be informed. Like, what system or 
what way or method have you devised to clarify how this 
system is going to operate now? How are people going to know 
what’s happening? Or when they get involved, are they going to 
be frustrated again by saying I thought I had the right door and 
now there’s two doors where they were one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — It’s an interesting question to ask how 
the public can know that these changes have taken place and 
how would they know they’ve been . . . they’ll be better served 
and how will it affect their contact with the various institutions, 
both physical and human which exist within a range of 
departments in the government. 
 
We, of course, have communicated with all of the stakeholders 
so that they will know the extent of the changes and how they 
should proceed. As for individual citizens, basically in this 
context, there will be one kind of door of entry into Corrections 
— youth and adult — but it will be one kind of place . . . I mean 
one office regarding these issues. So they should notice some 
efficiency there. 
 
But primarily if a person has a child at the Paul Dojack Centre, 
they will not notice significant differences in the way in which 

they can contact that person and the way in which services were 
provided to that person. But there will be, I mean, there are 
plenty of administrative efficiencies and other things. But 
certainly at the beginning, the services will be provided by the 
same people in the same way as they were before. 
 
So hopefully citizens shouldn’t notice anything . . . shouldn’t 
come across any complications as a result of these changes. 
Plainly if they have an issue and they phone the office of the 
Minister of Justice, they’ll be passed onto the appropriate new 
minister. 
 
So that perhaps is the extent of any uncertainty that might exist. 
But we’ll certainly make sure that any kinds of concerns about 
who to go to and how to fix any issues will be addressed as 
quickly as possible. 
 
But I thank the member for reminding us of that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — What process has been set up between your 
department and this new department and how much contact do 
you plan to have with each other? Is there something definite in 
place or is it just going to be a troubleshooting kind of a 
situation — if something flies apart, you’ll do a cross contact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I’m sure the member didn’t 
expect it to be just an ad hoc troubleshooting relationship, that 
he would have known that we would ensure close, close 
relationships between our departments. The new department is 
. . . the senior administrative officials from the deputy ministry 
on down are headquartered in the same building as the 
Department of Justice. 
 
There are joint policy . . . there is a joint policy committee and 
there’s shared human resources, systems work, 
communications, finance, administration. So there’s a very 
close relationship between the two departments and that’s likely 
to continue. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Going down further, a little further down that 
road about the two departments, the Youth Criminal Justice Act 
has received Royal Assent but won’t be implemented for a 
while. And one thing that does is change that age limit, as you 
know, and moves that down. 
 
And I’m wondering if you’d like to comment . . . I’d like for 
you to comment on . . . You now have two departments, one 
that’s going to be dealing very . . . in a very definite way to try 
and keep youth out of the justice system and another one that’s 
going to want to be very . . . you know want to be sort of hard 
over and say, okay you’ve committed a crime; you’re going to 
serve some time for this. So it seems you could sort of be going 
down two different roads on this. How will you be able to 
dovetail that kind of activity? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member’s quite right that the 
Youth Criminal Justice Act has been . . . will come into effect 
April 1, 2003. And that extension or that delay is as a result of 
pressure brought to bear by provincial ministers in order to get 
ready for the new provisions and also to ensure that we can put 
the appropriate amount of pressure on the federal government to 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

ensure that resources are available for some of the provisions 
they have put forward. 
 
The member will note too, that prior to the establishment of the 
new Department of Corrections, youth corrections was housed 
under the Department of Social Services and so there always 
was a need to work together with other departments. And 
certainly that took place in all of the presentations to the federal 
government with regards to our concerns over the Youth 
Criminal Justice Act. 
 
And that kind of collaboration — working together — will 
continue with the new department. And indeed processes are in 
place already to ensure that we will be developing joint 
responses which will, of course, on things like the age question 
to come to this Chamber. We also will have some continued 
contact — the two departments — with Social Services as they 
have still some role to play in some of these questions. 
 
But whether youth corrections and the Department of Justice 
were in the same department or not, there would always be the 
need to make sure that we pay careful attention to the different 
approaches that are proposed, that in fact take place in different 
institutions, as the member indicated. Different approaches 
perhaps are wise in adult facilities versus youth facilities. 
 
But you can be assured, the member can be assured that there is 
a close working relationship on these policy questions with the 
new department and that this Chamber will have ample 
opportunity to discuss those policies. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think your own department and 
stats indicate there’s about 1,200 adults in the province’s four 
jails. And a little more than double that — I believe 2,800 youth 
involved in the justice system. 
 
So again from a policing and a prosecution standpoint, how will 
that split or that division of those two departments now impact 
on those numbers and in what way do you plan on dealing with 
those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well again, the likelihood of anything 
in general terms being all that different is fairly small. The 
police and prosecutors have worked with both the adult and the 
youth facilities in the past and will continue to do so. 
 
But I would point out something the member is familiar with. In 
the strategy developed to address car thefts in Regina, there was 
a close working relationship between the two . . . between then, 
the two departments involved — Social Services and Justice — 
the police, and indeed, the city of Regina. And on the Justice 
side, of course, there were issues respecting prosecutions and 
policing which came to bear on that work. 
 
And perhaps that’s a good illustration of how we can effectively 
work together so that we do know what each . . . we firmly 
know what each component of our system is doing, how it’s 
responding to these issues, how it can better respond, and how 
we can all better work together to achieve a particular goal. 
 
And I think the member will be aware that to date we’ve had 
some success in reducing . . . some significant success in 
reducing car thefts in Regina. We’ve got more work to do of 

course, and we’re more than prepared to all work together to 
ensure that we have an even better strategy. 
 
So I think you can see that also with child prostitution in 
Saskatoon — a very close working relationship in operation 
help between police and Social Services, legal aid. And indeed 
every component — Health — every component of our 
supports for young people. 
 
So I think we see now a firm . . . a firmer commitment to 
integrated, holistic approaches and to every aspect, every 
component of the system being prepared to work together even 
more effectively for a common goal. 
 
But I think the member asks an interesting question about, how 
do you ensure that everybody’s on the same page, moving in 
the same direction, has the same information available to them, 
and essentially are pursuing the same goals? But we’re working 
very hard to ensure that that, in fact, is the case. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’d like to leave that area and 
turn to something a little different. But before I do that, there 
are a number of sort of specific issues that have been brought to 
my attention, some by my constituents and some by some 
people from other constituencies, that I’d just like to deal with. 
 
And the one is the sharing of traffic and Criminal Code fine 
revenues with towns and RMs (rural municipality) and cities. 
 
And I am wondering if you could just start off by giving a 
rundown of how that sharing takes place and what the 
percentages are, and then we’ll go from there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me, if I 
may, introduce John Baker, who’s our head of policing services 
and other things, who as you know works on these issues and 
others in a continual way. 
 
If I understand the member’s question properly — and we can 
explore other aspects of it if I don’t — the province administers 
. . . supposing an offence is committed within a municipality 
and a fine is paid. The province administers that fine collection 
process and 25 per cent of that collection . . . fine goes to the 
province. And if it’s a Criminal Code offence, say on the 
highway or something of that sort, then the province would take 
all of the fine revenue. 
 
I might say, and the member will know this, that in terms of the 
provincial government’s commitment to policing and 
enforcement in the province, the commitment is presently at 
$88 million — about an $18 million increase since 1999. The 
member will know about the numbers of police officers in the 
province, both municipal and RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police), and he will no doubt know about the challenges of 
generally funding this police component. He will know of the 
long-standing approach of ensuring that municipalities pay for 
some of their policing costs which has been in place since the 
beginning of the province and he will know of the significant 
new commitments from the province to policing. He will know 
that we have in fact record numbers of dollars going to policing 
in the province. 
 
If in the first part I didn’t answer the member’s question, we 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

 

certainly can pursue the specifics. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I believe I got part of my answer 
and we’re going to try and work at the rest of it. 
 
Twenty-five per cent of the fines go into the province, but if I 
understood correct, that all traffic fines went to the province. It 
was my understanding that the ones in the towns and the ones 
that took place in a close proximity to the towns, that the town 
got a good portion of those, at least I believe it was that case 
when I was on town council some time ago. Wonder if the 
minister will want to expand on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I hate to say it, Mr. Chair, but I think 
the member is right: that Saskatchewan Highway offences 
revenues would come to the province, Criminal Code offences 
revenues would come to the province, and municipal bylaw 
offences, 75 per cent would go to the municipalities, 25 per cent 
to the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — In those communities where the highway is 
very close to the community and they very often have a 
different speed limit — and I would think Chamberlain would 
be an example of that; town of Hague would be another 
example of that, and we have a few of those — any fines levied 
on that stretch of highway would then go to — what? The 
province would get all of it or would that be a split situation 
there as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — That’s right, Mr. Chair. While I’m on 
my feet, can I introduce Linda Hahn who’s another one of our 
officials working in this area on courts. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and welcome to your new 
official. 
 
And I think we’ll get back to this cost sharing of the fines in a 
minute or two. 
 
At this point, I’m wondering if the minister would briefly 
outline how the amount of sharing of policing that’s levied, how 
that is assigned as far as the towns and villages are concerned 
and the RMs? Or are they under the same formula where it’s so 
much per person or on what basis is that policing costs levied? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In response to 
the member’s question about the allocation of costs by 
municipalities for their policing: urban municipalities with 
between 500 and 5,000 people with an RCMP detachment in 
their community will pay $57 per capita; urban municipalities 
with between 500 to 5,000 people without an RCMP 
detachment will pay $42 per capita; urban municipalities with 
less than 500 people but with an RCMP detachment in their 
community will pay $40 per capita; and RMs and urban 
municipalities with less than 500 people without an RCMP 
detachment will pay $20 per capita. 
 
And I might say, as I’m sure the member knows, that this 
matter of municipal contributions to the costs . . . to the 
provision of RCMP services, payment for those services — 
which I say, which I have mentioned earlier, has been in place 
since the beginning of the province — is never an easy 
question. 

There is, as the member knows, a task force which made up of 
Justice officials and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) officials which meets on 
this matter from time to time and proposes a formula to apply to 
the municipalities. 
 
It’s of course never easy when, when you make a change. One 
municipality’s costs will go up and another’s will go down. My 
guess is that we hear from those municipalities whose costs go 
up, but not from those whose costs go down. But nonetheless 
the formula is worked out in conjunction with SUMA and 
SARM officials and is arrived at with their, with their support 
and then is implemented. 
 
What has happened over the last while is those formula . . . 
formulae have generated, as I say, winners and losers and some 
who are concerned about the cost. And then there is very often 
searching for another formula which would be more desirable to 
those who in fact are paying a little, a little more. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The member will know that by contrast to the cost of policing 
services in the urban municipalities — the larger ones with their 
own police services — that these are costs which are 
substantially less than you would pay if you lived in Regina or 
Saskatoon or Prince Albert. 
 
But we do know that this is a burden on our municipalities, on 
RMs and urban municipalities. And as I say we seek to find the 
best solution possible through the task force. But it is our view 
that municipalities should contribute as they have done since 
1905 to the policing costs of their communities. 
 
And I might say also that where there are concerns raised about 
the amount of policing, the amount of RCMP coverage in an 
area, that Assistant Commissioner Boucher, the head of “F” 
Division, the RCMP here in the province, is always prepared to 
meet with municipalities to try to address their concerns and I 
think has been successful in many respects. And certainly is 
very, very committed to ensuring not only community policing 
but also that communities get the kind of policing they want, 
and that his assessment of the needs of the community are 
discussed with those communities to ensure that they also know 
his concerns. And through that route we have generally been 
able to meet these challenges. 
 
I might say too, just to remind the member, that we do have 147 
RCMP officers more than we had in 1999 and we have 
significant . . . (inaudible) . . . extra policing in the province. 
And we’re committed to ensuring that the people of the 
province have the kind of policing to ensure the appropriate 
level of safety and security in their communities. We know it’s 
an issue for citizens and I think in the last budget we’ve 
indicated again, once again, a major commitment to safety and 
security in our communities all across the province. 
 
There will be further discussions with SUMA and SARM about 
municipal contributions, beginning April 17. And if we can find 
other formula that is acceptable to RMs and urban 
municipalities, then of course we’d be only too happy to 
implement them. 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

Mr. Heppner: — I thank you for that answer. And I . . . 
Minister, I should inform him that I do not intend to get in a 
debate with him about the formula. So we won’t have to stand 
here and argue about what should be less and what should be 
more and those sorts of things. 
 
I would also like to underline the statement that you made about 
the quality of policing that takes place out there. I know in my 
community of Rosthern we had a substantial increase in crime a 
number of years ago and the present people that are involved in 
policing have put a lot of effort into reducing that and have 
been fairly successful. So I think that’s a plus. 
 
I know the communities always have a concern about the fact 
that they don’t see the police car in town as often as they would 
like to see for the amount they pay for it. But as you also 
mentioned, they do have their superior officers that do come out 
to the town councils and meet with the mayors and councils and 
discuss those concerns with them. And my experience and the 
time that I spent on town council was very positive with that, 
and I think that’s a good system, and it gives the councils a 
feeling that they can go to someone and say, I have a concern, 
and then those concerns are worked through. 
 
When you gave the numbers or the amount of cost sharing that 
every community has to do based on population, and I was 
writing these down and I missed the one number that I wanted 
and that was the contribution from RMs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The RMs, Mr. Chair, whatever their 
size of population, pay $20 per capita. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. As we discussed earlier on, the 
towns, villages do share in fines from traffic costs. RMs, I 
believe, do not get any revenue from that. 
 
And that seems somewhat unfair when you have the breakdown 
of $20 per head from certain size communities and from the 
RMs, and yet those communities could benefit if they happen to 
have a highway going close by that has a reduced speed limit 
that works out excellent for a speed trap. And yet the RMs 
never get a chance to share in any of those revenues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member is right that the RMs 
would not recover any of the fine revenue from highway 
offences or Criminal Code offences. But they would, in the 
same way as other municipalities, keep 75 per cent of any RM 
bylaw offence fines. 
 
But I think it’s worth bearing in mind too that the RMs 
contributing just $20 per capita for RCM police servicing is, 
certainly in contrast to other municipalities, you know, I think a 
reasonable fee. 
 
And so those RMs do not pay a huge amount for RCMP 
services, but as I . . . and as I indicate, they do get a share of any 
RM bylaw fines. 
 
I appreciate the member’s point about concerns about how often 
the patrol might come by a particular community, and as he 
mentioned, there are always mechanisms to ensure that 
concerns raised about that can be addressed. 
 

The RCMP will initially decide, based upon their criteria, what 
kind of service they think is needed in response to the crime in a 
community, but are always prepared to reassess and work with 
the community to address their concern. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. In the rate structure that you 
presented, there . . . if there happens to be a detachment in the 
community, the rates are somewhat higher. And I’m wondering 
if the minister would like to explain. Is that because the thought 
is they’ll get a better service because the people are residing 
right there, and that will be a deterrent in itself? Or is it because 
of the economic benefit of having the detachment in the 
community? Which one of those two is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think it’s generally regarded that an 
RCMP detachment in a community is a valuable thing for that 
community; that it has both an economic component with 
officers living in the community, paying their taxes there, 
spending some of their earnings there, and participating almost 
invariably in community life — softball, hockey, coaching and 
so on. 
 
In terms of policing coverage, the RCMP, indeed any police 
service, would assess the kind of coverage needed based upon 
the crime rate and the amount of this social challenge in that 
community, which may or may not be affected by the presence 
of a detachment in that community. 
 
So it wouldn’t be right to say that they get more policing 
because that would be worked out on the basis of need. But it is 
I think likely to be the case, and I think we generally regard it as 
the case, that with a police presence right there in the 
community, there is greater access which may benefit the local 
community. 
 
So in general terms, I think everyone would recognize the 
benefit of having an RCMP detachment in that community. 
What I imagine is at stake is the amount, the dollar value to that 
community about which there can always be disagreement. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I think that the concept that there’s a 
psychological advantage to having a detachment in a 
community is probably there in most cases. I know in the 
detachment that I’m involved with, it just happens to be that the 
community that they live in, the detachment resides, is also one 
of the ones that has a fairly high crime rate. And the ones 
around there, where the detachment doesn’t exist . . . So the 
correlation isn’t always perfect. 
 
Now the RMs do not gain from any psychological benefit 
because the detachments aren’t in the RMs. They also don’t 
gain any economic benefit because these members, with very 
few exceptions, all live within the community, pay their taxes 
there, support the stores over there. 
 
So I guess my final question then would be, if the RMs do not 
gain anything from the detachment over there, they also don’t 
get any of the benefits from those traffic offences, any of those 
fines that are being paid through that. That in the minds of the 
RM people is somewhat unfair, in fact is maybe substantially 
unfair. 
 
Like we try and keep everything fairly even. I don’t think 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

 

there’s a lot of arguments as long as the communities through 
SARM and SUMA can come to an agreement on the cost 
sharing, and I haven’t had any letters from RMs complaining 
about the cost of policing. But I have had the concerns raised 
that that doesn’t seem to be offset by any revenue from the 
traffic component, and they don’t gain any benefit from the 
detachment being in the specific area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think that’s true. But I think that it’s 
worth bearing in mind that at the $20 per capita fee, that is half 
of urban municipalities with less than 500 people; and if you 
consider larger communities, that’s about a third of that total fee 
per capita. 
 
So I think the member is right that they don’t get huge extra 
benefits, but they are, I think, paying a cost which is, relative to 
other communities, really not too bad. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think what’ll happen is, as 
you mentioned, there’s another meeting coming off between 
your department and SARM and SUMA when these fees will 
be debated, and I’m sure a lot of the RMs will have a concern 
about the one that I’ve just raised about not getting any of those 
particular fees. 
 
On another particular topic, and this one I’m just going to read 
part of the letter, because you may understand it better if I read 
it rather than if I present it. 
 
And it comes from a credit service company and it says: 
 

I would like to voice serious concerns I have with regard to 
section 33 of The Trust and Loan Corporations 
Regulations, 1999. (And the question is,) I would ask that 
the policy be reviewed to change the filing date from the 
last day of February of each year to the last day of March. 
To require companies such as this one to have completed 
audited statements prepared by the auditors in what 
amounts to less than 60 days of their year-end is an 
unreasonable requirement. Every year we must make a 
special request for this priority handling of our audit which 
definitely creates some unique costs to their company. 

 
And I’m wondering if any consideration has been given to 
making a change in that particular system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well like the member opposite, I have 
section 33 of the trust and loans regulations at the tip of my 
tongue. 
 
But I think it’s a useful recommendation by the member. If 
we’ve received the same letter then we will have been looking 
at this proposal and certainly I’ll take the member’s suggestion. 
Maybe he has a copy he could let us have and we’ll have a look 
at this in the immediate future. 
 
Our goal is to ensure that we facilitate the filing arrangements, 
the filing requirements and so on, that we make life not more 
difficult but more straightforward to business people in the 
province. And anything we can do to improve that we certainly 
will do. 
 
So we’ll look at that right away and I want to thank the member 

for his suggestion. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome to the 
minister’s officials. 
 
It’s my pleasure to be able to stand today and ask a few 
questions, Mr. Minister, surrounding the upcoming measures 
that we hopefully can put into place soon to help the children 
who are being exploited on the streets. And I recognize, Mr. 
Minister, that the Bill has not received Royal Assent yet and 
that there may be questions that I can direct later on, but I 
would really appreciate if you can give me a couple of answers 
of concern that I have regarding how workable the Bill may be 
and how soon it may be workable. 
 
Mr. Minister, in as far as the $300,000 for the safe house that 
will be established in Regina, I’m wondering whether or not 
that entire sum will be put forward in the very near future in 
order to get the operations of the safe house started. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member will know that this is the 
government’s commitment, and that along with the member 
opposite and the members of the committee, and indeed all 
members of the House, we are committed to ensuring that we 
truly do address what is, as we would agree, really one of the 
most outrageous situations that exists in the province — the 
sexual abuse of children on our streets and in our communities. 
 
I would just say on the specific question that it would be 
perhaps better to raise this with the Minister of Social Services 
in whose responsibility this falls, but I would say that that is our 
commitment and we would anticipate delivering on that 
commitment as soon as possible. 
 
And indeed the provisions in the Act are our best response to 
the committee’s recommendations and that we’re always 
looking for new and better ways to respond to this particular 
problem. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you 
tell me from which department . . . or which department will be 
responsible for allocating these funds for the safe house. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — That would be Social Services, Mr. 
Chair. We will be looking after the police training costs and the 
kinds of implications that flow from enforcing the legislation. 
That will be Justice’s role. And then the matters regarding the 
provision of services in response to the young people involved 
will be under the auspices of Social Services. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if I recall 
correctly when yourself and the Minister of Social Services 
were engaged in a press conference regarding this matter, I 
believe the media did ask you whether or not you would be 
putting extra resources towards policing. And I believe the 
answer from one of you was that no, you wouldn’t but you 
would use the existing officers in order to meet the needs of this 
whole issue. 
 
So I’m wondering whether or not you are going to be in fact 
putting extra funding in place for police officers to work 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

specifically towards the many duties that they will have in order 
to make this legislation effective. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The first year’s budget commitments 
for the various different justice related programs here — 
specialized police training, support for DISC (deter identify 
sex-trade consumers) data collection, vehicle impoundment and 
so on — comes to about . . . comes to $367,000. 
 
You asked the specific question about policing. As you know, 
we did in the last budget provide more police officers for the 
. . . in particular the cities that are most affected, but also to 
other communities across the province too. 
 
And while we would anticipate some of those new resources 
being used for the purposes of enforcing this legislation, it’s our 
view that we should leave policing and policing priorities and 
policing commitments to those police services themselves. But 
we certainly would be expressing our support for them 
expending some of that . . . some of those new resources in this 
area. And I would have every expectation that they would. 
 
I think at the press conference the member refers to, there was a 
question about needing new resources in order to effectively 
enforce this legislation. And I think it’s pretty clear that unless 
some of the new resources are used in this area, that it would be 
very difficult to effectively enforce. 
 
So as I say, with those new police officers in the major cities 
and in other communities, we would anticipate new policing 
resources being used in this area. And it plainly is a priority for 
not only this House, but for municipalities who are particularly 
affected in this area and by . . . and for police services who are 
working with these children. 
 
And I think — and the member will certainly be familiar with 
— with Operation Help which is, you know, an interesting and 
valuable approach to dealing with the young people involved, 
attempting as much as possible to provide alternatives and 
counselling and supports rather than to charge them and to go 
through the criminal justice system. 
 
So I think there are many examples out there for doing things 
differently; for allocating resources, present resources, in new 
ways; and for using new resources in this endeavour. And I do 
want to repeat my thanks for the member’s support and 
commitment in this area which will ensure, I think, that in part 
our police services and our municipalities will do a good job in 
this area. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, have you 
done any research into understanding and knowing exactly what 
kind of money will be needed for the DISC system? And if you 
have, does this $67,000 that you’re speaking of, is that going to 
be enough money in order to make sure that we have a 
workable, effective DISC system in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I’m not sure if I heard the member 
right. But the new revenues — the new resources, I’m sorry — 
for Justice’s commitment to addressing child sexual abuse on 
our streets is $367,000 and of that about $30,000 is committed 
to DISC. 
 

We will of course be prepared to look at other resource needs if 
that isn’t enough to make the system work. But it’s our 
assessment that we should be able to make the system work 
with that commitment and we’ve closely looked at BC of 
course, at their system, and so we think this will be an adequate 
sum to address this concern. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So you have made a 
commitment of $367,000 from the Justice department, is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes, in the first year. 
 
Ms. Julé: — And you have mentioned earlier, Mr. Minister, 
that the Department of Social Services budget would be 
responsible for the safe house operations for this year. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering when exactly there’s the 
intent to start putting this money in place in order for these 
operations to get started? And have you been in contact with the 
police services in our major cities at least to be able to discuss 
with them the plans that you believe are necessary to put in 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — All these matters are underway or at 
stages of implementation. Police training, for example, will take 
place in Regina on March 6, 7 and 8, so very quickly we’ll be 
working on that. So you can see we’ve been working with the 
expectation of this legislation coming into force and getting 
ready for it. 
 
Some forces, as you know, have . . . some police services have 
DISC up and running at the present time and we’ll be working 
on enhancements for them. 
 
Impoundment is just about ready to go. I think there’s some 
pilots in some communities shortly to just iron out the bugs and 
make sure it’s all going to work well, and as soon as that is 
done then impoundment . . . the vehicle impoundment program 
will be in place. 
 
And as soon as this legislation, the new legislation has passed 
through this House and regulations have been put in place that 
. . . our response will be effective there too. So essentially we’re 
ready. We’re doing a lot of the things that we’ve indicated we 
would do already, and the things such as vehicle impoundment 
will be in place, I think, within the month. 
 
So I think fairly effective and quickly we’ve addressed these 
concerns. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I take it 
that you maybe made a bit of a mistake. You said that police 
training has been or will be in place March 6, 7, and 8 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . May 6, 7, and 8. All right. It will be 
in May, not March. Very good. Thank you. 
 
That’s very heartening, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to hear that 
because of course this is an issue that we must move on as 
quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was wondering whether or not in your 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

 

deliberations about the plan that you have . . . or that you intend 
to put forward to look at the many facets of what needs to be 
done to assist children in order to have the protection that they 
need, whether you have considered — and I notice in the Bill 
that it’s not in there, so I’m asking you — why you haven’t 
considered giving the option to parents, as well as outreach 
workers and child protection workers, etc., to in fact make an 
application for a stay away order, for . . . towards a john or a 
pimp that may be constantly harassing their children. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — My understanding, Mr. Chair, is that 
that provision is in the Act. We’ll just have a quick check and 
see for you. Plainly the member’s right in indicating that 
anyone who has a connection or an interest in ensuring the 
protection of any particular child, it’s . . . it would be valuable 
for them to be able to instigate a process to protect them, rather 
than just leave it to police, for example. 
 
But let me just check for a moment, but I’m pretty sure it’s 
already there. But it is a responsibility of Social Services. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Maybe while you’re double-checking 
on that, I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, if there has been 
any provision made at this point for a director of programming 
for the safe house that will be coming up in Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I’m sure this is the case, Mr. 
Chair. But again, this is something which is under the auspices 
of Social Services. But plainly they will have to have somebody 
who runs it and they will have to ensure that that person’s in 
place fairly quickly. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I’ll refer the rest of my questions at the time that we have 
Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 2. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would just like you to tell the Assembly how 
many youth court cases have been heard in the past year in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks how many youth 
cases were heard in Saskatchewan. The StatsCanada numbers 
for — this is 2000-2001 — state that there were 8,999 which is 
down 1 per cent from the 9,062 cases the year previously. So 
almost 9,000 cases. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How does that compare 
to other provinces, other jurisdictions in Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member will know the 
significant challenge Saskatchewan has with regards to crime 
and with regards to youth crime. Those numbers would be 
about double the national average. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, has 
your department and your government deliberated over any 
better way of doing things that might, in fact, see that youth 
have a way to possibly find an avenue to rehabilitation rather 
than going through the courts? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the . . . I think the concern 

behind the member’s question is really the concern that the 
Department of Justice focuses on almost exclusively. And what 
is it we can do and how can we contribute to the reduction in 
crime in our communities? And conversely, what can we do to 
ensure greater safety and security in our communities and 
indeed also a greater perception of safety and security in our 
communities? And this is in many respects . . . well it is 
certainly one of our greatest challenges in this province. 
 
And the member will know it’s flows from both a mixture 
personal responsibility — not being what we would wish it to 
be and a set of circumstances which we all know generate more 
criminal activity than we would hope for. 
 
Plainly if you live in a dysfunctional home, if you have drug 
and alcohol abuse challenges, if school attendance is poor or 
nonexistent, if you’re facing a whole range of challenges of that 
sort — poor housing, inadequate nutrition, and so on — that the 
crime rate amongst people with those attributes will be greater. 
 
It is a mixture though of being tough on those who commit 
offences and tough on the things that are likely to generate and 
contribute to generating more offending. And the mix is always 
a challenging one. 
 
But I might say for example, with regards to car thefts, that over 
half of the car thefts are stolen by a person who never steals a 
car again. So it does illustrate the kind of approach we can take 
that . . . and so alternative measures are used for those 
offenders. And because they don’t steal cars again, I think we 
can conclude, not conclusively, but we can I think, we can 
assume that we are having some success in moving them away 
from a life of crime. 
 
The trick in many respects is assessing which children, which 
young people, we can be successful with in terms of diversion, 
and which ones we have to recognize are major threats to 
society and need to be treated very forcefully. 
 
But of the 9,000 cases each year in youth court, about 2,000 are 
diverted off to alternative measures, and then that means 9,000 
go through the normal route and some, of course, will end up in 
acquittal, some will end up in guilt and sentencing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there has 
been indeed a great deal of discussion surrounding what kind of 
measures might be taken in order to, I guess, rehabilitate youth 
that, as you have mentioned, often come from dysfunctional 
homes, that don’t have parental guidance, that basically haven’t 
been versed in principles, values and guidelines that would lead 
them to being contributing members of society and that kind of 
thing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering whether or not your 
government has thought any further about disciplinary camps? I 
mean, none of us like to use the term, boot camp, but it was 
referred to as that in fact by your members not too long ago in 
the media, and it did come from your side of the House from 
one of your NDP members. It could have been you. I can’t quite 
remember, but I think it was you. 
 
But nonetheless, the focus of this discussion is not what it may 
be called. I guess the focus of it is do you believe there’s value 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

in, you know, rehabilitating youth through disciplinary 
measures? 
 
And by discipline, I don’t mean punitive measures. I mean 
measures that would help them understand that there are 
responsibilities towards society and themselves that they have 
to learn, and put them through that kind of counselling and 
rehabilitation. Have you thought about taking any more steps in 
that direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises what is, I think, 
again one of our challenges. What do we do to try to ensure that 
young people who are in trouble with the law have 
opportunities not to be — and realistic opportunities not to be. 
And how do we ensure that, both with a carrot and a stick, we 
encourage them to make those appropriate choices. 
 
And different things, as we know, work for different people. 
People are individuals and not one program will fit them all. 
And plainly, they also have significant challenges perhaps 
flowing from drug and alcohol abuse and other — maybe 
physical, sexual abuse in their lives — that make it very 
difficult to make those options real options for those young 
people. 
 
But we do firmly believe that strict controls, that rules and 
regulations, that boundaries are important as a component of 
addressing our youth problem; that some people plainly will 
respond very well to a very regulated environment. And most in 
fact of . . . or many of the young people we’re dealing with here 
are people who don’t have the kinds of discipline in the 
constructive way the member talks about — discipline in their 
home life. 
 
So consequently, we would leave no option . . . we would put 
no option aside in terms of how we best address the challenges 
we face. 
 
The young . . . the Youth Criminal Justice Act places now a 
very firm emphasis on rehabilitation. And I might say that if we 
look at youth crime rates in Quebec versus youth crime rates 
here, the contrast if very significant. You know, the youth crime 
rates are much, much lower in Quebec and the focus on 
rehabilitation in Quebec is much, much higher than across the 
country. 
 
So what they have found — and I think what other countries 
have found — is that if you focus on rehabilitation, you might 
actually rehabilitate a large number of young people. 
 
If you take a route more common in, say, in the United States 
where punishment is the . . . more of the norm, you find you’re 
not . . . don’t have as much success with that route as you do 
over the rehabilitation. 
 
On the other hand within a coercive environment, an institution, 
it is very difficult to engender rehabilitation. It is much more 
effectively done early in life with early childhood intervention 
initiatives which . . . of which the province has many, in dealing 
with supports for families to earn incomes to ensure that they 
bring themselves out of poverty. And you know, the building 
independence program has ensured the reduction of the 
numbers of people on social assistance in very significant 

numbers. 
 
But there will always be some of these offenders for whom a 
period of time away from society is the only solution. It may 
not particularly be a solution for them but it is a solution for 
society. 
 
So I guess what I’m saying here is that we would . . . we rule 
out nothing in terms of how we respond to these young 
offenders. And we are constantly seeking new ways to make 
sure that we are constructive and helpful and, in the end, 
actually reduce crime. Because I think we would all agree that 
the only way we will reduce crime is ensuring that the kinds of 
conditions which generate more crime are themselves reduced. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in respect 
to your comments on youth addictions to drug and alcohol, this 
is getting to be a very, very, much more serious problem in 
Saskatchewan than it ever was before. There is no doubt about 
it. I have heard from parents who tell me that their children can 
get the drug of their choice — any one of four drugs for sure — 
within the high schools of our cities at any time. 
 
And so I’m . . . in view of the fact that the committee to prevent 
the sexual abuse and exploitation of children has put forward as 
one of their recommendations that there needs to be a way of 
looking at how, in fact, we would look at all of the needs as 
well as the strengths of families, and if the need may be that 
they need to have addiction treatment, that there should be 
something put in place. 
 
Now there was one recommendation that spoke of the need to 
support and enhance the absentee assessment team approach by 
the police in Saskatoon as well as other cities. It could be 
certainly that whole idea passed onto other cities and, in 
conjunction with that, to make sure that we support as much as 
we can the program that goes with it, which is the Wraparound 
program. 
 
Now I understand, as you have mentioned, that Operation Help 
is quite successful. I also understand that sometimes there’s not 
the co-operation from all players in that, that . . . not so much 
the co-operation, but somehow there’s disagreements, I guess, 
that come to pass. And so I think there needs to be directive 
from government on co-operating, collaborating with that, and 
with a focus on getting the job done. 
 
I think the other thing that I’d like to see in regards to the 
recommendation that I mentioned in reference to the 
Wraparound program, I’m wondering if you have looked into 
enhancing that program a bit, using maybe the resources at hand 
but doing things a different way. I wonder if you have looked 
into ensuring that there is a collaborative effort, whether your 
government has insisted on that, and how that whole 
Wraparound program in your view is working right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, the member is quite right, that 
there is a constant need to ensure that there is as much 
co-operation and integration of services as possible, and that 
individuals and professions within who work in these integrated 
and coordinated approaches will have different perspectives and 
different values and different approaches, and perhaps even 
different priorities. And the benefit of working in this way — 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

 

and Operation Help, as the member indicates, is an example — 
and I think also the car theft strategy in Saskatoon . . . in Regina 
is an example. 
 
The benefit of working in this way is that people become more 
familiar with each other’s priorities and approaches and become 
more comfortable with the professionalism of others in the 
process, and consequently become more comfortable with 
changes that might be, might be useful. So that is a constant 
challenge for us — to make sure that we do have as much 
integration as possible. 
 
I’d also echo the member’s comments about the challenge of 
drug abuse and addictions. The member will know that there’s a 
particular problem in the North, but it’s a problem across the 
province. And the RCMP has been developing some new 
processes for dealing with, in particular, drug trafficking in the 
North, and we are talking with them about a more concerted 
effort. We will hear this at a gathering in Prince Albert — April 
24 and April 26, I think it is — where we will hear the call for a 
more concerted effort from northern communities, which we are 
working on to provide an appropriate response. We will hear no 
doubt calls for more resources, both physical, human, and 
financial, to address this concern. 
 
We would also, I think, agree that almost all of the kinds of 
crime we’re talking about here today has, as a component, drug 
and alcohol abuse. It’s a very common part of the makeup of 
those people who are committing those crimes. So we plainly 
need a better approach to this. 
 
I might say too that the challenge is not getting easier as new 
kind of designer drugs appear on the scene, which are very 
cheap to make and very easy to make and can do really very 
significant damage to young people’s physical well-being and 
their . . . and affect their mental, mental capacity. So this is a 
huge challenge, whether we think about it as flowing from fetal 
alcohol syndrome right the way through to the kinds of drugs 
people inject into their arms on the streets. And we’ve seen and 
you’ve seen and I’ve seen the damage that this does to people 
and the link to this criminal . . . to their criminal activity. 
 
So I really just kind of echo the member’s kind of sense of 
priority and urgency about this. And we have begun to talk to 
the RCMP about a really concerted effort to deal with these 
challenges. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And on the surface many of these things seem relatively 
straightforward. If there is one road in and out of a community, 
you would think you would be more successful at being able to 
control, for example, the drug and alcohol abuse in those 
communities. It appears relatively complex. It appears to 
require large amounts of resources in any given time, and of 
course the . . . and co-operation from communities and citizens. 
 
And of course you can’t always have those . . . that huge 
commitment of resources permanently. And so consequently 
really we have to work on what is it that makes people choose 
to use the drugs and alcohol that are available to them in the 
abusive way they do. 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I thank 
you for your comments. I’d like to just refer you back to the 
recommendation from the committee that spoke about the need 
to enhance the wraparound process. And, Mr. Minister, to me 
that process is one of the best kind of processes, if in fact we 
could do the right research, the research that we need to do. 
 
And what I mean by that is there is a very workable wraparound 
process happening in the United States. And it needs to be 
understood so that we can understand how to address the things 
that you have just mentioned. 
 
It really focuses a great deal on specific service providers 
wrapping around a family; for instance, where a young person 
has been in trouble and then been referred to wraparound and 
the people in it to help them. And in that process, the young 
person as well as the parents sit at the table, as well as, for 
instance if it’s Aboriginal people, elders sit at the table, and 
they speak about their needs, where they’re at in life, what those 
needs are. 
 
Now the great part of this whole program is that they tend . . . 
or the intention is rather, is to focus on the strengths of those 
individuals. And every human being does have strengths and 
qualities about them and talents that need to be developed 
whereby they can feel proud of themselves and will choose to 
take a different road than they were on before. 
 
So it seems to me very valuable to recognize that, when you’re 
working on the strengths of youth and you’re encouraging them 
in their strengths, there might be a very good chance that they 
will choose a different lifestyle along with people that support 
them. 
 
So I would like to just encourage you to recognize the value of 
this program and in the days, weeks, and months ahead to 
please look into how this program — it’s not a program really, 
it’s a process — can be enhanced in Saskatchewan. Because I 
think it’s one of the things that would be very, very helpful to 
our youth and their families and could basically turn around 
people’s lives to enhance their well-being and for the 
betterment of themselves and all of society. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The approach the member refers to, 
the wraparound approach, we do have a template for that. We 
are moving that out across the province. We are committed to 
ensuring that we do work with families in a holistic way. 
 
These are issues which don’t just affect the children. They are 
issues which affect and are solved by a more, kind of, 
constructive and resilient family arrangement. I think it’s also 
worth . . . So that approach is there and our commitment is to 
spreading that out across the province. 
 
I think one thing that is important to remember is that we need, 
in order to effectively address this issue, functional individuals, 
functional families, and functional communities. And in many 
respects, we . . . And across this province, we have many 
communities which simply aren’t functional enough in order to 
generate the kind of self-sufficient functional people in families 
within them. 
 
And so in some instances, we simply don’t have the underlying 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

conditions that would enable us to build strong families and 
strong individuals. That is a serious concern for us in this 
province. It’s one we focus on in terms of more policing 
activities, because in order to build strong, functioning 
communities, the rules and regulations, the social values and 
social norms of a community have to be enforced, and they’re 
enforced in our community by police officers. 
 
Those police officers also spend their time trying to ensure that 
there is capacity within those communities in order to take 
advantage of a more orderly environment. We have to ensure 
that leaders in those communities can in fact deal with the 
children within those communities, deal with the families in 
those communities without constantly having to fend off drug 
dealers and so on in order to be able to do that. 
 
But I would say that there is now — just in the years that I’ve 
been the Minister of Justice — there is now a greater sense of 
urgency amongst, for example, First Nations leadership of the 
need to address these concerns in an aggressive way. There is a 
greater commitment on the part of leaders in those communities 
to address them in an aggressive way and there’s a greater sense 
of what needs to be done within those communities in order to 
build strong individuals and strong families and those strong 
communities. 
 
And I’d certainly be happy to invite the member along. We’re 
hoping to go to the North again to see some of the communities 
and some of the work that is taking place in those communities. 
And I’d be happy if the member would come along and see 
some of the very impressive work and some of the very 
impressive individuals in those communities struggling often in 
very, very difficult circumstances with . . . just because those 
communities are remote and suffer from significant problems 
and have large numbers of young people within them. 
 
So I think with that I share the member’s view that we have to 
work within families, within communities, with individuals, 
that we have to be more integrated and more holistic. But I do 
have a sense of optimism that we . . . that we’re seeing a greater 
commitment across the piece to actually resolving, to resolving 
this. 
 
And before I sit down . . . I can’t read his writing though so I’ll 
sit . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well what am I going to say? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister, just a 
question on land titles if I might. If the minister could outline if 
there is any work at all or any function out of all . . . of his 
department related to land titles or if that has moved completely 
over to the corporation in light of ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), in light of the fact that the 
rollout isn’t completed all . . . in most of the districts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The specific roles and responsibilities 
to . . . of the registrar of titles and the registrar of surveys is now 
with ISC. But they have a statute . . . Those two persons have a 
statutory responsibility to report to the Minister of Justice 
because of the importance of the integrity of land titles in the 
province. 
 
So the actual administrative functions are with ISC, but the 
minister retains a residual role as someone who receives reports 

from those registrars. 
 
And I might say we’re in the process of moving ISC into 
Saskatoon. Regina, as you know, went relatively smoothly. We 
have continual challenges here in this very complex process, 
but I think you can tell too from the lawyers who’ve gone 
through the training, address their concerns to ISC, that they do 
feel that ISC is responsive to their concerns and are dealing 
with the problems which arise. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you put a price 
tag perhaps or assign a budget value to how many resources in 
your department continue to be utilized for some sort of land 
titles function as you’ve outlined, or partial positions or any sort 
of budget allocations that Justice still faces to do the . . . to play 
the role that you’ve outlined it still must play with respect to 
land titles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In dollar terms, it wouldn’t be very 
much. The deputy minister and I are on the board of ISC and 
there are of course meetings which take place with the registrars 
and with officials in ISC, but it is not a very significant 
expenditure for the department. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I wonder if the minister would undertake or the 
department could undertake to provide some sort of an estimate 
and send it over at your convenience for that figure. 
 
And also if there are any staff, especially in the regions that are 
still on the paper system, if there are . . . if those staff . . . I think 
they’ve already moved over to ISC, but I just seek some 
confirmation of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The transfer of employees from 
Justice to ISC took place some time ago and every single person 
involved in land titles is now an employee of ISC. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Just to . . . thank you, Mr. Minister. To switch 
gears a little bit here, there’s one fairly unique request or 
concern we feel regarding land titles and it’s related to the 
automation. But it’s the desire on the part of many people in the 
province to have that original charter or that original piece of 
paper for various reasons. A lot of it’s for, you know, emotional 
reasons or sentimental reasons. 
 
And it seems as though . . . I know that we were talking about 
this in Crown Corporations Committee and Mr. Hewitt 
highlighted that that was also an issue, but it’s the original 
documents of course that are very dear to some people. And I 
wonder if you could comment at all — understanding that it’s 
perhaps the purview of ISC, but could you comment at all 
whether or not Justice has any ideas about this, any solutions 
for this for folks that would like to have that document? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well certainly the member’s right that 
. . . and in fact in any transfer from a paper system to a 
computerized system, there is always a lot of angst about, well 
how can I prove that I actually own this piece of, this piece of 
property. Or, how can I be sure that the transaction that has 
taken place, in fact, has taken place? What is the proof I have? 
 
And for many of course the transition from paper to computer is 
not complete, and so that fact that you can find it on the 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

 

computer and print it off is not always enough for some people. 
For those who are much younger than us that, of course, will 
not be a problem in the future as they’re used to computer, 
computer processes. 
 
If a family has the original land titles paper, of course it’s theirs; 
they can keep it. People who, though, might buy a piece of 
property that perhaps the family member owned a long time ago 
wouldn’t necessarily have access to those pieces of paper, and I 
think we should look into how we might provide that kind of, 
that kind of response to people. 
 
We have many, many very interesting documents from many 
years ago about land in the province, and we should do our best, 
I think, to kind of make people feel good about the property 
they own. And if . . . We’ll certainly deal with it shortly. We’ll 
make sure that ISC spends some time looking at how it can 
address people’s needs for original documentation, and 
documentation today. 
 
Now, if they want . . . if a person wants a piece of paper, they 
can have a piece of paper. And if they feel better about having 
that piece of paper then sure, they should have it, and they can 
get it from their lawyer. But in fact the proof of ownership will 
be in the computer. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister, for those 
responses. And we will give that relatively good news back to 
those that have raised that concern that it’s something that the 
government will look at. And for the most part, I am referring 
to that . . . those people that for sentimental reasons are looking 
for that original document if they can get it. 
 
So we’ll pass that along to them. Thank you for your answers. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Minister, I’d sort of 
like to underline what my colleague just said. I think there’s a 
lot of people, particularly in rural Saskatchewan where you 
have second, third, fourth generation living on the farms, and 
that title has that unique sentimental value that they would like 
to be able to keep. And so I think if you can accommodate that 
it would be very well accepted by a lot of people, especially if 
other copies are also available to those people who may not 
have the farm any more but had some link to that in years gone 
by. 
 
We don’t have a lot of time left, Mr. Minister, but I think we’re 
going to get onto a topic that will probably entertain us for the 
next hour or two. 
 
Back in 1999, there was a promise made of 200 police officers. 
I would like for you to comment on why the number 200 was 
picked. Was that a political choice or was that actually a 
number that came into existence because of need that was 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well it was a promise, as the member 
will know, made in an election campaign, made by the former 
premier to the police association — in fact, police officers from 
across the country — made in response to concerns people have 
had and continue to have about safety and security in their 

communities and about their own personal safety. 
 
And I think, I think there’s . . . well there’s no doubt that this 
government has committed record amounts of money to 
policing, that we have now significant numbers of police 
officers in our communities, more than we had before. That if 
you add up those new police officers provided through 
provincial resources, in other words, if you add up those who 
are in the RCMP who weren’t there before — as a result of our 
renewed commitment to the RCMP as part of that $18 million 
investment extra this year over 1999 — and if you add the 71 
other officers appointed over the last three years, you’ll get 132 
new police officers paid for by the province who weren’t there 
before. 
 
If you add the federal component to that, you have an even 
larger number — the 147 plus the 71. 
 
But I think in the context of policing budgets and the context of 
the fiscal . . . the tight fiscal situation the province is faced with, 
this is a pretty major commitment to policing in the province. 
And we intend to continue that kind of, that kind of 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Minister, I think we’ll 
probably have to get into those specific numbers and see 
whether we, whether we agree on all the numbers and whether 
they total up to what they actually should total to. 
 
But returning back to that number, 200, what do you see as the 
number that are needed just as far as to provide adequate 
policing? 
 
Because if we look across the province today and we look at the 
situations that exist in a lot of our cities where we have the 
dubious record of being the car thief capital of Canada — 
maybe further than that — we’re getting into being the break-in 
capital; we have some of our cities that have major arson 
problems; we look at those sorts of things. 
 
I would like to know exactly what the complement of police 
officers, additional ones, needs to be to deal with those . . . to 
address those correctly. And I would hope that the department 
has looked at that carefully. Because just to say, well we’ll 
throw in five more, maybe that’s all that’s needed; maybe we 
need 505. 
 
So according to research that your department has done, and 
keeping in mind where Saskatchewan was at with crime in a lot 
of those areas that I just mentioned, what number of police 
officers would be required to deal with that adequately and 
effectively? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member I think asks, how many 
police do we need in the province, and do we need more, do we 
need less? 
 
I mean, in general terms we need enough police in order to 
ensure effective policing, effective enforcement of our laws, 
effective crime prevention, and solid kind of community 
restorative justice policing resources. And we know the kinds of 
percentage of time a police officer should be spending on 
community policing work, on working with kids, on doing the 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2002 

 

kinds of preventative work that is necessary to actually see 
crime reduced. 
 
And we also know that the RCMP has a way of assessing, based 
upon population, geography, amount of crime, and so on — it’s 
called STEER (Standards to Ensure Equitable Resources) — 
which assesses the numbers of police needed in order to 
effectively provide those services, that of prevention, 
community policing, and enforcement. 
 
We are pretty much at that level in Saskatchewan regarding the 
RCMP. The municipalities follow slightly different approaches. 
You can see that the police resources in municipalities, this last 
week they’re going up, partly the commitment of the province 
and partly the commitment of the municipalities. 
 
I don’t think you could say exactly we need, you know, one 
number. 
 
Because of our crime rate in the province, because of the 
constant pressure we have on criminal activity, obviously we 
need to ensure that we have the resources in policing we need. 
And we have, I think, been working very hard to ensure that 
those resources are there, both on the RCMP side and on the 
municipal side. 
 
And I might, for example, just say that North Battleford is a 
good example of where crime has been on the increase. The last 
two years we provided one extra police officer for North 
Battleford. And this year, because of the pressure we provided, 
we’ve provided two out of the provincial commitment. 
 
So we constantly try to ensure that those resources are 
available. We listen carefully to the municipalities and to the 
RCMP and to the municipal police chiefs and respond, I think, 
pretty effectively over the last short while. 
 
But this is a constant kind of pressure, a constant issue for us to 
ensure that we have the numbers of police officers we need. 
And like any occupation in our province, we have significant 
numbers of senior police officers at an age where they’re 
beginning to think about retirement and we need to bring new 
police officers in to those police services. 
 
And the member, I think, will be aware, but we, I think, are 
now . . . we are now in our third RCMP Aboriginal cohort at the 
depot here and all of those Aboriginal RCMP new recruits have 
been placed in Saskatchewan. So we also have very large 
numbers now of new RCMP officers who are from . . . who are 
First Nations or Métis, which is another important component 
of addressing the crime challenge in our province because they 
are able to do the restorative work, the community work in a 
different way than others. 
 
So we are, I think, focusing in a multi-faceted way in providing 
these . . . meeting these challenges. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Chair, it seems to be 
that we’ve had a pretty good afternoon, except we finally ended 
up with a question with no answer to it. I think the minister and 
his department needs to be much more specific in this particular 
area. 
 

And in the communities and the concerns that I listed, I didn’t 
even refer to North Battleford and he brought that one up where 
there was a definite increase in crime and a concern for public 
safety. 
 
We had a little incident here some time ago where the 
department was going to address the amount of cars that were 
stolen in Regina and they seemed to have addressed that 
somewhat successfully. But they did it basically by taking a 
certain number of those 30 to 80, however you define it, 
hard-core car thieves and took them off the street. And that 
obviously worked. Now who knows what’s going to happen 
when they show up on the street. We’re not sure, and that’ll be 
interesting to see how well what they are doing in the interim 
works. 
 
But while those particular officers were assigned to taking these 
particular individuals off the street, there were other areas of 
crime that weren’t being addressed. Because while they were 
trying to catch those hard-core car thieves and getting them off 
the streets, the other areas that we already mentioned — 
break-ins, assault, arson — all of those things weren’t being 
addressed. In fact resources were being taken away from there. 
 
So when we have these dismal records in Saskatchewan and I 
ask the question: what numbers would be required to deal with 
that? It is very frightening, Mr. Chairman, to be told by the 
department in the lack of an answer that they really have never 
addressed the question: what would it take to put Saskatchewan 
back where it should be? And that is in a situation where we 
aren’t leaders in cars being stolen, where we’re not leaders in 
assault, where we’re not leaders in arson, where we’re not 
leaders in break-ins in homes. 
 
And surely . . . And I know the minister is probably somewhat 
hesitant in giving out that number because he knows — and yes 
we would — we would want to hold his feet to the fire and say, 
now what are you going to do about it? But we still need that 
answer and surely the minister isn’t going to tell us they haven’t 
thought about that. 
 
They must have thought about it. They must have some 
numbers in place. And my question again is: what numbers are 
needed to bring those rates of those various crimes down in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Because the public security is very 
critical on this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well in the short response to the 
member’s question, in actual fact the member should note that 
the car theft strategy has not only reduced the numbers of car 
thefts in the cities significantly but it has seen also a 
commensurate increase in break and enters, and theft. So there 
appears to be a dampening of crime in the city in general. 
 
The issue about car thefts in the view of the chief of police, 
which I think is quite right, is that there needs to be every effort 
made to make a break in these thefts to ensure that they do get 
back to the national average. And of course we would prefer to 
be even less than that. 
 
But this is a constant challenge for us. We constantly seek 
measures to reduce crime and I think the car theft, in fact, youth 
crime strategy in Regina has been successful. We look forward 



April 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

 

to it continuing to be successful but we’ll need new measures in 
order to make sure that that’s the case. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask for 
leave to move a motion with respect to committees of the 
legislature. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members 
on Standing Committee on Agriculture 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That the names of Ms. Carolyn Jones, Mr. Ron Osika, and 
Mr. David Forbes be substituted for those of Mr. Jim 
Melenchuk, Mr. Clay Serby, and Mr. Mark Wartman on a 
list of members composing the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
introduce two motions dealing with the composition of 
committees with opposition members. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Substitution of Member 
on Standing Committee on Agriculture 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Wayne Elhard be substituted for that of 
Bill Boyd on the Standing Committee for Agriculture. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member 
on Standing Committee on Health 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Arlene Julé be substituted for that of Bill 
Boyd on the Standing Committee of Health. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:02. 
 
 


