















































Hansard: December 16, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2987 
 December 16, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to present a dozen or more petitions on behalf of citizens of 
Hudson Bay and surrounding area who are concerned about the 
lack of long-term care beds in the community of Hudson Bay. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary changes that would allow for an expansion of 
at least five long-term care beds in the community of 
Hudson Bay to meet the needs of the citizens of Hudson 
Bay and the surrounding area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these petitions are all signed by citizens of Hudson Bay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some nine, 
ten pages of names from across the province, including out of 
province, up to Calgary. This petition was originated in the 
community of Hague and then covered the surrounding area and 
most of the towns in that particular area. And it is prefaced on a 
plebiscite that happened earlier on in Saskatchewan and I would 
like to read the prayer. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to commence immediate action 
to ensure that, in future, abortions are not to be considered 
a medically necessary procedure and therefore are to be 
removed from those procedures that are paid through the 
public purse. 

 
On behalf of those citizens, I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from 
constituents concerned about Saskatchewan Crop Insurance and 
what they’ve been doing. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reassess the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers 
in 2002; and further, that the government review the 
definition of viable farming practices as outlined in present 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance policy. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, Lloydminster, and 
Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present more petitions from citizens who are concerned with the 
Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitions are signed by residents of Weyburn, Halbrite, 
Lang, Arcola, Ceylon, Pangman, Big Beaver, Coronach, and 
more from Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the petitions keep 
coming in for a new hospital for southwest Saskatchewan. The 
prayer of these petitioners today reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the southwest 
Saskatchewan communities of Abbey, Success, Admiral, 
McMahon, Cadillac, Val Marie, and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I have a petition from rural residents who are very much 
concerned about the crop insurance premium hikes and 
coverage reductions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the good folks at 
Kincaid and Aneroid. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I continue to receive 
petitions from citizens concerned about the Kyoto accord. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 



2988 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the citizens of Landis and Biggar. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present on behalf of constituents. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
Regional Health Authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Bulyea, Strasbourg, and Glen Harbour. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 18, 32, 165, 169, 437, and 438. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, today it’s my 
pleasure to introduce, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Michele 
Howland, who has been working with us for several years. 
 
Michele Howland, director of reference services at the library, 
has announced her retirement from library work effective 
December 17, 2002, after nearly 14 years of service with the 
Legislative Assembly. Michele first joined the library in 
December 1983 as a sessional cataloguer. Michele also worked 
for the Legislative Assembly Office as Hansard indexer from 
1985 to 1988. 
 
She returned to the Legislative Library in 1993 as acting 
members’ services librarian. Since 1995, she has directed 
reference services for the library. It is Michele and her staff who 
respond so quickly and accurately to members’ request for 
information, often under very short deadlines. Her team and her 
colleagues will miss her special contribution to the library 
service, as will, I’m sure, the members. 
 
With her today also seated, her mother, Ruby Steele, and her 
husband, Gary. 
 
Members, I ask you to join me in wishing Michele well as she 
returns to her family farm. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly Sandra and David Pratt of Love, 
Saskatchewan. Sandra and David are seated in your gallery and 
will be here to observe the proceedings this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Sandra is here today as part of a delegation from SARC, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres. She has 
been on that board of directors for five years and on the board 
of directors of her local organization, Handi-Works in Nipawin, 
for 10 years. David Pratt spent 35 years, Mr. Speaker, as a 
veterinarian in Nipawin. 
 
I would ask Sandra and David to stand so that everyone can 
welcome them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I should like 
to draw your attention and that of the members to a group that 
are seated in your gallery. This is a group of grade 12 students 
from Balfour Collegiate and they’re accompanied here today by 
their teacher, Karen Jackson. 
 
Ms. Jackson always makes sure that her students come to the 
Legislative Assembly to view the proceedings and get an 
opportunity to put questions to their MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly). I appreciate this and I know that 
members also appreciate that kind of attention. So I would ask 
all the members to join with me in extending a warm welcome 
to these students and to Ms. Jackson. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce a 
person seated in your gallery, Mr. Larry Spencer, the MP 
(Member of Parliament) for Regina Qu’Appelle. I’d like to 
welcome him here today — or Regina Lumsden; I’m sorry; I got 
the provincial and the federal mixed up. I’d like to welcome you 
here today, as all members will. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Remarks by David Ahenakew 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I cannot find 
words to adequately describe how appalled and sickened I was 
when I first heard the vile, racist remarks made over the 
weekend by David Ahenakew. 
 
By now I think everyone in Saskatchewan and probably 
everyone in Canada has heard Mr. Ahenakew’s remarks 
regarding the slaughter of millions of innocent people. They are 
not worthy of repeating in this Assembly. What this Assembly 
must do, however, is send a clear message that Saskatchewan 
people condemn all forms of racism, Mr. Ahenakew’s 
disgusting views in particular. 
 
Immediately following question period I will call for an 
emergency debate calling for David Ahenakew to be removed 
as an officer of any organization which has a financial 
relationship with the Government of Saskatchewan, including 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2989 

 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. 
 
This motion will also call on the Government of Canada to 
remove Mr. Ahenakew as a Member of the Order of Canada. 
Canada is a nation of tolerance. It is absolutely unthinkable that 
a person who holds such disgusting racist views should hold our 
nation’s highest honour. It is a particular affront to two groups 
of Canadians: those who survived the Holocaust and those who 
fought and died defending the world from the tyranny and 
genocide of Adolf Hitler. 
 
This Assembly must send a strong message against Mr. 
Ahenakew. I urge all members of this Assembly to support the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Wheat Board Elections 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I rise in the House today, Mr. Speaker, to make 
a statement on the results of the Canadian Wheat Board 
elections to the board of directors that was announced 
yesterday. 
 
It has been long . . . it’s been long this government and party’s 
position that producers themselves must determine the role and 
type of marketing agency that they wish to have. The election 
results reconfirms the producers’ support for the continuation of 
single-desk selling. Four of the five directors elected yesterday 
ran on the platform that they strongly supported the 
continuation of the Canadian Wheat Board monopoly for the 
sale of Prairie wheat and exported barley. 
 
The results of the election should not come as a surprise to 
most. Independent studies have shown an annual benefit for 
producers in the Canadian Wheat Board as a single-desk seller 
to be in the hundreds of millions of dollars annually. 
 
Foreign customers have demonstrated their continued 
willingness to pay a significant premium for consistent 
high-quality product, something that Prairie producers and their 
selling agency, the Canadian Wheat Board, is renowned for 
around the world. 
 
Of the 10 elected board members, eight are strong supporters of 
single-desk selling. The elected Canadian Wheat Board 
directors are accountable to producers and are responsible for 
implementing the changes to the board in response to 
producers’ concerns. 
 
I would like to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party opposite 
does not support the Canadian Wheat Board and is actively 
promoting its destruction. This demonstrates once again how 
offside the Sask Party is in relation to the wishes of our 
province’s farmers. 
 
I wish the new board well as it continues to oversee the 
operations of the Canadian Wheat Board. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Curling National to be Held in Humboldt 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, early in 
2003 the city of Humboldt will be host to some of the finest 
curlers in the country, and even the world. The National, one of 
four events on the World Curling Tour’s Grand Slam of Curling 
will be in our city with four days of superb curling from 
January 30 on through to February 2, 2003. 
 
This event brings with it some of the finest curlers in the world, 
including Olympic silver medallist, Kevin Martin of Alberta; 
Manitoba’s Jeff Stoughton; defending champ, Ontario’s Glenn 
Howard; and Saskatchewan’s own Bruce Korte. In total 18 
teams will be competing for a prize worth $100,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great event that Humboldt will be hosting 
and will require many volunteers, but that won’t be a problem 
for the people of Humboldt who have always come through 
with their great spirit of hospitality. 
 
So ladies and gentlemen, I ask you to mark your calendars and 
come and enjoy fine curling in Humboldt, January 30 through 
to February 2. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bursaries for Health Professionals 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More than 250 
Saskatchewan students from 53 different provincial 
communities have been awarded bursaries in exchange for their 
commitment to work in Saskatchewan. Our government is 
devoting $3.8 million this year to support return service bursary 
programs in the health field and an additional 800,000 to 
bursary programs as part of our retention and recruitment 
strategy outlined in the action plan for Saskatchewan health 
care. 
 
The bursaries range from 2,500 to 7,000 per year for nursing 
and health sciences students and provide 25,000 per year for 
medical students. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Keeping and attracting health care professionals are top 
priorities of our government. With this in mind, I am very 
pleased to recognize the students who have received bursaries 
to help them pursue careers as health professionals. We can all 
be proud of them for their commitment to health care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Bursaries have been awarded to Saskatchewan students in 
registered nursing, registered psychiatric nursing, licensed 
practical nursing, and primary care nursing. More than 60 
bursaries have been awarded to Saskatchewan students studying 
to be: nuclear medicine technologists; pharmacists; medical 
radiation and medical laboratory technologists; public health 
inspectors; clinical psychologists; physical, occupational, and 
respiratory therapists; speech language pathologists; and 
emergency medical technicians. 
 
These bursaries are provided throughout the students’ education 
program with a service commitment to work in the province’s 



2990 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

publicly funded health system upon graduation. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a working plan to fulfill the need for more health 
professionals and provide a rewarding career for young people. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legislative Library Staff Member Retires 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
many of us know, one of the very dedicated Legislative Library 
staff is retiring today. After more than a decade here at the 
legislature, Michele Howland has decided to return to work 
with her husband and son on the family farm. We also 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that Michele’s son is preparing to set 
up a market garden business and she’s very excited about 
helping out on that project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Michele’s dedication to the public sector, 
specifically her work in the Legislative Library department, is 
commendable. In fact her period of service with the Legislative 
Assembly spans more than 13 years. Since 1993 she has been 
reference service librarian, acting members’ service librarian, 
and more recently director of reference services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember my first day here as an MLA and how 
Michele encouraged me and my colleagues to use the library to 
help us out in our duties. We all respect her dedication to the 
work we do for the people of this province. Michele’s practical 
knowledge and expertise proved invaluable to members and 
staff throughout the years. 
 
Michele says that she will not only miss the people here, Mr. 
Speaker, but she’ll miss the symbolic and historic building that 
we are all privileged to work in. She believes we must never 
take the work we do for granted and I’m sure that there are 
those inside and outside the House today who couldn’t agree 
more. 
 
Michele, good luck and thanks for everything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Remarks by David Ahenakew 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in words 
as plain and unambiguous as I can make them, I wanted to state 
my personal dismay and complete rejection of the statements 
made on the weekend by David Ahenakew. I speak with the 
support of all my colleagues on this side of the House and of the 
New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. I also believe that all 
thinking people of every political and religious persuasion and 
of every race . . . our abhorrence at these remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was not a slip of the tongue. David Ahenakew 
clarified his remarks less than he misunderstood. They were not 
the creation of the media. The responsibility for these beliefs 
lies solely with one person — the person who said them. The 
responsibility for repudiating them lies with all of us, especially 
those in position of public trust. 
 
It is not enough to say that this is just one man’s opinion or that 

his rant was, quote, “nothing to do with me.” No, Mr. Speaker. 
When race hatred appears against any group, propagated by any 
person, it is everyone’s public duty to speak out plainly and 
unambiguously. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thank You from the Peters Family 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the weekend Mrs. Shirley Peters phoned me and asked me 
to pass on her many thanks and appreciation to all members of 
the Legislative Assembly, not only since Rudi’s passing but 
also during Rudi’s illness. Shirley wanted to remind us of how 
much Rudi appreciated caucus and staff’s help in carrying out 
his duties and taking up any slack when he was unable to attend 
to his duties as a member of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Shirley and her family and, if I might add, the whole 
community of Rabbit Lake and district are deeply touched by 
the attendance of the Saskatchewan Party caucus and 
representatives of the NDP and Liberal caucus at Rudi’s 
funeral. 
 
The offering of roses at the funeral and the formation of the 
honour guard at the gravesite was a special moment for Shirley 
and the Peters family, and, as Shirley pointed out later, a 
gesture that Rudi would have been very proud of. 
 
The Peters family will cherish forever the wonderful words 
spoke of Rudi made during the condolence motion on last 
Monday’s proceedings. They would also like to thank the 
Legislative Assembly for the tape of the proceedings and the 
tributes made to Rudi, and also for the wonderful flower 
arrangement placed on Rudi’s desk in the Assembly. 
 
Shirley is blessed with a very close family and many wonderful 
friends. She will be spending Christmas with her family in 
Alberta. 
 
Shirley would once again like to thank you for your kindness 
and wish you and your families a very merry Christmas and a 
happy new year. Please join me in wishing Shirley and the 
Peters family a merry Christmas and a happy new year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Medical and Nursing Education in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Health. Mr. 
Speaker, the College of Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan is in danger of losing its accreditation with the 
Association of Canadian Medical Colleges. The college has 
been placed on probation and given two years to make 
improvements to its staffing levels, its library, and curriculum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke to several medical doctors and members 
of the college over the weekend who stressed that this situation 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2991 

 

is very, very serious and that chronic underfunding of the 
college is to blame. In fact, one of the NDP’s (New Democratic 
Party) own cabinet minister, the Minister of Learning, told CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio that indeed the 
college has been underfunded for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this NDP government underfunded 
Saskatchewan’s College of Medicine to the point that it is 
failing to meet national accreditation standards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the recent 
accreditation review which was done in April of this year 
indicates that there were a number of deficiencies within the 
College of Medicine that needed to be rectified. 
 
I’ve recently had conversations not only with my department 
officials but also with the president of the University of 
Saskatchewan and they have indicated to me that in January 
they will be prepared to provide recommendations to the 
government with regard to the College of Medicine. And as I’ve 
indicated to the president and to the public, we will be strongly 
supporting whatever initiatives are required to make sure we 
have a viable, sustainable College of Medicine in the province 
of Saskatchewan for years and years to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
where has this government been for the last 10 years? Mr. 
Speaker, this didn’t just happen out of the blue. This situation 
has just not developed in isolation. Mr. Speaker, the 
Department of Health and the Minister of Health should have 
known about this situation for the last number of years because 
this situation has not occurred since this accreditation review 
has been undertaken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting for the Minister of Learning to 
stand in this House and make the commitment that they’re 
going to be willing to look at a proposal from the university. 
 
Where have they been? Or is it constantly going to be the case 
that we have to wait for a crisis to develop before anything 
positive is going to happen by this government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m interested in what the Minister of Learning 
has to say, but where is the Minister of Health on this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we see from the 
member from Melfort the self-righteous, pompous attitude that 
he has, let me point . . . let me point out, Mr. Speaker, what this 
government has done. 
 
We have just recently signed a university funding mechanism 
that has increased the dollars, increased the dollars to the 
College of Medicine. Every year since we have been in this 
coalition government we have added dollars to the university. 
We have added dollars to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at 
the funding increases that we have provided from the 
Department of Learning and from the Department of Health the 
last three budgets, we have significantly increased our funding. 
 
And I recognize that we have had Kerr-White, and we have had 
DesRosiers, and we have had Mr. Glynn, and we have had a 
number of reports all indicating that we needed to fund the 
College of Medicine better. And we have added additional 
dollars every year for the last three years, and if we have to do 
more we will do more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t really appreciate or need an attitude adjustment from the 
Minister of Learning, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not only 
the College of Medicine that’s being neglected by this 
government and by its attitude, Mr. Speaker. The College of 
Nursing is also in . . . facing great deal of difficulty because of 
this government’s inaction in regard to the quality and quantity 
of nurses in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s recently been released a nurses . . . a 
Canadian nurses advisory committee report that says that there 
has to be serious increases in the number of educational seats 
for the College of Nursing in this province. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
not only chronic underfunding of the College of Medicine that 
is responsible . . . responsibility of the chronic shortage of 
health care professionals, it’s also a failure of this government 
to recognize the dramatic need for an increase in the number of 
educational seats for the College of Nursing. 
 
Will the government support the advisory committee’s report to 
increase the number of educational seats for nursing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 
and I have recently met with the Association of Licensed 
Practical Nurses. We have also met with nursing stakeholders in 
the recent past. 
 
We have increased the number of positions through the NEPS 
(Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan) program in 
Saskatchewan. We have added additional nurses through our 
northern nursing program. We have also increased the number 
of positions available to licensed practical nurses, and we are 
considering actually looking at a core program in Saskatoon to 
add further spaces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So our commitment is to make sure that we do meet the training 
requirements. We have increased the number of nurses in 
Saskatchewan in the past two years and we look at increasing 
these positions even more in the future. 
 
But I might add, Mr. Speaker, that when they froze funding to 
Education and Health it was a double whammy on training in 
this province and they should be ashamed of themselves, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2992 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this government and this 
minister obviously doesn’t understand simple facts. We have 
600 nursing positions unfilled in this province. Over the next 10 
years we’re going to lose, on average, 400 nurses due to 
retirement each and every year. And yet this government would 
try to tell us that 260 education seats is going to address that 
reality. You do the math, Mr. Speaker — it simply doesn’t add 
up. 
 
And this government pretends that it has an action plan. This 
government is going to get us into the worst health care crisis 
that has ever faced this province. They’re already responsible 
for the longest strike in Saskatchewan’s history. They’re 
already responsible for the longest waiting lists in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will they understand that they have to think 
forwardly instead of dealing with just crisis management? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again we see the 
posturing and slogans from the members opposite. This 
government concerns itself with action and we have a record 
that we’re proud of. 
 
We have increased nursing positions in the licensed practical 
nurses. We have increased nursing positions with regard to 
registered nurses. We have promised to look at expanding 
programs at both SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) and the university in the near future, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I must remind the members opposite that when they laid 
out their platform, when they got their little heads together last 
time we had an election, Mr. Speaker, they said we were going 
to freeze funding in education, freeze funding in health, Mr. 
Speaker. And guess what that means? No new nursing 
positions, no new training positions — a dismal effort by the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are also for the 
Minister of Education, slash Health. When the province signed 
a new three-year contract with teachers earlier this year, the 
government committed to fully compensate the school boards 
for the increased cost of the teachers’ salary for the four-month 
period from September through December. However, school 
boards and school trustees are gravely concerned that this 
government has not yet committed to covering the increased 
salary costs for the period from January 1 to the end of the 
contract in 2004. 
 
What the school boards don’t want is a self-righteous and 
pompous reply from the minister. What they want is a 
commitment that the provincial government will cover the 
increased salary costs . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Would the member repeat her last sentence, please, and 

continue. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Ms. Draude: — School boards . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Would the members . . . Order. 
Order. Would the members allow her to continue. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what the school boards want is 
this minister to commit to covering the increased salary costs 
associated with the new teachers’ contract right through to 
2004. Will he do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate 
the lively question from the member opposite. I would like to 
indicate that I think this is day 84 of this current session, and 
the number of questions on education have been few and far 
between, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at our promise with regard to the most recent 
teachers’ collective bargaining agreement — and I must say a 
successfully completed agreement, Mr. Speaker; the 
negotiations went very well — we did promise that we would 
cover the calendar year costs this year. And we have done that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have also indicated that in future years, meaning this 
upcoming calendar year and the subsequent calendar year, that 
we would put that into the budget mix. And I’m sure, Mr. 
Speaker, that when we have had a good chance to analyze this 
as part of our budgetary process, that we will be meeting those 
demands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we really want 
is a commitment — a true commitment from this government. 
The NDP is playing Russian roulette with school divisions and 
property tax payers across this province. School boards need to 
know today whether the NDP government is going to honour its 
commitments. 
 
The choice for school boards is simple: if the NDP doesn’t 
cover the increased cost for the teachers’ salaries, then the 
taxpayers of this province is going to have to pick up that bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP had no problem blowing $88 million on 
our land titles system that didn’t work. They had no problem 
losing $28 million in the potato business. They had no problem 
spending $80 to build a cellular phone service in Australia. But 
the NDP will not show the same sort of commitment to the 
children of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to fully funding the 
increase of salaries for the teachers in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had bi-level 
bargaining in this province since the early 1970s and every year 
that we’ve had a negotiated teachers’ contract, the government 
has considered, and in most circumstances — in fact, if not all 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2993 

 

circumstances — they have helped cover the cost of those 
increased teachers’ salaries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I will say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we have covered the cost for this calendar year. We are looking 
at covering the costs for subsequent years. That is part of the 
budget mix. 
 
And I must indicate that this is the same message I gave to the 
school trustees during the last negotiation. And I must indicate 
also that in the last negotiation, not only did the trustees sign, 
the government signed — all members, all parties at the 
provincial table signed that agreement. We believe it is a very 
good agreement and we look . . . we are looking very carefully 
at covering those costs in the near future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, looking at this answer to the 
question isn’t good enough. They have to commit to covering 
the costs. While the NDP is stalling on the commitment to fully 
fund the teachers’ contract, the government is also hiding debt 
by moving it from the books of the province to the books of the 
school divisions. 
 
According to the Saskatoon Public School Division, the NDP’s 
latest Crown corporation, the Education Infrastructure 
Financing Corporation, results in more Enron-style accounting. 
This new Crown corporation shifts debt for the construction of 
new capital projects from the province’s General Revenue Fund 
to the school divisions. 
 
According to the Provincial Auditor, and I quote: 
 

The net effect of the creation of this corporation on the 
2002-2003 budget is to remove the budgetary expenditures 
relating to capital financing from the annual surplus or 
deficit. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP using what the Saskatoon Public 
School Division calls Enron-style accounting by funding K to 
12 capital projects through the transfer of debt from the 
province to the school divisions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I think if the public, 
Saskatoon public board of education has some concerns with 
how capital dollars are provided to school divisions in this 
province, they should probably take that up with their parent 
organization, the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association). 
 
Because we . . . when we budgeted for capital in this most 
recent budget, we actually talked to the SSTA, we talked to the 
universities, we talked to education stakeholders, and they all 
agreed with that process, Mr. Speaker. Now at the 11th hour we 
find that one board of education has a difference of opinion. 
 
The reality of the day, Mr. Speaker, that with regards to the 
EIFC (Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation), we 
incorporated in last year’s budgeting. We are reviewing that 
again for this upcoming budget and we’ll decide at that point in 

time whether we continue the EIFC program or not, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I must indicate that no matter how you look at it, we have 
provided additional dollars to school capital — 24 million to 40 
million. And I know there would not have been one penny 
coming from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the school divisions are saying 
that the NDP’s new approach to funding K to 12 capital projects 
will devastate school boards’ financial positions and severely 
compromise the ability of the school divisions to borrow for 
capital projects. 
 
According to the Saskatoon Public School Division, I quote: 
 

“If Enron has taught us anything it’s that boards must be 
vigilant in safeguarding the integrity of accounting and 
financial procedures . . . This new procedure allows the 
provincial government to download debt onto local school 
divisions.” 

 
The Saskatoon school board also says there needs to be a bright 
light shone on what they call the questionable financial 
procedures by this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government using questionable 
financial procedures that includes hiding government deficits 
while adding debts to school divisions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we discussed the 
estimates for the Department of Learning in the most recent 
budget, these questions were asked by the member opposite. 
They were asked by the critic for post-secondary. And we 
provided the answers. 
 
And at that day of the budget speech, the Minister of Finance 
clearly indicated and also identified on what page the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation would be located, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we are not hiding debt. In fact, we have laid it out in our 
estimates. We have indicated that we created the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation so we could provide 
additional dollars for capital construction in this province. And 
we provided $90 million for the sector this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only that, when we agreed to fund . . . agreed to the 
funding of the EIFC, we indicated there would be a contract 
between division boards, the EIFC, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan. We will cover the principal and the interest, and 
we record this as debt on our books, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Participation in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
some questions regarding the government’s relationship 



2994 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

through SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) and a company called Microgro in Biggar, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that Microgro nor its 
former principals are involved in any pending or current 
lawsuits with the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, among other things, this company Microgro is in 
the business of research and development in terms of 
greenhouse, specialty greenhouse projects, and also the 
development of nuclear potato seeds. 
 
To a large extent at the encouragement of SPUDCO, Microgro 
developed a long-term relationship to supply SPUDCO with 
seed. As a part of that agreement, SPUDCO agreed to a rolling 
agreement over four years with Microgro and a schedule of 
payments from SPUDCO to Microgro — those payments 
totalling about $400,000. But in the fall of ’98, SPUDCO 
significantly slowed the payments to Microgro. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell the House why SPUDCO 
purposely slowed down its payments to Microgro? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was on my feet last 
week and I appreciate getting back into the debate again, Mr. 
Speaker, because the members opposite last week talked a lot 
about how in fact the industry in that part of the province has 
not been growing. 
 
And today the member from Swift Current talks about how in 
fact the seed potato industry is growing, Mr. Speaker. And 
absolutely, the seed potato industry, Mr. Speaker, is growing. 
And why is the seed potato industry growing in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker? Because on this side of the House, these members 
and this government invest, Mr. Speaker, in the growing of 
Saskatchewan. That’s why it happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so as we’re putting money into growing rural 
Saskatchewan and developing rural Saskatchewan, those 
members, Mr. Speaker, get together at a convention and what 
do they talk about? They talk about, Mr. Speaker, about how to 
play-act and they talk about drama classes, Mr. Speaker, and 
they talk about how they should be theatrical across the 
province. And so while they’re busy, Mr. Speaker, enrolled in 
drama classes at their convention, we’re busy talking about 
policy to grow rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this matter 
. . . this matter is not before the courts. The government has an 
obligation and a responsibility to answer all of these questions 
and it can’t hide behind the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has a confidential memo 
that came from the acting president of Sask Water to the board. 
The memo highlights a strategy for renegotiating its seed 
contract with Microgro. The strategy, according to the memo, 
was authorized directly by the minister responsible, the current 
minister for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) in September of 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the memo lays out a five-point strategy and here’s 
the third point. Quote: 
 

Create some financial expediency for Microgro through 
impacting their cash flow. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the question is this. It appears that any objective 
reading of the NDP strategy would suggest that the minister 
authorized a plan to sabotage this company to free the 
government of its obligations to that company. To the minister: 
will he clarify for the House why he authorized SPUDCO to 
cause financial problems for Microgro? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on Friday the member 
from Swift Current stood on his feet and he said in a very quiet, 
soft fashion, in the way he practised over the convention, and he 
said, you know what, Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very serious 
debate. That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. This is a very serious 
debate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely a very serious debate. This 
debate is about who is developing and growing and investing in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this debate is about, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it talks about, Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations of this 
province investing in Saskatchewan across the piece — whether 
it’s in hog barns, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s in ethanol, Mr. 
Speaker, or whether in fact it’s been in potatoes, Mr. Speaker. 
This government is about making a difference in Saskatchewan 
rural development and it’s about making an investment in 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And when that member stands on his feet in a theatrical fashion 
and says that Saskatchewan people have in fact invested in a 
boondoggle, I say to the member opposite that you and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d like the member to take note 
that I first cut off the mike on his last sentence the minute he 
started talking to the opposition directly and not through the 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this question is for the Premier. Mr. 
Speaker, last week we found out that in this Premier’s cabinet 
you can’t get fired for not telling the truth to your cabinet 
colleagues; you can’t get fired for recommending that they pour 
more millions of dollars in to cover up the original fact that you 
didn’t tell the truth; you can’t get fired if you waste or lose 28 
million taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker; you can’t get fired if 
you go around your government’s own tendering policies, Mr. 
Speaker; you can’t get fired if you try . . . if you set out to fool 
our international trading partners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question for the Premier is this today. Will he commit that 
if his minister of Sask Water then, the current Minister of CIC, 
authorized a plan to financially harm another private 
Saskatchewan business as a way to get SPUDCO out of its 
long-term financial commitments to that company, if that is 
true, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier stand today and say that that 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2995 

 

minister will be fired? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I listened carefully to the 
member opposite over the last couple of days and again today, 
where he talks, Mr. Speaker, about how in fact this province has 
not been credible in the work that it’s been doing for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you need to demonstrate 
where your credibility is as an opposition. You need to talk . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would invite the Minister of 
Agriculture to take all his remarks, make all his remarks 
through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, they need to talk about their 
credibility as an opposition because our plan about growing 
rural Saskatchewan and growing Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 
clear. 
 
You just need to take a look at the investment that we’ve made 
in the royalty piece, Mr. Speaker, for the oil and gas industry in 
this province. Mr. Speaker, you just need to take a look at 
what’s happened in the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan today, 
Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan. And you need to just take a 
look, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening on the manufacturing and 
processing tax reductions that have occurred in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. And who’s been providing the leadership for that, 
Mr. Speaker? The Premier and the minister responsible for 
economic development in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Saskatchewan people on a daily basis congratulate the 
government for this work and don’t know who the opposition in 
Saskatchewan are, Mr. Speaker — don’t know who they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, through you to the Deputy Premier, that the people of 
this province know full well who the opposition is. It’s the 
government in waiting because of answers like that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the memo that we’ve been talking about, an 
internal government memo. Mr. Speaker, it says that: 
 

A proposed negotiation strategy (with respect to Microgro) 
was presented to the (I’m quoting) to the Honourable 
Maynard Sonntag, Chairman and Minister Responsible on 
September 18th. 

 
It was approved on September 21, 1998. 
 
And what does that strategy say, Mr. Speaker, that . . . it 
recommends that the government, the NDP government create 
some financial expediency for Microgro through impacting the 
cash flow. We know from talking to the principals that right 
about this time SPUDCO stopped paying their bills to this 
company, or slowed them down. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if it’s true that the minister directed his 
officials to interfere in a private company by slowing down 
payments so the company would go bankrupt and they wouldn’t 
have to pay them — if that’s true, Mr. Speaker, will the Premier 
stand in his place today and say that that minister will be fired? 
Or will he leave it to the Saskatchewan people who most 
assuredly will fire all of the ministers over there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
members on my House don’t give me that kind of applause 
when I stand up. I appreciate that. 
 
I want to say . . . I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to start with, this 
member and that group of men and women on that side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, will be waiting a long time before they’ll 
be a government in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And I say to the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, you say that you have a plan and that you have a 
public policy, Mr. Speaker, and what are they? When you ask 
them about what’s your plan on education, they say, we’re 
going to cut the tax. When you say to them, what’s your plan on 
social services, they’re going to say, we’re going to cut the tax 
and take $50 million out of the pool. When you say, what are 
you going to do about rural Saskatchewan, they’re going to say, 
we’re going to cut the tax. When you say to them, what are you 
going to do when it’s time, Mr. Speaker, to build the roads, well 
we’re going to cut the tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government and . . . this opposition party, Mr. Speaker, are 
a smorgasbord of non-thinkers from every party across Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, and they have no idea about what government will 
be and will be lucky if they get back as opposition members, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Changes in Personal Income Tax 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today I am happy 
to announce good news for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In just over two weeks the fourth 
instalment of personal income tax reform will take effect. Mr. 
Speaker, tax rates will decrease and the tax brackets are being 
adjusted. Both of these measures will lower income tax for all 
Saskatchewan income tax payers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the only province with the 
universal child tax credit. On January 1 this credit will increase 
from $2,000 to $2,500, providing families with dependent 
children a further tax savings. 
 



2996 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

The value of our supplementary seniors credit will increase to 
$1,000. All senior citizens who pay income tax will receive a 
benefit and pay lower taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These changes will save Saskatchewan people $78 million in 
the 2003 calendar year alone. Mr. Speaker, on January 1, our 
government’s commitment to reduce taxes for the average 
Saskatchewan people . . . family by $1,000 will be fulfilled. 
 
Over 50,000 low-income individuals will have been removed 
altogether from the provincial income tax rolls. 
 
Our income tax system is now fairer, it is simpler, and it is more 
competitive than before. And the changes don’t end this 
January 1, Mr. Speaker. Starting on January 1, 2004, all tax 
brackets and credits will be indexed to the rate of inflation for 
that year and into the future. Full indexation will ensure that our 
system remains fair and competitive in the years to come. 
 
Income tax reform is one key component of our plan to make 
Saskatchewan a better place to live. The commitment was made 
and it has been kept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to respond to the ministerial statement 
on behalf of the official opposition, the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that the comments made by the 
minister today — and for all people in Saskatchewan to 
understand this — these were the exact same comments made 
in a document by the minister dated March 29, 2000. So he’s 
repeating material that was contained in a document that he 
released on March 29, 2000 — no new ideas. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party had a plan in 
1999 to cut taxes. Personal income taxes had to be addressed. 
That government, that NDP Party, said that could not be done. 
Mr. Speaker, we continued to push for that and we were pleased 
by the Minister of Finance’s three-year program to reduce taxes. 
We believe that tax reduction is essential. 
 
And you know the surprising thing, Mr. Minister, is that back 
on November 15, 16, 17 at the NDP convention, it’s my 
understanding that they debated the ability to not proceed with 
these tax reforms. So while I want to applaud the minister for 
sticking to his guns and ensuring that the party did not change 
his plan, it’s important to note that his last words, “and it has 
been kept” because this government has not kept many, many 
promises to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from North Battleford on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — By leave to respond. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleagues. As the opposition critic has referred, this was first 

announced in the spring budget of 2000 and I am pleased that in 
fact the latest instalment of tax reform is to proceed. That is 
good news. We had feared that the tax reform would not 
proceed as scheduled. We all know that a competitive tax level 
is essential if we are going to attract investment and people, and 
I’m pleased that that is going to happen. 
 
I was not as happy that the Minister of Finance did not give his 
commitment that this instalment in tax reform is not being 
accomplished through increased government debt. It has often 
been observed that government debt is delayed taxation. So 
while I am happy that the tax reform and the competitive 
income tax level is to proceed as announced three years ago, it 
would be an even better day for this province if the Minister of 
Finance would give his commitment that tax reform is not 
going to be at the expense of increasing public debt. 
 

Safe Driver Recognition Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am proud to rise today to talk about the success of SGI’s 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) Safe Driver Recognition 
program. 
 
The program was introduced in July of this year to reward safe 
drivers with a discount on their vehicle insurance while also 
ensuring drivers who display risky behaviour pay their fair 
share in financial penalties. Simply put, the safer you’ve driven, 
the more likely you will receive a discount. 
 
And I’m also happy to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the majority 
of Saskatchewan motorists are safe drivers. In fact, two out of 
three Saskatchewan vehicle owners are currently receiving 
some level of discount on their insurance under Safe Driver 
Recognition in 2003. That’s about 350,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatchewan. 
 
More incredible is that around 38 per cent of the vehicle owners 
in the province qualify for the maximum discount available. 
And, Mr. Speaker, effective January 1, 2003, SGI is increasing 
the maximum discount under Safe Driver Recognition from 7 to 
8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In all, this means safe drivers will 
receive a total of about $20 million in discounts in 2003. Mr. 
Speaker, that is something that we should all celebrate. Equally 
impressive, Mr. Speaker, is that while rates are dramatically 
increasing across the country, SGI has found a way to introduce 
Safe Driver Recognition with no general increase in 2001 and 
2002 to its auto insurance premium. This is a testament to the 
strength and efficiency of this province’s basic auto insurance 
provider. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we have consistently 
had amongst the very lowest auto insurance premiums in the 
entire country. 
 
When Safe Driver Recognition was first introduced, SGI 
committed to grow the maximum discount as it could afford to 
do so. Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate SGI for putting 
more money into the pockets of safe drivers in Saskatchewan. 
I’d like to also commend SGI for responding to its customers 
and rewarding the motorists who have kept our streets and 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2997 

 

roadways safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through a formal customer feedback campaign last 
year, SGI directly asked its customers how SGI could serve 
them better. The results were clear, Mr. Speaker. Customers 
told SGI their number one desire was for good drivers to 
receive discounts on their vehicle insurance premiums. SGI 
responded and continues to respond with the recent expansion 
of the program to vehicle co-owners. Beginning this December 
and retroactive to last July, individuals who co-own private or 
farm passenger vehicles are eligible to receive discounts on 
their vehicle insurance under the Safe Driver Recognition 
program. 
 
To meet its commitment of including co-owners in the program, 
SGI manually reviewed each and every one of the 22,000 
co-owner registrants. That process was completed earlier this 
fall and co-owners are now benefiting from discounts under the 
program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, SGI is also spending . . . is also sending, I 
should say, pro-rated refunds to those customers who renewed 
their co-owner registration since the program was introduced on 
July 1, 2002. This is yet another example of SGI listening to its 
customers. 
 
And I’m happy to report that SGI isn’t resting on its laurels, Mr. 
Speaker. SGI is currently working on a program for the 
remaining 30 per cent . . . 30 per cent of vehicles, primarily 
commercial vehicles, and we plan to introduce that program 
some time in 2003. 
 
Consistently offering Saskatchewan vehicle owners among the 
lowest auto insurance premiums in the country, SGI promises to 
keep its ear open to the needs and desires of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI’s Safe Driver Recognition program is a huge 
success story that will continue to benefit the citizens of this 
province for years to come. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
respond on behalf of the official opposition to the ministerial 
statement by the minister responsible for SGI. And I think it’s 
fair to say that we characterize this as a positive statement by 
the minister and a positive development for this program. 
 
When it was first announced, I think the official opposition 
indicated that the principles at work here were certainly 
something that we would support. We also heard as the minister 
highlighted, several people, a number of groups in the province 
calling for some system that would reward and provide 
incentive for good drivers in the province. 
 
That being said, when the program was outlined we also noted 
that there was some . . . several problems with the program that 
arguably could have been dealt with prior to the rollout. The 
minister has highlighted some of them. Specifically the 
co-owner issue was one we heard a lot about from people and 
we raised with the minister in terms of letters and raised directly 
with Mr. Fogg at the Crown Corporations Committee meeting 

about three weeks ago here at the legislature. 
 
And so we congratulate the government for acting on the 
concerns of Saskatchewan people and whatever role we were 
able to play in that . . . we certainly are hopeful that we did help 
in that regard. 
 
And you know, there are some 30 per cent of drivers who still 
aren’t covered. The minister’s statement highlighted that as well 
and these are issues that again we’ve brought forward to the 
government in the context of both companies, commercial 
fleets, but also on a more practical level on the part of many 
Hutterite colonies who have the problem, Mr. Speaker, with 
many members of the colony driving the vehicles and how does 
the program work for them. And I understand from the 
minister’s statement that the corporation continues to work for 
those kinds of situations, as well as the situation governing 
commercial fleets. 
 
(14:30) 
 
So overall, I think we would say that this is a positive step. We 
wish the government perhaps would have addressed more of 
these issues prior to rolling it out so they wouldn’t have to be 
playing catch-up. But that being said, they are catching up and 
they are addressing these and we encourage them in that effort. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I stand under rule 46 to 
move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state the nature of the 
motion? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Remarks by David Ahenakew 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the 
weekend, a statement was made by a prominent Saskatchewan 
citizen that was racist in nature to a degree unprecedented in 
recent times and perhaps in our province’s history. Thankfully 
this statement was only made by one individual, but the impact 
has been felt not only within the boundaries of Saskatchewan 
but across Canada and I understand even beyond our borders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel it is absolutely essential that this Assembly 
rise and state in the strongest terms that those types of racist 
comments are totally unacceptable and that this Assembly stand 
strongly in opposition and is prepared to be not only on the 
record, but prepared to take action to deal with this type of 
horrible . . . these horrible statements. Mr. Speaker, it is on this 
basis that I call for this motion to be accepted. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 14 years or 
more of political involvement in Saskatchewan, I have never 
felt so sick to my stomach as I felt when I heard the statements 
of David Ahenakew with regards to the Holocaust, with regards 
to the actions of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany, with a defence 



2998 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

of some of the most reprehensible actions ever seen on the 
globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that these are the comments of one man. 
And as I mentioned in my preliminary comments, thankfully 
only one person has espoused this horrible point of view, in fact 
acknowledging or trying to claim that the Holocaust was a 
justifiable action. All thinking, responsible people in 
Saskatchewan recognize that this is an atrocity, this statement is 
an atrocity, and it is in fact totally unacceptable to the people of 
this province and to the nation of Canada. 
 
Mr. Ahenakew has held several leadership positions in 
Saskatchewan and nationally. He is a past chief of FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations). He was the past 
chief of the Assembly of First Nations. And thankfully many 
spokespersons from these organizations have spoken out in 
clear terms against the comments made by David Ahenakew. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party invites the government . . . and we 
have talked with the government about making a strong 
statement in opposition to racism in Saskatchewan. And for the 
benefit of not only the government, members on the 
government side, but all of the people of Saskatchewan, I’d like 
to read the motion and then just make a few more comments 
before introducing it. 
 
And so we would be moving: 
 

That this Assembly condemns all forms of racism in the 
form of words or images which promote racial hatred or in 
actions which threaten the safety and security of any single 
group; and 
 
That this Assembly condemns the vile, racist remarks of 
David Ahenakew regarding the Holocaust; and 
 
That this Assembly calls for the removal of David 
Ahenakew from any executive position with any 
organization with which the Government of Saskatchewan 
has a financial relationship, including the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College; and 
 
That this Assembly calls on the Government of Canada to 
remove David Ahenakew as a Member of the Order of 
Canada. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that even while we have 
met in the legislature that the federation of . . . the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College has suspended Mr. 
Ahenakew from its board of governors. We applaud this move 
and we suggest by supporting this motion that that would be a 
permanent situation. 
 
We want to very much express our appreciation to many First 
Nations leaders such as Gary Merasty, who has spoken out very 
clearly against the racist comments of David Ahenakew. Gary 
Merasty, the Prince Albert Grand Council chief, said this really 
. . . and I quote: 
 

This really puts a black eye and leaks poison into the 
relations between all people in Saskatchewan.  

We heartily concur with Gary Merasty’s remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regard to the . . . Mr. Ahenakew’s position in 
the senate of FSIN, we understand that there is some movement 
afoot that he would be removed as Chair. But we believe that 
the Assembly needs to pass this motion to make it clear that any 
position within the FSIN is totally unacceptable in light of the 
horrible remarks made by Mr. David Ahenakew. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the fact that Mr. 
Ahenakew is a Member of the Order of Canada, that we 
recognize that it goes beyond the jurisdiction of Saskatchewan 
to actually take the order away from Mr. Ahenakew, but we 
know that on a regular basis the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan gives advice — and very pointed advice — to the 
federal government. And again, I believe in light of the racist 
remarks made by David Ahenakew that it is incumbent upon 
this Assembly to make it clear in no uncertain terms to the 
Government of Canada that we support them taking the action 
of removing Mr. Ahenakew’s name from that of many 
outstanding citizens of this country who certainly do deserve 
the Order of Canada. 
 
We do not want to trod on the dignity of the hundreds of the 
people who have deservedly received the Order of Canada by 
allowing Mr. Ahenakew to remain a part of that esteemed group 
of Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it breaks our hearts when we see any form of 
racism, and I’ve seen manifestations from different parts of the 
country over the years that I’ve been involved in public life. It 
always hurts us inside because we recognize the value and the 
importance of every person on this globe and certainly every 
citizen of Canada and every resident of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot abrogate our responsibility to speak out 
in the loudest terms and the strongest terms when we see any 
form of racism raise its ugly head. But as I’ve said, Mr. 
Speaker, this is the worst case that I ever remember ever 
hearing of in my entire lifetime, Mr. Speaker. Therefore I would 
move, seconded by the member from Rosthern: 
 

That this Assembly condemns all forms of racism in the 
form of words or images which promote racial hatred or in 
actions which threaten the safety and security of any single 
group; and 
 
That this Assembly condemns the vile, racist remarks of 
David Ahenakew regarding the Holocaust; and 
 
That this Assembly calls for the removal of David 
Ahenakew from any executive position with any 
organization with which the Government of Saskatchewan 
has a financial relationship, including the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College; and 
 
That this Assembly calls on the Government of Canada to 
remove David Ahenakew as a Member of the Order of 
Canada. 

 
I so move. 
 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2999 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to respond to the motion by the member opposite. 
 
Just last week, Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly joined 
together to celebrate Human Rights Day in Saskatchewan. We 
were reminded of the reasons the United Nations General 
Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
in 1948. We were reminded that the world stood stunned by the 
atrocities that occurred during the Second World War. People 
struggled to understand how such things could have happened 
and how future generations could be spared the devastation they 
had witnessed. 
 
As individuals we have the power and the responsibility to 
create a world of tolerance and harmony, and our institutions 
must also reflect this ideal. Our province is remarkably diverse 
and becoming more so every day, and we must remain 
constantly thoughtful about the needs of all people. The 
irresponsible behaviour of those who would attempt to drive a 
wedge between groups of Saskatchewan people is not helpful in 
attaining the goal of tolerance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier today outside the Assembly, I’m 
referring this matter to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) for further investigation of a possible offence under 
section 319 of the Criminal Code. 
 
And I’ll just remind members what that section says, Mr. 
Speaker. It creates two offences involving the inciting or 
promoting of hatred against an identifiable group. The first 
offence is committed as such hatred is incited by the 
communication, in a public place, of words likely to lead to a 
breach of the peace. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there is an offence 
committed only by wilful promotion of hatred against an 
identifiable group through the communication of statements 
other than in private conversation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, I’ve referred that matter to the RCMP for 
investigation as to whether or not it would be appropriate to lay 
a charge under section 319 of the Criminal Code. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of whether or not there’s been criminal 
conduct, the remarks made by Mr. Ahenakew are obviously 
unacceptable. I know that these views are not the views of 
Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan and they are not the views 
of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 
 
We have heard statements from the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations denouncing these statements, and I hope Mr. 
Ahenakew will at least apologize for his comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bearing in mind that this matter is now before the 
RCMP, that the RCMP will be investigating whether or not a 
charge is laid, I think it’s inappropriate to contain . . . for the 
motion to contain the words that refer specifically to Mr. 
Ahenakew. And also it is appropriate for those organizations for 
which he works, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, for the Government 
of Canada, to take whatever actions it deems appropriate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this province, having the potential for a 
tremendous future that will only be achieved by all 

Saskatchewan citizens working together in a spirit that 
embraces and celebrates diversity, urges me to move an 
amendment, Mr. Speaker, that would . . . seconded by the 
Premier, that would: 
 

Delete all the words after “Holocaust” in the second 
paragraph. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I simply want 
to make a very, very few comments, joining with the sentiment 
so ably expressed this afternoon in the House by the Leader of 
the Opposition and the Attorney General. A sentiment that is 
being expressed across Saskatchewan, from First Nations 
leaders to community leaders, a sentiment that is being 
expressed across Canada, and that is the unity of our view that 
the comments that have been reportedly made by Mr. 
Ahenakew are to all thinking Canadians offensive and 
unacceptable. 
 
They are particularly offensive in the context of the great 
province of Saskatchewan where we have built a province and a 
community based on tolerance, based on inclusion. Mr. 
Speaker, the motto of the province of Saskatchewan is the 
motto which translated reads “from many peoples, strength.” It 
has been and remains the great strength of Saskatchewan that 
we are a tolerant community. 
 
Therefore the comments reportedly made by Mr. Ahenakew are 
totally offensive to Saskatchewan people and do not represent 
the views of Saskatchewan people. Nor, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear 
do they represent the views of the First Nations people of 
Saskatchewan, of Métis people of Saskatchewan, of Aboriginal 
people of Saskatchewan, and in this regard they are offensive 
and unacceptable. 
 
They are as well, Mr. Speaker, offensive and unacceptable . . . I 
share this entirely with the Leader of the Opposition. They must 
be offensive and unacceptable to that generation of men and 
women from our province and from across Canada and around 
the world who did battle in the years of the Second World War 
— that generation of veterans, some of whom gave their lives, 
many of whom gave their youth, that generation of people like 
my father who left his home to fight this evil embodied in Hitler 
and Nazism, typified by the Holocaust. It must therefore be 
offensive to the veterans of Saskatchewan and the veterans of 
Canada that this kind of comment has been made. 
 
It is offensive. It is unacceptable. It does not represent the views 
of Saskatchewan people, or First Nations people or Métis or 
Aboriginal people in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, you’ve 
heard today the Attorney General of the province of 
Saskatchewan make his decision that this matter will be referred 
for investigation by the RCMP under section 319 of the 
Criminal Code, and I most clearly believe that is the appropriate 
action that has been taken by the Attorney General of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no debate I think in this House. There will 
not be a member in this House who will support the kind of 



3000 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

sentiment that has been expressed by . . . or reported at least to 
have been expressed by Mr. Ahenakew and today we stand as 
one. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. It’s a matter of personal 
sadness and shock to me that I actually met with Senator 
Ahenakew two weeks ago in North Battleford and at that time 
we were discussing the corrosive effects of racism on our 
society. So it’s a shock to me that this same individual so 
heartily endorses racism and hatred against another group, 
namely the Jewish population and, frankly, by extension, all 
non-Aboriginals. 
 
And while we are pleased that many First Nations leaders were 
quick to condemn the remarks, at least some of the responses 
have to be described as limp and inadequate. 
 
Now we have a representative of a group that has too often been 
the victim of racism and so one would expect that a 
representative of that group would be the first to condemn 
racism in all its forms and all its manifestations and it is sad that 
that is not the case. 
 
As for the amendment that has been introduced, the Minister of 
Justice in his remarks quite rightly conceded that the 
amendment is irrelevant. It is irrelevant in the sense that 
whether the words are technically criminal or not has nothing to 
do with whether they are repugnant, whether they are 
unacceptable, and whether this represents an opinion that 
should be elevated to the highest honour our nation can bestow, 
namely the Order of Canada. 
 
So even if these remarks are found not to be criminal — and of 
course it’s improper for me to express any opinion on that 
subject at all — but even if these remarks are not criminal, that 
does not in any way at all reflect on the issue as to whether our 
nation’s highest honour should continue to be held by someone 
who represents not the best but, frankly, the worst that we have 
to offer. 
 
We had this problem in North Battleford a few years ago and it 
is indeed a very embarrassing one. But the Order of Canada is a 
near sacred institution for those who have made signal 
contributions to our national life and represent the very best of 
Canadian values. 
 
I would make, with all due respect, one suggestion to the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition. My understanding is the Government 
of Canada is in no way involved in the granting of the Order of 
Canada. Honours come solely from Her Excellency the 
Governor General, and therefore that address should not be to 
the Government of Canada. It should be to the Governor 
General of Canada. 
 
And I would invite the opposition to make that amendment — 
that we should not address this resolution and suggestion to the 
government but to the Governor General. The Prime Minister 
and the cabinet is not involved in the granting of honours is my 
understanding. 

And so, I would move, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That the words “Government of Canada” be deleted and in 
their place we insert the words “Governor General of 
Canada.” 

 
As a subamendment, and seconded by the hon. member for 
Wadena. 
 
But I think that it is incumbent on all of us — and I would 
encourage First Nations leaders especially — to say that hatred, 
racism is unacceptable no matter who is the perpetrator and no 
matter who is the victim; that these principles do not change 
simply by changing the names of the groups we are choosing to 
demean and insult and degrade, and even to the ultimate of 
advocating genocide. 
 
And I would also submit in moving this subamendment that this 
is affirming that the Order of Canada must be reserved to the 
very top of Canadian society, the Canadians whom all of us can 
unreservedly say represent the best of Canadian life and the best 
of Canadian values. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. While I have not received the 
subamendment in writing, I would like to advise the member — 
just judging from the words that he mentioned — that his 
subamendment would be out of order because you can only . . . 
a subamendment can only be an amendment to the amendment 
itself before the Assembly. And the amendment before the 
Assembly is: 
 

That all the words after “Holocaust” be deleted. 
 
The motion therefore before the Assembly is the motion . . . 
pardon me, the questions before the Assembly are two 
questions: the motion moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar and seconded by the member for Rosthern; 
and the amendment, moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
We will first of all vote the amendment. 
 
Those in favour of the amendment? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
 
The division bells rang from 14:54 until 14:59. 
 
Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorje Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3001 

 

Nays — 26 
 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Huyghebaert 
Dearborn Brkich Wiberg 
Weekes Harpauer Hart 
Allchurch Hillson  
 
(15:00) 
 
The division bells rang from 15:03 until 15:04. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division. 
 

Yeas — 56 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Huyghebaert 
Dearborn Brkich Wiberg 
Weekes Harpauer Hart 
Allchurch Hillson  
 

Nays — nil 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, leave to move a 
motion with respect of sitting hours. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1), on Wednesday, December 
18, 2002, the Assembly shall meet at 10:00 a.m. and the 
Assembly shall adjoin at 1:00 p.m. subject to the provisions 
in rule 3(2) and rule 3(3), so far as they may be applicable. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In looking up to 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I noticed Mr. Harold Just, a 
constituent of Regina Wascana Plains. Mr. Just is also a 
representative of Eli Lilly pharmaceuticals. 
 
And I would urge all members to welcome him. I know in 
speaking with him, but in also persons who’ve approached him, 
that he’s fairly often mistaken for the member of Regina 
Elphinstone or at very least a brother. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — So with my compliments to both individuals 
. . . so, Mr. Speaker, with my compliments to both individuals, I 
would ask all members to join me in welcoming a constituent of 
my constituency, Mr. Harold Just. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Elphinstone 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And don’t be 
confused. Harold’s up there — oh pardon me, Mr. Speaker — 
and I’m down here. But it’s true what the . . . with apologies to 
Harold, I just want to add very quickly to what the member 
from Wascana Plains has to say. 
 
Shortly after the by-election took place in Elphinstone, Harold 
was at an event where he was congratulated on his election to 
the Legislative Assembly by one of my colleagues. And I’ll 
leave it to you to figure out which one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I too would like to add a voice of welcome to Harold at this 
day. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Melfort-Tisdale on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — With leave to welcome a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side who have 
come to know Harold very well and also know the member 
from Regina Elphinstone, have no confusion about the two at 
all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been a great pleasure to meet with Mr. Just on 
a number of occasions to talk about health care issues and 



3002 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

particularly those that involve the pharmaceutical industry. Mr. 
Just brings a great deal of experience and insight and passion 
for Saskatchewan and the health care system. 
 
So it’s a pleasure for all of us to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I’m very 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and respond 
to written questions 447 through 458 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 447 to 458 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Health Care 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The future of 
health care in Saskatchewan and right across the country has 
generated a tremendous amount of public interest and 
discussions in recent weeks and months because of the 
profound effect it has on the lives of all citizens. 
 
It is about the health of our communities and the care we 
receive when we’re sick or injured. It affects us as taxpayers 
who want to know that our health dollars are being spent in the 
most effective way. 
 
And it matters to us as Canadians who believe that a strong 
medicare system is a source of national pride and part of our 
Canadian identity. 
 
At the end of my remarks I’ll be making a motion to address 
three issues: the progress that we have made over the past year 
in implementing the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care; 
the positive contribution of the Romanow Commission on the 
Future of Health Care in Canada; and the need for adequate, 
sustainable funding from Ottawa to make our health system 
sustainable in the long term. 
 
I will speak to each of these issues individually, but I believe 
that when taken together they form a comprehensive response 
to the public’s desire for better quality access and accountability 
in our health care system. 
 
There is in Saskatchewan, and I believe right across the 
country, a common view that major changes are required to 
address the present and future challenges in our health care 
system. It’s the reason our government commissioned a major 
review of health care in Saskatchewan and developed a 
comprehensive plan to guide health renewal in our province. 
People told us they support a publicly funded health care 
system and they want to maintain it, improve it, and strengthen 
it for the future. They also told us they wanted change, and as 
long as it’s part of a sensible, clearly stated plan. Saskatchewan 
people spoke, and we listened. 
 
Our action plan offers new, innovative approaches that will 

make the health system more responsive to patients and more 
cost-effective. Our plan will improve the delivery of everyday 
health services in our communities and it supports good health 
for every resident of our province. 
 
It focuses on attracting the doctors, nurses, and other health 
providers we need. It strives to reduce waiting times for 
surgery, and to improve the fairness and transparency of the 
surgical system. And our plan reduces administration in the 
health system and promotes province-wide planning and 
coordination to help ensure the most effective use of our 
dollars. 
 
Over the past 12 months we’ve made solid progress on key 
initiatives in every area of the action plan. We have followed 
through on our commitment to support the retention, 
recruitment, and training of health providers. This last Friday 
we offered our congratulations to 250 students who have 
received bursaries in exchange for a commitment to work here 
in the province upon graduation. This year our government will 
spend $3.8 million in total health care bursaries, an increase of 
$800,000 over last year. 
 
We are increasing the number of emergency medical 
technicians we train and expanding enrolment in a number of 
health disciplines. We made a commitment to increase the 
participation of Aboriginal and northern residents in the health 
professions, and this fall our government launched a new 
northern nursing program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, skilled health providers are in great demand across 
Canada and around the world. Our province has a lot to offer 
for those who appreciate a low cost of living and an exceptional 
quality of life. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But we recognize the importance of providing competitive 
wages and benefits to attract and keep our doctors, nurses, 
pharmacists, therapists, technologists, and other valued health 
professionals. In the past year we have provided significant 
increases in wages and benefits to ensure our health providers 
receive fair and competitive compensation for the important 
work that they perform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our action plan also presented a strategy to ensure 
reasonable, predictable waiting times for patients awaiting 
surgery. Earlier this year, I announced the formation of the 
Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network to oversee the 
development of a province-wide surgical registry that is the first 
of its kind in Canada. 
 
A few weeks ago, the Surgical Care Network offered a sneak 
preview of a new surgical care Web site that will be fully 
operational early in the new year. The Web site has a full range 
of wait time information, including average patient waits for 
non-emergent surgery performed in Regina and Saskatoon. This 
information will give patients who are waiting an idea of when 
they might expect to get their surgery. It will help patients and 
the public understand wait times and help patients explore 
options so that they receive their surgery sooner. 
 
Another Canadian first that has received national recognition in 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3003 

 

the health community and in the media is the formation of the 
Health Quality Council. Last month I had the honour of 
introducing the council’s inaugural board, a collection of 
provincial, national, and international experts in the health field. 
 
The November 23, 2002 editorial in The Globe and Mail 
describe the Health Quality Council as a model for the rest of 
the country, a body that will help ensure the public receives 
good value for its health dollars and makes all parts of the 
health system more accountable for their actions. 
 
Another feature of the Saskatchewan Action Plan for Health 
Care is the strategy to reduce administration and improve 
province-wide planning by moving from 32 health districts to 
12 regional health authorities. Our new health regions are better 
positioned to offer a wide range of services in each region. We 
have a greater ability to manage health provider retention and 
recruitment activities and they give us the structure we need to 
offer a seamless health care system built around the needs of 
parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time does not allow for a detailed discussion about 
the progress we are making on all of our action plan 
commitments. But allow me to touch on a few others before I 
move on to discuss the Romanow report. 
 
Our plan also calls for the creation of a toll-free, 24-hour 
telephone advice line that will answer health questions, assess 
symptoms, and advise callers where to go for help. We have 
developed the service guidelines for the advice line and 
followed a request for proposal process to assist in the selection 
of the advice line provider, and I expect to announce the vendor 
in the next several weeks. The telephone advice line is part of 
our strategy to improve everyday primary health care services 
in the province. 
 
The other part of the strategy involves organizing doctors, 
nurses, therapists, and other front line providers into teams so 
that patients have better access to the most suitable health care 
providers. 
 
I recently attended the launch of a new primary health care site 
at the Estevan Medical Clinic. It was the first site established 
under the action plan and the first site to be established in 
southeast Saskatchewan. The clinic has seven physicians and is 
in the process of hiring a nurse practitioner. These doctors are 
hoping to go further and work with the College of Medicine to 
open their doors to medical residents, allowing the next 
generation of doctors to experience primary health care in a 
small city setting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our plan recognizes that the most important 
influences on the health of our communities are factors like 
income, education, diet, housing, and support from family and 
friends. The action plan supports an increased focus on 
population health promotion and over the past year we have 
taken some important steps. 
 
We’ve increased funding for diabetes prevention programs 
delivered by health authorities. We’ve announced a new 
cervical cancer screening program in partnership with the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. We’ve launched the Kids First 
program to assess and address the needs of vulnerable children 

and their families from the prenatal period to age five. And we 
have enacted our new tobacco control strategy that’s aimed at 
preventing youth from smoking and reducing exposure to 
second-hand smoke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the progress we’ve made over the 
past year, but we still have a lot of work ahead of us as we 
move forward with our long-term vision for the health system. 
We recognize that public concerns about waiting lists, health 
provider shortages, and rising costs won’t be resolved quickly. 
These are complex issues that extend beyond our borders and so 
the solutions must involve governments, health providers, and 
patients from coast to coast to coast. 
 
Our government was among the first to call for a national 
examination of our health care system that would seek out 
Canadians’ views about the future direction of our health 
system and assemble the most promising ideas and innovations 
that Canadians have to offer. 
 
Over the past 18 months the Commission on the Future of 
Health Care, headed by former Saskatchewan premier, Roy 
Romanow, conducted extensive public consultations that 
included 591 separate presentations during 21 days of public 
hearings in 18 cities. The commission received another 640 
formal presentations from individuals and organizations, 
received 7,000 letters, 3,600 phone calls, and 14,000 completed 
surveys. 
 
This extensive dialogue with Canadians is reflected in a final 
report entitled Building on Values, and I believe that this report 
does represent an accurate portrayal of Canadian values and 
their collective vision for renewing the medicare system. 
Canadians sent a clear message that they support the core value 
of a single payer, universal medicare system. They want 
governments to tackle the problems in health care but they 
don’t want them to sacrifice the fairness and equity of our 
public system. They want a health care system that’s based on 
need, not a person’s wealth. 
 
I should point out though, Mr. Speaker, that the Romanow 
report did not base its recommendations solely on what 
Canadians wanted to hear. The recommendations were also 
rooted in evidence and the conclusions of 40 independent 
research papers. And what the commission concluded is that 
public hospitals are the most cost-effective, with lower 
administrative costs and better health outcomes. 
 
The report cites a recent study that concluded for-profit 
hospitals in the United States had a significantly higher risk of 
death and tended to employ less highly skilled individuals than 
non-profit facilities. 
 
This national review also provided confirmation that a single 
payer public health care system is good for business. The big 
three auto makers and the Canadian Auto Workers union 
presented a joint submission to the commission in which they 
pointed out Canadian businesses enjoy a major advantage over 
their US (United States) counterparts because their employees 
are healthier and their labour costs are lower. The CAW 
(Canadian Auto Workers) compared hourly labour costs 
between factories in Canada and the US and concluded that 
lower health costs saved Canadian employers $4 an hour per 



3004 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not suggesting that the health care system is 
working perfectly or that we should maintain the status quo. I 
don’t know of anyone in Canada who is. 
 
Indeed the Romanow report calls for major improvements in the 
way health care is funded and delivered in Canada. It calls for 
transformative change in a number of key areas including home 
care, pharmacare, primary health care, diagnostic equipment, 
and rural and remote services. Investment in these key areas 
would help to ensure that Canadians receive similar access to a 
common basket of quality health services, regardless of where 
they live. These are the priorities of Canadians and these are the 
priorities of our government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some might suggest that national undertakings of 
this kind are an intrusion on the province’s jurisdiction in the 
area of health care. Our government believes that while there 
must be flexibility in the way in which these programs are 
designed, there must be an opportunity for national initiatives 
that ensure high quality, accessible health care for all 
Canadians. 
 
The Romanow report has recommended a substantial increase 
in the federal government’s contribution to health care. By the 
2005-06 budget year, federal spending would increase by $6.5 
billion. The report also calls for a funding escalator that would 
make the federal contribution more predictable and help ensure 
the system remains sustainable in the long term. 
 
Our government fully accepts its responsibility to be 
accountable to the public for health care spending and we 
would welcome changes that will make the system more 
accountable to citizens. I would encourage this legislature to 
send a strong message to Ottawa about the need for adequate, 
predictable, sustainable funding for health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is moving forward with an 
ambitious change agenda. Our action plan has been very well 
received by the public and the health community but our ability 
to move forward is limited by the need for increased financial 
support from the federal government. 
 
I want to thank everyone who has assisted in moving forward 
with our health action plan. And I especially want to thank the 
people of Saskatchewan for their enduring belief in a quality, 
accessible public medicare system. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
for Saskatoon Eastview: 
 

That this Assembly acknowledges the substantial progress 
that the provincial government has made in the past year to 
implement the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care; 
and 
 
That this Assembly endorses the positive vision for 
renewing universally accessible, publicly funded health 
care as presented in the final report of the Romanow 
Commission, which addresses the need for national 
approaches to home care, Aboriginal health, pharmacare, 
primary health care, and diagnostic services; and which 

complements the efforts of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to improve health quality, reduce waiting 
times, and address health provider shortages; and 
 
That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 
immediately increase its share of health spending to ensure 
adequate, sustainable funding for the future. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m very happy to second the motion made by my colleague, 
the Minister of Health. I’ve been involved in the health system 
for over 35 years, first as a registered nurse, then as a union 
leader, a politician, and as the associate minister of Health. 
In-between the hands-on work of those different roles I’ve been 
a patient myself several times and been with members of my 
family as they too have accessed the health services. 
 
During all my years in the health field, in whatever role I was 
in, there were always changes. Technology has exploded since 
my graduation from nursing school many years ago. I assume 
that I will continue to see dramatic changes in drug therapies, 
diagnostic equipment, surgical procedures, medical treatments, 
and information technology for the rest of my life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the changes in the health system have 
been as dramatic as the technology changes but not as welcome. 
Changes to the roles and responsibilities of the various health 
providers have come at quite a personal cost to many of us. Jobs 
have been lost, moved, or changed in description. It has been 
hard to keep up with the changes as they have so fundamentally 
impacted our daily lives. But lifelong learning is a prerequisite 
to job satisfaction in a world that values and rewards 
knowledge. Stagnation does not equal gratification. 
 
The role of a nurse has changed over the years. For example we 
now have nurse practitioners who can do many things that we 
only thought a doctor could do — such things as basic physical 
exams, diagnosis of minor ailments like ear infections, ordering 
certain tests, prescribing certain drugs, suturing wounds, and 
delivering babies, to name a few of the expanded 
responsibilities of a nurse practitioner or advanced clinical 
nurse as we call them in Saskatchewan. We are seeing nurse 
clinicians in gerontology, cardiology, and pediatrics. There can 
be nurse anaesthetists and nurse first assists in the operating 
rooms. 
 
Other providers are seeing their roles change as well. We’re 
making better use of our pharmacists in teaching patients and 
following up on drug therapies. Licensed practical nurses are 
giving medications and doing more complex tasks than 
previously seen. 
 
Many of these changes reflect the full utilization of training that 
is done and expertise that is present in the various health 
professions. As new roles emerge for nurses and others, doctors 
can focus on more complex issues facing their patients. Using 
the skills and abilities of each professional to the maximum will 
better serve the patient, client, resident, or consumer. 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3005 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a concept in health care delivery that we 
call the wheel of services. The various health services are 
arranged in a wheel-like manner, in a circle around a centre 
hub. The services are the spokes. In the centre of the circle, in 
the hub is the client, patient, resident, or consumer — whatever 
we’re calling them. 
 
And as a nurse I always thought of myself as being in the centre 
of the circle with the patient, as nurses are with the patient 24 
hours, 7 days a week. There was some disagreement with 
doctors as they thought that they should be in the centre of the 
circle with the client. 
 
(15:30) 
 
I was recently telling someone about this particular difference 
of opinions between doctors and nurses, and the person quite 
wisely pointed out to me that while the doctors and nurses were 
debating who was in the centre of the circle with the patient, the 
patient was running around the outside of the circle trying to 
figure out how to get in to access the services. This was a real 
stunning reminder to me, as it should be to all providers, that 
what we do is for the patient. 
 
I really do not think we as providers do this that well and 
certainly not all the time. It’s quite easy to get involved in how 
health services should be delivered and where and by whom 
and forget who we do all this for. 
 
During my most recent experience with a family member 
having a major health crisis this past summer, what was very 
clear to me is that we do not always have someone designated 
and recognizable who coordinates the care and advocates for 
the patient and their family. What really disturbed me is that I 
know the system and the way it works and who makes it work. 
If I was having trouble, I can only imagine how someone with 
certainly less knowledge than me manages to navigate the 
system. 
 
We need to do better for the patient. Mr. Speaker, one of the 
ways I think this can be done is to have teams working together. 
Not only should we work together, we should share some 
common training so that we all have an appreciation of what the 
other person does and their intrinsic value to the delivery of the 
right care at the right time by the right person. This involves a 
change in educating health professionals and a change in our 
attitude to our work and our colleagues. What each of us 
contributes is valuable to the well-being of our patient. 
 
Health care delivery should not be about which provider does 
what better or who is more important. Health care delivery 
should be about what the patient needs, and then who is the 
most appropriate provider to meet that need. This is not about 
competition. It’s about service. We did not train to compete. We 
trained to serve. Sometimes we lose sight of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, change is constant and indeed persistent. The 
changes I have seen over the last decade have been catalyst in 
making a better health system. The emphasis on change in the 
Commission on the Future of Health Care report is timely and 
welcome. 
 
The connection of new federal money to demonstrated change 

is extremely wise. If there is no incentive to change, we really 
will not see a much different health system. It’s hard to change 
and most people don’t want to change. We’re comfortable as 
we are. Unfortunately the same system that we have today will 
not be sustainable without the changes that Mr. Romanow 
recommends. 
 
Mr. Romanow’s report sets out some very realistic goals. He 
also attaches conditions and he’s quite directive in what he 
thinks we need to do. That was what he was tasked to do by the 
Prime Minister: tell us what the Canadian people think of our 
system and then tell us how we can all work together to refine it 
and redefine it for the future. 
 
By doing this we can save what most Canadians agree is one of 
our unique aspects as Canadians, medicare — a comprehensive, 
publicly funded, publicly administered, universal, and portable 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the recommendations in the report are 
already in the works or have been done in Saskatchewan as my 
colleague has already pointed out. There are 23 primary health 
care sites in such innovative areas as a senior citizens high-rise 
and on a university campus, targeting seniors and students 
respectively. 
 
There is unique opportunity to address women’s health needs 
using a primary health care model where there would be a focus 
on such issues as menopause and osteoporosis. The Quality 
Council that was just recently announced is the first of its kind 
in Canada. Our home care system is integrated with our acute 
and long-term care facilities so we have a seamless transition 
from home to hospital and back again. 
 
Our new approach to the waiting list issue is exciting, with 
online access to your information and a central surgical booking 
process in our major surgical centres. Both these and upcoming 
initiatives are designed to improve our access to surgical 
services. We are working together with the other Western 
provinces to come up with common definitions and 
evidence-based criteria for being put on a waiting list to begin 
with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our human resource strategies are the envy of 
many other provinces. We have a principal nursing officer in 
the Department of Health to coordinate efforts to retain and 
recruit nursing personnel. She also works with the professions 
on a variety of projects to improve the working life of nurses. 
We have the same type of commitment to our doctors and work 
constantly with them to improve the recruitment and retention 
of doctors. 
 
Other health providers are equally important in the delivery of 
high quality health services. Many incentives are in place to 
ensure that we have adequate numbers of respiratory 
technicians, occupational therapists, physical therapists, speech 
language pathologists, laboratory technicians, medical imaging 
technicians, pharmacists, dieticians, nutritionists, and all the 
other various professionals and support staff that make the 
health system so complex and so efficient. 
 
I’ve seen the warts, and I’ve seen the wonders. Health care is 
dynamic. And if you think you have it figured out, something 



3006 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

new will come up and you’ll have to adjust. 
 
We sure don’t do everything right yet and I’m not convinced 
that anyone ever can. But we can do and what we have done so 
well is to integrate our health services. People like you and me 
can get our complex health needs met quicker and more 
efficiently than ever before. We can get our more basic needs 
met closer to home and with a wide variety of health providers 
in the same location. That’s called primary health care. 
 
This approach to providing services puts the patient first and 
vastly improves their experience with the system. We have not 
put the primary health care model in enough places but we are 
doing a very good job of adding locations as fast as the 
communities and the various providers are ready to accept and 
assume the new roles. 
 
I was very happy to see the emphasis in Commissioner 
Romanow’s report on the primary health care model of health 
delivery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been almost 10 years since I was elected 
president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. It’s just about 
been that long since I’ve been talking about primary health care. 
 
According to the commission report, the primary health care 
model is: 
 

. . . about fundamental change across the entire health care 
system. It is about transforming the way the health care 
system works today — taking away the almost 
overwhelming focus on hospitals and medical treatments, 
breaking down the barriers that too frequently exist 
between health care providers, and putting the focus on 
consistent efforts to prevent illness and injury, and improve 
health. In fact, no other initiative holds as much potential 
for improving health and sustaining our health care system. 

 
This concept is integral to how we move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the health problems that have put such a 
strain on the resources of the health system are within our 
control to influence. Obesity, smoking, alcohol use during 
pregnancy, are just a few that come to mind that we have the 
power to make choices about and that could have a major 
impact on decreasing diabetes, heart disease, some cancers, and 
fetal alcohol syndrome. 
 
In many cases it isn’t the system that is out of control; it’s our 
personal control over choices that adversely affect our health 
that is at fault. 
 
The cost to us as individuals in decreased quality of life and to 
the health system in costly treatments and surgeries is 
undesirable and is a major factor in the unsustainability of the 
current system. We need to take control of and responsibility 
for our own health. 
 
I was very happy to see the emphasis in the commission report 
on the benefits of disease prevention and health education. 
 
I too have a strong commitment to the reality of the social 
determinants of health. Our education, our social supports, our 

environment, our job — even as I’ve said before whether we 
have joy in our lives — these things are a major factor in 
determining how healthy we are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cannot be said enough — health care does not 
equal health. Health care does not equal health. So much more 
contributes to a healthy person. Our health system is only one 
part of our health. 
 
We need to have a distribution of our resources that allow for 
adequate funding of education, social services, safe 
communities, safe drinking water, and all the other programs 
and supports that contribute to a healthy person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about appropriate usage of personnel. We 
know we need more than a doctor to make or keep us healthy. 
We also have to talk about the best use of our buildings and our 
hospital and long-term care beds. We spent a lot of time and 
money on buildings in the health sector. We know we have to 
have enough beds to meet the surgical and medical treatment 
needs but we must balance this need with the need for other 
programs that contribute so much to recovery and wellness, 
such as outreach programs for new moms, for mental health 
programs, for services for eating disorders and various 
addictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good example of this concept is that we must 
have places where a person can get diagnosed with diabetes, 
taught about the disease, and then be plugged in to a system that 
calls them back for follow-up visits. There must also be 
community resources for supporting people in their own 
management of the disease such as access to dietitians and 
podiatrists. 
 
Hospitals only meet a small part of our health care needs. It’s a 
narrow view of the health care system if all we value is the 
hospital. Our new facilities being built in places like La Loche, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Stony Rapids, Fort Qu’Appelle, and Meadow 
Lake, to name a few, are health centres. They are designed to 
deliver a broader range of services than a traditional hospital 
ever did. We are recognizing that we need more than a hospital 
bed to make or keep us healthy, just as we need more than a 
doctor to make or keep us healthy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a whole aspect of the health care system 
that has not been adequately funded or explored across Canada. 
That’s information technology. 
 
Each province is trying to move toward an electronic health 
record. This will enable providers such as doctors, nurses, 
emergency medical personnel, and a host of other providers that 
we visit or that have a part in our diagnosis, treatment, and 
recovery to readily access pertinent information about us when 
we need health services. 
 
It will eliminate duplication of tests and of questions about 
family history and past medical history. It will also enable good 
information to be collected about trends in disease, usage of the 
system, and enable us to track how what we do actually makes 
or keeps us healthy. 
 
We need both of these benefits of information technology to 
make appropriate use of our health dollars and to make treating 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3007 

 

patients more effective and efficient — a report card, if you 
will, to the public on how health dollars are spent and what do 
we get for our money. 
 
I’m proud to say that when my colleague, the member from 
Nutana, and myself were in the Health portfolio, we played a 
major role in making this reporting a national commitment. The 
first report has come out this fall in each province and will be 
regularly updated for the Canadian public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the changes in public awareness about our 
health needs have led to a more educated, demanding, and 
involved patient, client, resident, consumer, or user of health 
services. This is a very positive sign for the future of the health 
care system. We as consumers demand that we have the best 
available technology, the best providers, the best variety of 
health services. And so since we are so educated, we recognize 
the value and the wisdom of the recommendations of the 
commission’s report and we expect no less than full 
implementation of those recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canadians have told the commissioner in a 
multitude of forums over the last 18 months that we want 
medicare preserved and enhanced, and we will accept no less. 
Mr. Speaker, the commissioner’s recommendations are 
supported by documented research. We no longer have to rely 
on coffee row anecdotes, talk show opinions, and scare tactics 
to make the necessary decisions to ensure that medicare is 
sustainable and enduring in Canada. 
 
Canadians have said they are tired of the squabbling between 
governments about who did what to harm the system, or who 
should do what to fix the system. We will hold our elected 
representatives, both provincially and federally, to the 
commitment to fix the system. We need no more now than the 
political will to move forward. All that being said, Mr. Speaker, 
I can still speak for another 20 minutes or a couple of days 
probably, but I know my colleague from Cumberland in 
particular will need some time to address Aboriginal issues. 
And with that, I will stop here. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with pleasure that I join in this debate about a very important 
topic, a topic very near and dear to many of us, and certainly for 
some of us a topic that is very, very precious — and that is the 
topic of the delivery and sustainability of the health care system 
in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the motion the government puts forward, they 
talk about the progress that they’ve made in their own initiative 
and recognizes . . . there’s sort of three components to their 
motion: first of all recognizing what they’ve accomplished; 
second of all endorsing the Romanow Commission report; and 
thirdly, supporting the principle that the federal government has 
to play an increased role in terms of the funding. 
 
And I would like to speak to really all three of those issues, not 
necessarily in that order. Mr. Speaker, one of the things the 
health care system has had over the last number of years and 
since I’ve sort of become interested in the provincial political 
scene and public service . . . I go back to the Murray 

Commission as a matter of fact, as a very major initiative by the 
province of Saskatchewan at the time, and a very significant 
effort on behalf of the commission of that day and the 
commissioners to come up with a vision and recommendations 
and future blueprint of Saskatchewan health care delivery. And 
in many ways that that could be maybe transposed on to the 
national scene. 
 
And we’ve had in more recent times the Fyke report in terms of 
looking at Saskatchewan particularly, and on the national scene 
we have had not only the Romanow report but we’ve had the 
Senator Kirby Senate report, and in Alberta we’ve had the 
Mazankowski report. So there hasn’t been any shortage of 
reports and recommendations in regard to the health care 
system in Saskatchewan and Canada. We have had magnitudes 
of volumes of these reports, and every one of them, I think 
would be agreed by everyone, have some significant and 
important insights into the health care system, and some 
important recommendations. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The question is really, is not so much how many reports we’ve 
had — and we’ve had minor ones in the provincial scene on 
waiting lists, surgical waiting lists, that have come and gone. 
And we’ve had new people do new reports on the College of 
Medicine, on the nursing shortages right now. All of these 
things are all well and good. 
 
The fundamental question that we have to ask ourselves in all of 
these reports are, where are the succinct and doable decisions 
that have to be made so that we can move forward the health 
care agenda to actually cope with the realities we are not only 
facing today, but that we’re going to face in increasing numbers 
into tomorrow? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of . . . there’s a few of those realities that 
I want to touch on. The first one is the basic demographic 
reality that we have in Saskatchewan and in Canada. You know, 
Mr. Foot, in his paper looking at I think Boom, Bust & Echo, 
talked about the demographics of our country, and what the 
impacts of these demographics are going to be not only on 
health care, but on many other issues of society. He talked 
about the fact that after World War II, the baby boom was 
created. And many of us are the living reality of that baby 
boom. And there is going to be increasingly more and more of 
us that are going to reach our senior years and are going to 
require more and more services from the health care system. 
This is a number reality, a demographic reality, in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada, that we simply have to face. 
 
So all of the issues we’ve been facing so far are going to be 
even greater challenges in the very near future. And instead of 
looking at how we’re going to be able to cope with the people 
and the numbers that we’re currently coping with, we actually 
have to accept the reality that there’s going to be more of us that 
are going to be requiring health care. 
 
And so the challenge is not just to cope with what reality we 
face today, but also face the reality of the future. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that that is a real challenge for us. 
 
When I looked at the various reports . . . And I have to say that 



3008 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

Mr. Romanow’s report was rather disappointing. And maybe it 
was because my expectations were much greater than they 
might have otherwise been, because I thought Mr. Romanow 
was in a very unique position to build on all these other reports 
and really come out with a very clear blueprint that was not 
only visionary but practical and pragmatic in terms of its 
implementation and meeting the challenges that I’ve outlined, 
particularly of the demographic shifts. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, one of the realities is, is that Mr. 
Romanow was not nearly in my opinion as direct and as 
visionary as Senator Kirby was. I thought that his report had a 
great deal of insight as well and a great deal of pragmatic 
suggestions as to how we can move forward into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that was outlined by the member 
from Saskatoon Eastview . . . and I agreed with very much of 
what she said in terms of the general directions and the 
philosophical attitudes and the challenge that we all face as 
people who are advocates or leaders in the health care system. 
The points that she made are points well taken in terms of 
where we need to go. 
 
But one of the things that I think is absolutely fundamental, that 
Mr. Kirby recognized and devoted an entire chapter to, where 
Mr. Romanow only discussed obliquely, was the whole issue 
about the numbers of health care professionals that we are 
going to need today and into the future to deal with the 
challenges that the health care system is currently facing and is 
going to face in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a fundamental challenge 
because we can talk about surgical waiting times, we can talk 
about primary health care teams, we can talk about the need to 
have more research in pharmacological products and things of 
that nature, we can talk about roles and responsibilities and 
relationships between various levels and categories of health 
care professionals. All of that is very true and is very interesting 
and is very important, but unless we have health care 
professionals, unless we are preparing and educating and 
providing enough health care professionals for the health 
system, it’s going to be a very academic discussion that’s going 
to ultimately lead to a great deal of disappointment because 
we’re not going to be able to achieve the lofty ideals that we 
talk about. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, Senator Kirby talked very much about the 
fact that there has to be first of all an evaluation of where we are 
in terms of our educational training in all of the various 
categories and particularly those that are identified in short 
supply, and one of the fundamental primary initiatives that have 
to occur is to address that whole issue. Because I think quite 
rightly he recognized that there is a huge delay and a timeline 
that’s going to occur in order to realize that potential. 
 
On one hand, we have the reality of an aging baby boom 
population and expanding numbers who are going to demand 
increased services. And that isn’t some time in the very distant 
future; it’s virtually at our doorsteps. On one hand, we’re going 
to have that increasing demand that’s going to be necessary 
because of the demographics and on the other hand, we’ve got 
some very real concerns about the ability to cope with the 
situation as we have it now — never mind reach the future — 

and there’s going to be a delay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard over the weekend that we have some 
real problems in the College of Medicine in Saskatchewan. And 
I think those are very real problems and they underline the fact 
that we have not properly dealt with the whole issue of 
providing medical professionals in this province. We’ve got the 
numerics, but I mean when we look at the statistics, almost half 
of the graduates from the College of Medicine are lost to the 
province. Not quite, but I mean it is a concern. So we are not 
going to even maintain 100 per cent of the graduates from the 
College. 
 
In the College of Nursing, I understand that the numbers are 
better and the statistics, of the fact that we have 260 seats that 
could be potential graduates and we are actually retaining over 
80 per cent of them. And that is very encouraging in terms of 
having a much higher retention rate in the province for nurses 
practising their profession within the province. But even if it is 
in the high 80s, it means that we are only retaining something 
over 200, between 200 and 250 nurse graduates in this 
province. And the study that was recently done has indicated 
that over the next 10 years, 4,000 of our 9,000 registered nurses 
are going to be eligible for retirement. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, of the time that I’ve spent 
observing what’s going on in the health care system I believe 
that the vast majority of these nurses, when they are eligible for 
retirement, are going to take their retirement because quite 
frankly they’re working extremely hard and they are tired and 
they’re at the risk of burning out. So the likelihood of us having 
people defer their decision to retire is highly unlikely. 
 
So when you do the math, Mr. Speaker, we’re likely to lose 400 
nurses a year — that I think has been demonstrated — and at 
best we are educating and providing for Saskatchewan maybe 
225 nurses a year. It’s really easy to do the math, that this is an 
impossible situation with registered nurses. 
 
They not only are being asked to provide increasing services in 
the advanced clinical and the nurse practitioner roles — and I 
support that whole-heartedly as part of primary health care 
teams — they’re the heart and soul. They are indeed the centre 
of the circle that the member talked about in terms of health 
care delivery. And we are going to create a very critical 
shortage about this issue and the government doesn’t seem 
willing to really significantly and in an important way address 
this issue. 
 
And even if they saw the light today, it’s likely going to take 
four to five to six years before we would actually achieve any 
substantial increase in the number of graduates from a program 
because there is such a deficiency in facilities and professors at 
the nursing level, not only in Saskatchewan but in Canada, that 
this is going to be very difficult. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we can talk about all of these issues and we 
can agree philosophically and we can say the nice words about 
what all should be done in regard to the health care system in 
Saskatchewan and Canada. And Mr. Romanow or Mr. Kirby or 
the members opposite can stand in the House as I can and say 
this should be done and that should be done, but unless we deal 
with the very fundamental issue of who’s going to do these 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3009 

 

things, who are we going to have in the workforce to deal with 
these issues, we are all going to be disappointed as to the 
outcomes and our ability to deliver the services that we say are 
so critically important to our population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has a responsibility to not only 
deal with the crisis and the problems of today, which is the way 
they seem to deal with the issues in health care — it’s like crisis 
management — they have to anticipate what’s going to occur 
into the future. Because while it is an imperfect science, it is an 
important thing to try to look forward and anticipate what the 
realities are going to be five and ten years into the future, 
because all of this takes time. 
 
One of the concerns I had in the Romanow report is — I 
understand why he’d perhaps want a very tight timeline in 
terms of the five main categories where he wanted targeted and 
special funding — is that also is the timeline is very short. And 
one thing I’ve realized, that if you’re going to really have 
meaningful and well-thought-out plans for the using of these 
resources, it takes a little time to develop them and I’m not too 
sure Mr. Romanow’s expectations in terms of the timelines he 
recommended are not tighter than what can be realistically 
achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue that I think is important . . . and I 
really think it’s also important to highlight a couple of 
initiatives that I think are innovative and really important in the 
Romanow report that deserve our consideration and support. 
Again with the underlying thing that we’ve got to clearly make 
sure that we have people to undertake these initiatives, that that 
is so fundamental is the underpinning on everything that we do. 
It should be a precursor for anything that’s discussed. 
 
I think it’s important to talk about the ability to deliver better 
home care programs, particularly in the area of mental health 
which is an area that I think in many instances has been sort of 
neglected and not had proper attention paid to it. And the other 
area I think that is very interesting and important is the ability 
for the home care system to help people and families who have 
a loved one in a palliative care situation and I think that that is 
also very good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think as well that there are some real 
opportunities for Saskatchewan in particular to take a leadership 
role in rural and Aboriginal health issues because we certainly 
have more of those situations facing us than maybe any other 
place in Canada. So I think there are some real opportunities in 
that area as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things Mr. Fyke talked about in his 
report is about accountability and sustainability. And I believe 
that it’s absolutely true that all of us have an obligation to the 
citizens and the taxpayers of the province to be absolutely 
transparent and accountable for how we are committing major 
resources of our citizens and our taxpayers in health care. 
 
But the other thing is sustainability, and quite frankly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m a little bit worried about Mr. Romanow’s 
desire to count on the federal government to the extent he does. 
 
I think all of us remember that when medicare was brought in 
as a national treasure, if you like, that we were counting on the 

federal government to be involved in this project with 50-cent 
dollars, that everyone was going to agree that the federal and 
provincial governments were going to fund this new health care 
initiative in equal proportion. And, Mr. Speaker, with due 
respect to the federal government, we I think all agree on what 
has happened. We’re down to arguably 14-or 17-cent dollars, I 
guess, depending on how you calculate the formula. 
 
And Mr. Romanow has now said that over the next three years 
that amount should be increased by $6 billion by the federal 
government to get the federal government to a 25 per cent 
share. Well again I think those are admirable sentiments. But I, 
for one, am not quite comfortable of trusting the federal 
government to stay at that level. 
 
We were trusting them to be at 50-cent dollar levels and we see 
what happened to that trust. And so I am more than just a little 
bit nervous that the federal government is going to live up to its 
commitment, if it indeed makes it in the first place. 
 
The other thing that I see is that the federal government has 
been saying that if there’s going to be new dollars for health 
care, they got to be new dollars that come both from the federal 
government and the provincial government. Well I’m a little 
worried about that as well because the provinces have been 
there all along with their dollars and the federal government has 
backed away from it. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the 
sustainability of the system, to just believe that the federal 
government is going to commit to these new dollars and stay 
living up to that commitment over the long term is something 
that quite frankly terrifies me, because these are the same 
people that said, for example, that the gun registry program was 
going to cost $2 million and we ended up knowing that it’s 
approaching $1 billion. 
 
(16:00) 
 
That kind of nonsense frightens me because if they make those 
same kinds of inappropriate investments and decisions, I am not 
so sure that they’re going to live up to their commitment that 
they may indeed make — if they do — on the sustainability of 
their commitment to the health care system. 
 
And so I am nervous about us embarking on a program that’s 
going to rely and count on their commitment because we may 
end up holding the bag again, as we did in the last example of 
relationship in regard to health care funding with the federal 
government. And so I’m worried about that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my concern about what’s 
going on in the health care system. And I would like to offer an 
amendment that I would like to read into the record at this time. 
Moved by myself and seconded by the member from 
Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the following words be added after “acknowledges”: 
 
the government’s poor performance in delivering health 
care services to the people of Saskatchewan as 
demonstrated by the longest wait lists in Canada, the 
longest health care strike in Saskatchewan’s history, the 



3010 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

unsatisfactory working conditions and poor morale 
amongst health care professionals that has been 
demonstrated by repeated strikes and labour unrest which 
has directly contributed to the health care shortages in this 
province, including the 600 vacant positions for registered 
nurses and registered psychiatric nurses that currently exist 
in health districts; and 
 
That this Assembly recognizes that unless there are 
adequate medical professionals in the health care system it 
will be impossible to implement any of the 
recommendations that have been made by the Fyke 
Commission on Medicare, Senator Kirby’s final report on 
the state of the health care system in Canada, the final 
report of the Romanow Commission, or the government’s 
Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care; and 
 
That this Assembly further supports the need to increase 
educational training seats where specific shortages for 
medical professionals exists and in particular supports a 
call by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, SUN, and the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association, SRNA, to 
increase the training seats for nurses to 400 by the 
academic year 2003-2004; and 
 
That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 
immediately increase its share of health care spending to 
ensure adequate, sustainable funding for the future. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think this motion encapsulates the concerns that 
I’ve expressed, encapsulates the concerns of health care 
professionals across the province, encapsulates the concerns 
about people across this province for a sustainable, long-term 
health care system, and I’m proud to move this amendment. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is indeed an honour to second that amendment that 
really describes the concerns that people have right across 
Saskatchewan with the need for health services, the concern 
about who will provide them, and in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where will they be provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Romanow report, the chapter that I’m going 
to pay particular attention to is chapter no. 4. In that chapter, 
Mr. Romanow talks about two very specific areas. He refers to 
one section on page 94 as the nursing situation and later on, on 
page 96, he refers to access to doctors. 
 
There are three issues that I want to bring to the attention of the 
House this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and indeed to all people 
across Saskatchewan about how things have deteriorated in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the nursing situation, Mr. Romanow highlights a number 
of areas and I’m going to read into the record three of the areas 
that he italicizes. Those are the areas that he identifies this way. 
He calls one the nursing profession is aging; the second one is 
too many nurses leave the profession due to stress, poor 
working conditions, and poor morale; and the third one is too 
few graduating nurses. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those kinds of concerns, as 
identified in the Romanow report, have very significant 

ramifications on the delivery of health care in rural 
Saskatchewan especially. But not only rural Saskatchewan. We 
have to look at how the delivery will take place using the large 
centres of Saskatoon and Regina, the regional facilities like the 
community of Yorkton, and then the local hospitals at Canora, 
Preeceville, Kamsack, and Foam Lake. 
 
And that’s where I want to begin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 
community of Foam Lake. Foam Lake has been very concerned 
about the fact that their registered nurses, the age of those 
nurses and the number of years of service has been steadily 
increasing. And through the summer, two nurses decided that it 
was time to retire and gave their notice of retirement, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I quote from a couple of articles 
published in newspapers in my area, the Foam Lake Review. 
And this is of . . . dated October 14, 2002 and it’s a comment 
made by Mr. Ben Weber, who now serves as the Chair of the 
Sunrise Health Authority, and he says this: 
 

It’s not unique to Foam Lake, it’s across Saskatchewan. We 
face tremendous challenges. There are very serious 
shortages. 
 

Those were comments made by the Chair who . . . in referring 
to the fact that no nurses were available to take the positions of 
the two nurses who retired. 
 
Mr. Joe Kirwan, the CEO (chief executive officer), said on that 
. . . in that same article he said: 
 

There are no plans to remove acute care from Foam Lake. 
 
That was October 14. Now, Mr. Speaker, the next article is 
from the Foam Lake Review dated October 28. And it says this: 
 

If replacement nurses can’t be found within the next few 
days, the Foam Lake Health Centre faces temporary closure 
of all acute-care beds effective November 1. 

 
This is the word from Michael Redenbach and Joe Kirwan, who 
met with the Foam Lake advisory . . . community advisory 
committee on Tuesday, October 22: 
 

As of November 1, the hospital will be short two and 
one-half nursing positions. There has been no response to 
ads for nurses. Redenbach and Kirwan came to Foam Lake 
to discuss the situation and to ask the advisory committee 
for suggestions. If permanent replacements are not found, 
Foam Lake would go to a 9-to-5 facility on November 1, at 
which time Dr. Bia’s classifications would change so that 
he would do no evening or weekend emergency coverage. 
In short, no nurses means no acute-care beds, no acute-care 
means no admissions, and no evening or weekend 
emergency care. 

 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, the ramifications of not having 
sufficient number of nurses in this province, not only the fact 
that we can’t retain, as my colleague has pointed out, but the 
fact that we just don’t have enough trained, registered nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a chart that has been prepared by the nursing 
group in the province of Saskatchewan for registered nurses is 
even more alarming. And when I saw these statistics, I really 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3011 

 

couldn’t believe them at first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan we used to have 
two nursing programs. They were the diploma and the degree 
programs. And in 1991, in those two areas, the number of 
graduates that entered the work profession in Saskatchewan, as 
far as graduates, totalled 364. As the government announced the 
removal of the diploma program and phasing it out, we reached 
an all-time low of the number of graduates in 1998 of 105. 
 
The projection for 2002-2003 is 145 graduates per year and my 
colleague from Melfort-Tisdale has ably pointed out just how 
tremendous and inadequate that number is, tremendously 
inadequate. We are graduating a small number of nurses even 
with the increase and we have the baby boomer group, the 
aging nurses. As Mr. Romanow has reported, the age of nurses 
is increasing and there will be more retirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other chart that is very, very important to look 
at and is how other provinces in Canada have looked at this 
situation and said, what are we going to do about it. Actual 
graduates from colleges of nursing in Canada in the year 1999 
totalled 5,221 — 5,221 nurses graduated through all of Canada. 
Saskatchewan contributed 147. Those are actual statistics. 
They’re not my numbers. That was 1999. 
 
So let’s look ahead to the projections for 2003. 2003: the 
estimate is that there will be 7,578 registered nurse graduates — 
a huge increase — almost 50 per cent increase in the number of 
graduates coming out of the provinces of Ontario and Alberta 
and Manitoba and all over Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number in Saskatchewan in fact drops 
by two. From 147 in 1999, we will expect 145 graduates in the 
year 2003. So, Mr. Speaker, while Mr. Romanow has made 
reference to the fact that we have a nursing situation and we 
have a number of concerns with age, he also talks about the fact 
that we have too few graduating nurses. 
 
Provinces who recognize this weakness have developed a plan. 
They in fact have increased the number of nursing graduates to 
be well over 7,000 nurses in all of Canada. We have not 
increased one single position from 1999 to expected graduates 
of 2003. Mr. Speaker, that’s appalling because now the 
community of Foam Lake, upon having retirements, cannot find 
nursing positions. And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
community of Foam Lake as far as its acute care facility is a 
small facility and that it’s difficult to attract the professionals to 
that, but it’s a tremendous community. 
 
Patty Hack who chairs that committee has spoken very well 
about the need to go elsewhere, the need to advertise Foam 
Lake and to look at ensuring that there are nurses available. 
And this government has to lead by example. And the statistics 
that I’ve just pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, show that that 
won’t happen, that this is in fact a step backwards in 
Saskatchewan when we look at the number of graduates. 
 
So when we look at what Mr. Romanow has suggested, it’s very 
important that we move in this province to address this concern. 
Whether we have to do something temporary to ensure that a 
facility like Foam Lake has the available registered nurses to 
keep it open and operating, I don’t have that solution, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But collectively the people in the Department 
of Health, the government members, should be able to put 
together a plan that ensures that the services that we expect as 
Mr. Romanow has indicated, are in fact delivered. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in chapter 4 as well, the Romanow report 
also states one other statement that I want to read into the 
record. And he says this: take steps . . . and I quote: 
 

Take steps to ensure that rural and remote communities 
have an appropriate mix of skilled health care providers to 
meet their health care needs.  

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can see that that’s not only just 
the registered nurses, that’s the laboratory technicians, the 
X-ray technicians, all of those professional groups that are 
needed. Because what we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
graduating students are attracted to Saskatoon and Regina and 
Prince Albert, and then their next choice is Yorkton and North 
Battleford — the next regional centre. And the communities 
like Canora, and Preeceville, and Kamsack, and Foam Lake 
which are facilities in my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are now already at the bottom of the rung, if I might use that 
expression, in terms of where do they find the available help. 
 
And I think we have to be very, very, you know, candid about 
this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not something that we can just 
say well they’ll come from another country or something else 
will happen. We have to put in place a plan that trains and 
educates the number of skilled workers that we require. My 
colleague also pointed out is that we will require more services 
in fact, as the baby boomer reaches retirement and in fact, the 
statistics do say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the last four years 
of one’s life you require I believe it is 80 per cent of the medical 
services that you require in your entire lifetime. So we know 
that those are going to be required. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the second area I want to turn to very 
briefly is the growth and development in this province. One of 
the communities in my constituency, that being Preeceville, has 
been, has had a project approved in principle — and I would put 
those words into quotation marks, Mr. Deputy Speaker — for a 
number of years. And they’ve been working extremely hard at 
the Preeceville and district level. 
 
It was expected to be a project that would be about $4.5 million 
in size. But that’s a couple of years ago and I’m sure through 
inflation that number has already increased. And it was going to 
involve a construction of a new facility — a new hospital, 
nursing home centre — to meet the needs of the people of 
Preeceville and area. 
 
The funding for this, of course as we know, is a 35/65 per cent 
split. The community has put in place its 35 per cent. It 
continues with fund-raising projects that just, you know, 
astound me. 
 
We see the presentation of a cheque on November 13 from one 
individual of $10,000 to this project — wanting to ensure that it 
happens. On November 25 the hospital auxiliary raised more 
than $3,000 from one simple little auction that they had. 
 
So the people of the area are behind it. They have their 



3012 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

commitment of the $1.6 million, approximately, which will be 
their 35 per cent share. They already have commitments that 
that money is in place. They’ve raised money though various 
funds and they actually have I believe almost $800,000 in a 
bank account. And the remaining municipal contributions have 
been committed. They’re ready to go. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problem is that for the last three 
or four years that I’ve raised this issue, we’ve heard about all 
the concerns. We heard that there was a Fyke Commission that 
was going around, so everybody said, just wait; we’ll see. Then 
there was the Fyke report and people said, well here’s the 
recommendations and now we’ll get an understanding of what 
the province is going to do. 
 
Then the action plan came down . . . came out and of course the 
Assiniboine Health Valley became the Sunrise and they said, 
well just wait; we’ll have to see what happens with the East 
Central Health District and the Assiniboine Valley and the 
North Valley District. Now we’re waiting for the Romanow 
report. And now it’s out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for this government to show some 
leadership. And I want to read into the record a comment made 
by the minister on July 4 of this year. I asked the question about 
whether or not there was going to be an announcement of 
funding because I thought the plan was in place. And on July 4 
the Minister of Health indicated to me, and I quote from 
Hansard of July 4. He said: 
 

I know that I’ve met with the mayor and some of the other 
people from Preeceville. And once we’re free, I’m hoping 
to go up to that area and see their project and the place 
where they want it to go and even have a better 
understanding of what they’re wanting to do. Because I 
think that’s how we rejuvenate our health system across the 
province. 
 

So you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was very pleased to see in 
the Preeceville Progress a picture of the Minister of Health in 
Preeceville. And true to his word, he came out and he met with 
the people. And in fact that’s the day, I understand, that Mr. 
Johnson presented the committee, through Mr. Nilson, for a 
cheque for $10,000 to go to that. 
 
So now is the time for action, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need . . . 
Communities, communities need the Department of Health, 
through the leadership of the minister, to announce these 
projects, to move forward for development because those are 
the kinds of services that people are very, very worried about. 
They need to feel assured by this government that the 
Romanow report which recommends this . . . it recommends 
that we ensure that rural and remote areas have access to 
services. 
 
The minister has met with the people. The announcement has 
been made by the new Sunrise Authority, that they’re . . . it’s 
approved in principle. And I think it’s time for this government 
to step forward and allow those communities like Preeceville to 
move forward. 
 
My final comment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is around the area of 
retaining professionals. The east central side of the province — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’d be very familiar with that side of 
the province — is very concerned about the fact that one of . . . 
one very good orthopedic surgeon by the name of Dr. Van 
Sittert is leaving Yorkton. And there are, there is concern 
expressed by the people, Mr. Kirwan, as CEO and others, is that 
there’s been difficulty recruiting a qualified surgeon to handle 
that tremendous load that Dr. Van Sittert had. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, those concerns are very, very important to the people 
of that area because if orthopedic surgery is removed from the 
regional facility in Yorkton . . . I spoke with the CEO of the 
Regina district, and he said, it would literally swamp their 
system in Regina. It just cannot be allowed to happen. 
 
So we have an example again of physicians leaving the 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as I quoted from the 
Romanow report, Mr. Romanow includes a section that he calls 
“Access to Doctors.” Now as a result of problems within the 
health system, as a result of too few professionals in the area of 
nursing, especially in the area of post-op beds, we have seen a 
cutback in the number of surgeries performed. And this is a 
domino effect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I now look at the community of Canora where we’ve had a 
number of tremendous general physicians — two doctors by the 
name of Dr. Cornelius Vanzyl and Dr. Lizette Vanzyl have 
decided to leave Saskatchewan. They’ve announced that 
effective December 31, they are headed for Ontario where he 
will be able to do surgeries and he will have a practice that will 
even be bigger than the one in Canora. But most importantly 
he’s going because he will be able to do surgeries. No surgeries 
are performed in Canora and he was trying to have some 
operating room time in Yorkton but, due to a shortage of 
professionals, it cannot be offered. So his decision is, leave 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So it is of great concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
Romanow Commission’s recommendation around retention of 
nursing graduates, around growing those areas, needs to be 
addressed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have raised two or three points of . . . for 
information for the people of Saskatchewan and the members 
opposite, and as indicated by the amendment it draws those 
particular things to the attention of this Assembly. And I’m 
honoured to be able to second that amendment. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, I am pleased 
to enter the debate . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — . . . to outline very clearly that I will be 
supporting the motion put forth by government and opposing 
the amendment by the members from across. 
 
Number one, the debate is about the Romanow Commission. 
The debate is about $6 billion extra money from the federal 
government in a certain time period which will be amounting to 
about 25 per cent, you know, of the funding, you know, from 
the federal government. Right now we have been debating with 
the feds in regards to 14 per cent funding or 17 depending what 
fact you take, and we would like them to improve on their 
funding levels. 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3013 

 

So we’re talking about both the quality of health plus the 
funding of health. And in that sense we’re pretty clear that the 
federal government has to come out with the dollars. And there 
was a bit of an uncertainty in the Sask Party position. They 
seem to be saying that we should be putting more money, you 
know, from the provincial side. 
 
And I’m not too sure about that position because last election 
when they were running, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were 
talking about zero, zero, zero. And now as a new election rolls 
around they’re becoming to be a little bit more moderate. 
They’re trying to sound a little bit more moderate and trying to 
sound a little bit more reasonable. But wait till after the 
election, you know. They’ll be going back to the same zero, 
zero, zero. And in that sense, Mr. Speaker, there’s got to be a 
bit of a sense of trust in regards to what they actually say and 
what they actually do into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I get into the debate, I wanted to focus in on 
the North and on First Nations and Métis people. Now as I look 
at the Romanow recommendations across for Aboriginal 
people, meaning the Inuit as well as First Nations and Métis 
people in Canada, we look at these recommendations very, very 
carefully and they seem to mesh in with some of the things that 
we’ve been doing in this province. Of course, it’s been very, 
very important as we looked at the history of the past 10 years. 
We’ve had the Fyke Commission and now the Romanow report 
at the federal level that we have made some progress towards 
some of the things Romanow is stating. 
 
Number one, as we were looking at the funding side, although 
we know we’d had a very difficult funding period, we’ve been 
able to do certain things in partnership with the federal 
government. And many of the people out there may not 
recognize that. 
 
The North had very few health centres. We had one in La 
Ronge. There was one that was down when . . . During when 
the Tories were in power, they had put in very little money into 
the North and we had health centres every couple of hundred 
miles but it was neglected in the North. They made promises all 
the time that they were on. They made promises that they would 
do something for the La Ronge Hospital. But lo and behold, 
when they were in power for nine years, nothing came of that 
promise — absolutely nothing. They were putting money into 
some of their constituencies but not in all, but they were putting 
nothing into the North. 
 
And so when people are talking about a First Nations strategy 
or a northern strategy, obviously a lot of the Sask Party people 
will be very, very wary . . . I mean, First Nations and 
northerners will be very worried because they know they make 
promises before an election but they don’t deliver them, you 
know, after the election. 
 
Now we look at the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And one of 
. . . The member says that I’m fearmongering. I’m actually 
speaking the facts. This is what actually happened. It is not 
fearmongering. It is directly what happened in regards to the 
North. 
 
And I know that the people in the North had raised $1 million 
— $1 million. They raised funds to build their health centre. 

But the Tories never even put any money down on the table for 
that La Ronge health hospital. 
 
When we come into power, we have put in about $30 million. 
We have put in money into the La Ronge health centre. We 
have put in money in regards to the Athabasca region. We have 
put in money into La Loche, and those centres are now going 
up. And even into — the person from Indian Head is talking 
about from his seat — and even in his area in Fort Qu’Appelle, 
we put some money in: a total of $30 million on Indian health, 
on Indian hospital there. 
 
So when you combine the amount of money — the 30 million 
that was into the northern hospitals plus the one in Fort 
Qu’Appelle — so that’s an important part to look at. The other 
one that comes out in the report is that there is a . . . it’s 
something that’s a little bit problematic for the Sask Party. They 
don’t like to see First Nations control or northern control. And 
in that sense when the Romanow report talks about direct input, 
this is the strategy we’ve been looking at. 
 
We’ve been having a strategy where we look at the P.A. (Prince 
Albert) Grand Council up in the north country as well as the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council, and they have come together. 
About three years ago I had met with one of their head persons 
called Lionel Bird. And Lionel Bird had talked about a new 
grand vision for the North wherein the treaty rights of people 
would be respected at the First Nations level, but they would 
come together in unity at the regional levels, at the tribal 
council levels, so that you could have health consulting people 
deliver support systems to the people at the local level. 
 
And also at that time we had a discussion and saying, why not 
do a partnership between that and the three regional health 
authorities for the North and for our three boards in the North. 
So when we had a discussion there, it was about this time 
before Christmas that I went to see him, and lo and behold it 
didn’t take long. In about another half year they had talked to 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council. They had all agreed that we 
should be having a partnership in the North and that we should 
have a co-operative approach. In that co-operative approach we 
therefore developed a memorandum of understanding. 
 
And this memorandum of understanding dealt with the key 
aspects because we knew that there would be shortage of 
funding over the long run. There had to be better co-operation 
on the regional level. There had to be co-operation not only for 
the people in the public system at large, the northern health 
boards, but there had to be co-operation with the First Nations 
regional bodies, which were the tribal council. 
 
So the model came to be . . . when you look at the Romanow 
Commission report, that’s what it’s talking about. It’s talking 
about that type of partnership to be developed overall 
throughout Canada. And I think it’s an extremely good model. 
When that report talks about this model, a person has to look at 
concrete tactics. 
 
We have seen now that the three health boards in the North plus 
the two tribal councils have come together to deal with the issue 
of diabetes. Diabetes is about six times higher in the First 
Nations and Métis communities and coming together in that 
fashion was very, very important. 



3014 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 2002 

 

So now they co-operate and look at not only the level of 
discussions on treatment but on education, you know, the 
importance of public education, the importance of nutrition, the 
importance of exercise, the difference between type 1 and type 
2 diabetes, and the prevention aspect that is very important 
dealing with the issue of type 2 diabetes. So that they have 
come together to do that type of work, and that’s the essence of 
the . . . Romanow’s report. 
 
At one end it respects the jurisdiction of treaty rights of First 
Nations people and also the fact that we need public access and 
public control of health. So it’s a combination of both in this 
partnership strategy and that’s what is going to work, you 
know, for the long run. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The other aspect, as we’re looking at it, I 
looked at the funding and it’s an extra 6 billion. I was very 
pleased in that funding. We had an extra one and a half billion 
for rural and remote funding. I know that the member from 
Melfort talked about Aboriginal people, but that report actually 
talks about remote funding as well — northern areas all across 
Canada as well as northern Saskatchewan. So I was pleased to 
see that aspect on the report, one and a half billion on that type 
of fund. 
 
There was also 2 billion on home care because in northern areas 
and in First Nation area, a lot of the people at the higher levels 
have to go outside their communities. And to start having a plan 
dealing with home care at the local level is a very, very 
important one, not only on the First Nations reserves, you 
know, across Saskatchewan, but also on the northern 
communities. So I think it’s an important aspect in regards to 
the overall development of health. 
 
The other thing is the primary health care model which different 
speakers have talked about already. But again, an integrated 
strategy where First Nations and Métis people are part and 
parcel of the primary health model is a very, very important 
aspect of the overall plan. 
 
As I looked at the idea of recruitment and retention, that was 
another aspect that was in that report that was very, very 
important. I know that we’ve been doing quite well on training 
people, you know, in the legal profession in the province, for 
Aboriginal people in the legal profession and getting them 
involved in areas of education. We have a lot of teachers, a lot 
of social workers. 
 
But where we lacked a little bit of development was on the 
health education side. First Nations and Métis people, we’ve 
been looking at it the past five years. I know my friend Valerie 
Arnault who runs that Native access program for nursing and 
they have over 100 people that have come through that 
program. There’s also an LPN (licensed practical nurse) 
program operating in P.A. in co-operation with SIIT 
(Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies) and I think — 
SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) I mean — and 
it’s very, very important to get these partnerships going. But it’s 
the training of the people that’s very important. 
 
I always thought we spend about approximately $1 billion in 

education in this province and we spend over 2.3 billion in 
health. Why not the training of a lot of First Nations and Métis 
people in those areas? 
 
So that plan deals with that as well, and it’s an important aspect 
of it. We want people to be LPNs, nurses. We want people to be 
the X-ray technicians. We want people, First Nations, Métis 
people to be pharmacists, dentists, doctors, and all type of 
different health care workers. And I think it’s very, very 
important as part of the overall strategy. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, on the third level, on the last level that I 
want to talk about a little bit, is this idea of consolidating the 
partnership. The partnership that’s in the North, it’s with two 
tribal councils and the three health boards an important 
partnership but we don’t see that in the rest of the province. 
There is a certain degree of partnerships that take place but not 
at that level. 
 
So we’d like to see that development, and when we get that 
funding on the remote access, and also the . . . on Aboriginal 
funding, that that would be an important part of the strategy. 
 
And the idea on the funds that the Romanow Commission talks 
about is that there’s about half a different . . . half a dozen 
different funding sources as you’re trying to get into the health 
care delivery and health care programming. 
 
And what Romanow is recommending is that we have a 
consolidated fund, you know, on First Nations, Métis, and Inuit 
health. So that there is a consolidated funding strategy so that 
everybody knows exactly not only the total amount of money 
that is being spent, but also from there you could detect exactly 
how much is being spent on diabetes, how much is being spent 
on FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome), FAE (fetal alcohol effects), 
what is being spent on ambulances, and what is being spent on 
the different needs that are there for First Nations, Métis, and 
northern communities. 
 
So those are very, very important aspects of the debate, Mr. 
Speaker. But in summary, as I look at my timing — I said that I 
would try and restrict with my comments between 15 and 20 
minutes — and I would say this. 
 
As I look back as a Cree-speaking person, and I dealt with a lot 
of our Dene brothers and sisters in the north country, I talked 
about health development over the years. And many of them, 
very interestingly, were reflective of our first phase when we 
did the first phase of a health care review in this province in the 
early ’90s. And what the people were talking about was that we 
were spending a lot . . . too much time on focusing in only on 
the illness side of the question, and that the Romanow 
Commission also deals with the prevention side. 
 
And we looked at the prevention side over the years and 
interestingly enough in Dene, in the Dene language, they call 
the health centre, the illness or the place of death . . . the illness 
place or the place of death. In Cree, we call it the 
ahkosiwikamik, which means the place of illness. You know 
that’s where the . . . The illness house is what we call it. 
 
And we’ve talked in the North about developing and evolving a 
new model that deals into the concept of healing. And we now 



December 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3015 

 

call . . . (inaudible) . . . somebody who does healing to 
somebody. And the new health centres should be called . . . 
(inaudible) . . . the healing centres. 
 
And in many cases, both the Dene and the Cree do agree that’s 
a type of model that we need to develop vis-à-vis the whole 
province. And when I know that with the Dakota people and the 
Nakota people and the Missinaibi Saulteaux people, it’s also, 
you know, a similar sort of strategy. You know the concept of 
healing is a very, very important aspect of the need for change 
into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I listen to the Sask Party comments again, 
final comments, it’s always a . . . they try to do a more 
moderate plan. The Saskatchewan Party’s trying to moderate 
their view. And I know that they’re saying that they will do 
more than zero, zero, zero. But it remains to be seen whether or 
not that is indeed true as we move on, later on into debate. 
 
But I think that as we’re looking, the essence of the debate is 
the quality of health care in the province; the Romanow 
Commission is there; and also the money — you know the 25 
per cent, the 6 billion. I don’t think that they will disagree with 
that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are my remarks. I 
would like to say I support the government resolution and 
oppose the amendment by the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:41. 
 


