















































Hansard: June 25, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1921 
 June 25, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to present a petition on behalf of people who travelled 
down Highway No. 49, which is in atrocious shape, and they 
came to Highway No. 23, which was in very bad shape, so 
they’ve asked me to present a petition on this highway. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 23 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Porcupine Plain and 
the surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Porcupine 
Plain and Tisdale. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg, Glenbain, Regina; Lethbridge and 
Blairmore, Alberta; and Halifax, Nova Scotia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people who have grave 
concerns over the condition of Highway 47 South. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this are from Bienfait, Roche 
Percee, North Portal, Weyburn, Torquay, Estevan, and Crosby, 
North Dakota. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who are 
concerned about the increase in crop insurance. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Kindersley and 
Netherhill. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again in the House today to present a petition on behalf of 
citizens concerned with the alarming rate of rural school 
closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to retain schools in rural communities 
such as Denzil and supply adequate education for rural 
families of our province. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitions will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Denzil. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with the high cost of prescription drugs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about Crown leaseholders. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Borden and Biggar. 
 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on the condition of Highway 14. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair this highway in order to address 
safety concerns and facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by people from Wilkie and North 
Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
concerned with this government’s inaction in addressing the 
water level issue in the Qu’Appelle lakes. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with First 
Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to its normal level and 
end the economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has 
caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the petitions tabled yesterday 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received and tabled as addendums to sessional papers 
no. 12, 21, 35, 114, 120, 124, 141, and 162. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to stand in the Assembly today on 
behalf of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts to 
present the committee’s fourth report of this, the twenty-fourth 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee has last met on June 24 of this year 
and up to that time, we have had the opportunity to examine a 

number of reports of the Provincial Auditor. As many as eight 
reports have been looked at, going back to as far back as 1999 
Fall Report Volume 2, up to of course the 2002 Fall Report of 
the Provincial Auditor Volume 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee still has a fair amount of work to do 
in that we have not concluded the consideration of all of the 
chapters of the 2002 Fall Report Volume 2, and that is some of 
the work that we will be doing, probably later on at the end of 
this summer so that we will be able to move forward. 
 
And beyond that, Mr. Speaker, of course the Provincial Auditor 
has tabled very recently the 2003 Spring Report. So the 
committee will have a fair amount of work to do and in 
consultation with the Vice-Chair from the government’s side, 
we’ll be planning some work sessions, probably in early 
September or to the middle of September, where we will again 
be able to meet to consider the report of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move a motion, seconded by 
the member for Regina Northeast, the Vice-Chair of the Public 
Accounts Committee: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure today to welcome a group of 21 students from 
Balcarres School, in the great community of Balcarres, Mr. 
Speaker. And accompanying this bright, young-looking bunch 
of students are the teachers: Deanna Hollerbaum, Susan Henry, 
Ali Matai, Elaine Bailey, and Laura Dixon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately given their tight timelines, we won’t 
have an opportunity for a meeting. But I do hope that you 
young ladies and gentlemen enjoy your visit here in the 
Legislative Assembly. And very best wishes to you and your 
families and your communities. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these bright young 
students to our Assembly, and their teachers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to the Assembly eight people who work in 
the Legislative Assembly and who were honoured this morning 
at the Long Service Awards ceremony of the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
It’s a special day for these people who have accomplished either 
10 or 15 or 20 years of service with the Legislative Assembly. 
And I would ask them to rise one by one as I mention their 
names. 
 
So serving and having received the 10-year Long Service 
Award, we have, first of all, Kathy Wells, who works at the 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

 

human resources and administrative services; Myra Cole, who 
works in Hansard. Having been here 15 years, Linda Spence, 
who works with the Speaker’s office; Anne Hoffmann, who 
works at the Legislative Library; and not here but I think 
working at this very moment in Journals is Pam Scott, who’s 
also received the 15-year recognition. And having received 20 
years of recognition, we have Lorraine deMontigny, from 
visitor services; Linda Kaminski, from human resources and 
administrative services; and Tim Prince, from the Legislative 
Library. 
 
And there are some family members who have accompanied 
them, and I would ask all members to congratulate and 
welcome these employees of the Legislative Assembly Office. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce and have members welcome three 
people who are from my constituency. One I think is part-time 
these days, but they are also in your gallery and have . . . One of 
them at least has stood just earlier. 
 
But I would like to introduce Pam Yungwirth, who was a Page 
here a couple of years ago and has been attending university, 
and her mother Sandra who works in administration, and one 
other constituent who stood to receive congratulations, Linda 
Kaminski. So I’d ask all to join in welcoming these constituents 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I have one more introduction. I 
would like to introduce to you as well, seated beside Sandra 
Yungwirth and Pam Yungwirth is a guest from Princeton, BC 
(British Columbia), Eileen Posein. Welcome to the Assembly, 
Eileen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Work and the Family 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the major 
workplace issues and one of the major social issues of the first 
decade of this new century is the challenge of achieving a 
desirable balance between work and the family. Finding a 
workable solution is critical. 
 
I am proud that we have a work and family unit within the 
Department of Labour whose work is internationally 
recognized. Let me tell you about a recent example of how this 
unit puts the issue of balancing work and family before the 
public. Together with the Canadian Association of Family 
Enterprises and the Balancing Work and Family Alliance, they 
co-sponsored a series of events with the highlight being a 
luncheon address by Ken Dryden. 
 
Ken, of course, is well known to the rest of the world for 
hockey. He is also, though, an author and he is also a family 
person. Mr. Speaker, people were moved to tears when Ken 
Dryden spoke. His topic, “Towards a different future: how can 

we help our kids do better?” His answer to his own question, 
spend more time with our children. His solution to this 
challenge, adjust workplace attitudes and schedules so that 
proper emphasis goes to proper places. 
 
My favourite line in his speech is, quote: 
 

Quality time is a crock! It is our own purposeful delusion. 
In fact, essential to quality is quantity. 

 
Hard to argue with a superstar like Ken Dryden, Mr. Speaker. 
Copies of his speech are available from the work and family 
unit. They should be read by everyone who cares about work 
and families. More importantly, it should be acted upon. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Faces of Racism through the Eyes of a Child 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this past Monday I was able to attend the Faces of Racism 
through the Eyes of a Child grand finale at the Davison School 
in Melville, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program was sponsored by SaskTel Pioneers 
and Marieval Enterprise Center Inc. Mr. Speaker, the 
Cowessess Community Education Centre, grades 3 to 6, and 
Davison Elementary School grades have partnered together 
with SaskTel Pioneers and Marieval Enterprise Center to 
combat racism and bullying. 
 
Young children between the two schools established pen pals, 
are beginning to gain a greater understanding about each other’s 
culture and life. They’ve been talking about things that other 
people or children have done to them that have hurt them and 
made them feel sad, and they’ve also been discussing solutions 
to ensure that those types of behaviours will not happen again to 
other children. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to accommodate this as well, the two schools 
had an interchange between the schools. On one day they spent 
. . . the Davison School children, parents, and teachers went to 
Cowessess and vice versa a couple of days later. And the idea, 
Mr. Speaker, was to sit down and really discuss racism and 
bullying and how to combat it. 
 
These communities and corporations have recognized, Mr. 
Speaker, that racism and bullying must stop and that only by 
working together can we hope to have an impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it certainly was a fine presentation as they 
presented their grand finale and I trust that through this effort 
we will indeed be able to begin to address the issues of racism 
and bullying in our communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Awards to Yorkton Community Groups 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

week it was my privilege to present four Yorkton community 
groups with grants totalling just over $14,000 for community 
initiatives funds that support summer programs related to 
children and youth. 
 
The Boys and Girls Club received $4,500 to provide 
opportunities for kids between the ages of 6 to 16 to participate 
in a variety of programs, including the arts and crafts, daily 
recreation and sports, and a three-day camping trip. 
 
The second presentation was to the Yorkton boys . . . brothers 
and sisters who received 3,000 for something called Sizzling 
Summer Activities Program, which consists of a variety of fun 
educational activities such as canoeing, archery clinic, the kids 
and cops program — and highlighting the role of the police 
officers — and of course the water safety course, outdoor 
survival, and a sports and recreation day. 
 
The city of Yorkton’s leisure services received $3,500 in 
funding to deliver a couple of different . . . to deliver in a couple 
of different locations is designed to help kids 6 to 11 participate 
in social skills development. 
 
And $3,500 went to the Parkland Early Childhood Intervention 
Program that launched a special summer program of respite. 
This focuses on children with special and challenging needs to 
provide respite services throughout the week as well as giving 
parents access to support groups once a week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the kinds of programs directed at 
supporting this province’s children and families and help us to 
create the kind of wide open future that we talk about. And I’m 
sure all of my colleagues will want to join me in wishing all of 
the organizers every success and all the young folks that will be 
taking part in the summer programming this summer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Telephone Charges in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The past few weeks 
this NDP (New Democratic Party) government has spent a great 
deal of taxpayers’ money promoting Saskatchewan through 
their so-called Future is Wide Open ad campaign. The 
campaign strongly suggests that Saskatchewan is a fair place to 
establish new businesses and that their prosperity is assured. 
The people of Saskatchewan and recent new business inquiries 
know that this is false advertising. 
 
Recently a successful company from Alberta called GrainPlace 
FirstAgra sought to establish a branch of their company here in 
Saskatchewan at Glenside in my constituency. The business 
wished to establish a modern office in this community and 
inquired to SaskTel as to the cost of three phone lines, one fax 
line, and a dedicated line for dial-up Internet. 
 
Incredibly the quote to GrainPlace that the first phone line 
would cost $221, the next two lines would cost $13,188 each, 
and the final two lines SaskTel reduced to a mere $13,152 each 
— over $52,000 in costs. This from a government who 

advertise that Saskatchewan is a fair place to do business. 
 
If this business established in a large Saskatchewan community 
or city, the cost would only be a fraction of the quote received 
by GrainPlace. However since this grain company wanted to 
establish in a small town in rural Saskatchewan, they were 
penalized. I guess the future is only wide open wherever the 
NDP thinks they can gain the most votes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students Promote Energy Conservation 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the Assembly today to inform everyone that 
David Kreps, a grade 2 student in Dieppe School in my 
constituency, is the Saskatchewan winner of a contest 
promoting energy conservation. 
 
The 2004 National Energy and Environment Calendar Contest 
is an initiative of Natural Resources Canada and is 
co-sponsored in the province by Saskatchewan Learning and 
Saskatchewan Industry and Resources. Students aged 6 to 13 
submit artwork on themes of energy conservation and climate 
change, and the winning entries from each province and 
territory are published in a calendar that promotes wise energy 
use. 
 
David’s winning entry, entitled, “Don’t Take a Car, Use a 
Bike,” was one of 423 entries received from students across the 
province. The Saskatchewan runner-up was 13-year-old Kelsey 
Dionne, a grade 7 student from River Academy in Prince 
Albert, whose submission was entitled, “Be Smart, Conserve 
Energy.” Both students receive a prize package and Dieppe 
School in my area also received a $250 grant to its resource 
centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, climate change and energy conservation are issues 
that are of concern to all of us. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to congratulate David Kreps on 
this winning entry and all students who entered for their interest 
and participation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nomination for International Poet of the Year 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today 
to bring to the attention of this Assembly a young woman from 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency, Kayla Chorney, who has 
been nominated for the International Poet of the Year for 2003. 
 
Kayla entered one of her many pieces, called “Ring,” in January 
2003 to the International Society Open Poetry Contest. She was 
selected as a semi-finalist in February and from there in March 
2003 she advanced to the final competition. Her work has been 
chosen for international publication. 
 
In April she received another letter stating that she had been 
chosen as one of the 33 poets whose artistry would be recorded 
professionally as a special part of a new poetry collection, The 
Sound of Poetry. Her poem will be presented aloud by a 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

 

professional reader with a beautiful music form in the 
background. 
 
On August 15, she’ll be inducted as an International Poet of 
Merit and honoured in Washington, DC (District of Columbia) 
during the 2003 International Society of Poets summer 
convention. 
 
Kayla will personally present her poetry in front of her fellow 
poets from around the world. She will also be presented with an 
Outstanding Achievement in Poetry Silver Award, as well as a 
commemorative award medallion to honour her poetic 
dedication and achievements. She’s in the running for a grand 
prize of $20,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulation Kayla on her poetry accomplishments and 
wishing this young poet future success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Queen’s Jubilee Award Recipient 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m absolutely 
thrilled to take a moment to talk about a person from Meadow 
Lake, Ms. Unita Esau. 
 
Just last week Unita was honoured with the Queen’s Jubilee 
Award. This award is given to individuals who have 
accomplished a great achievement or have provided 
distinguished service to citizens within their community. 
 
What is Unita’s achievement? She has given and continues to 
give the gift of literacy to members of the Meadow Lake 
community. For several years Unita has been involved with 
Laubach Literacy Canada. She just recently stepped down as 
president of the national organization. This award is in 
recognition of her countless hours of volunteer work in helping 
others learn how to read and write. 
 
I would now like to read a quote from the June 22 edition of the 
Meadow Lake Progress that sums up Unita’s commitment to 
assisting others in the area of literacy. In speaking about the 
award, she says, quote: 

 
The top feel good achievement is when one person learns to 
read and write. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is people like Unita Esau that make Meadow 
Lake a great place and Saskatchewan a great place to live in, 
Mr. Speaker. With people like herself, our future truly is wide 
open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Population Decline 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the NDP 
government has spent millions of dollars on its Future is Wide 
Open campaign. We see the stuff everywhere, Mr. Speaker, so 
now it’s time to determine what are the results. 

Well according to the latest population figures just released, it’s 
not working. The Wide Open Future campaign is an utter 
failure because in the first quarter of 2003 Saskatchewan lost 
almost 1,500 people. That’s one of the worst population losses 
in the last decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP may be spending millions of dollars on 
its PR (public relations) campaign, but it’s doing absolutely 
nothing to stop the outflow of people from the province of 
Saskatchewan. Why is the NDP driving so many people out of 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
Leader of the Opposition — who of course is always quite 
negative as anyone watching this can see — that there was a 
slight fluctuation in the population of the province. But I want 
to say, Mr. Speaker, that the population numbers are going to 
catch up to what is really going on in our economy, which is 13 
straight months of job growth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s what’s going on. And I want to say 
to the member opposite also, Mr. Speaker, that I received an 
e-mail from someone who had this to say. They said, you know, 
I have not heard one negative comment about the campaign — 
well except for his of course — in fact just the opposite; 
everyone loves it. I was at a youth meeting, it says, concerning 
how to keep youth in Saskatchewan and the high school 
students there said that the commercials on TV make them want 
to stay and pursue opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
minister from the NDP may want the opposition to jump for joy 
because people are leaving the province of Saskatchewan. But 
the truth is it’s breaking the hearts of people from 
Saskatchewan to have to leave. And the Future is Wide Open 
campaign has been an absolute flop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out-migration, net out-migration have more than 
doubled from the previous quarter. If you can imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP are driving many more people out of the 
province of Saskatchewan than those who are entering our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how on earth can the Premier suggest that his 
Wide Open Future campaign is working when the number of 
people leaving Saskatchewan has doubled in the last quarter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the Leader of the Opposition should 
know — if he doesn’t know, Mr. Speaker — that when his hero, 
Grant Devine, was premier there weren’t 1,500 people leaving 
in a year, there were 15,000 people leaving in a year, Mr. 
Speaker. And things are turning around in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s 13,000 people more working now than there 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

were a year ago. The only thing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing that would 
drive people out of this province is the negativity of the Leader 
of the Opposition and people like him who refuse, Mr. Speaker, 
to acknowledge that Saskatchewan is on a roll. Mr. Speaker, 
there are 13,000 more people working, retail sales are leading 
the nation, urban housing starts are up, oil and gas drilling is up 
about 60 per cent so far this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re on a roll and we’re going to roll right over 
those naysayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
minister may be right. Perhaps 15,000 people did leave 
Saskatchewan under the Devine government. And the Devine 
government lost the election and they deserved to lose the 
election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, according to recent statistics, 35,000 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, 35,000 people 
have left the province of Saskatchewan under this NDP 
government. Mr. Speaker, this government is going to go down 
just as hard or harder than the Devine government went down. 
And it deserves to go down; it deserves to fall flat on its face. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the NDP government we have seen 18 
consecutive quarters of population loss. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
four and a half years of people leaving Saskatchewan under the 
NDP government. Mr. Speaker, any way you look at it, that is a 
disaster of divine proportions and more, Mr. Speaker. Why is 
the NDP driving so many people out of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report 
that not everyone shares the doom and gloom attitude of the 
Leader of the Opposition. I’m looking at Saturday’s 
StarPhoenix where the Bank of Nova Scotia, Mr. Speaker, says 
that whereas the Canadian economy will not grow very much 
this year, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s resource receipts should hold up very well 
and . . . (we’re hopeful that Saskatchewan will lead the 
nation in economic growth.) 

 
That’s what the Bank of Nova Scotia says, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to say also, Mr. Speaker, that we always have our 
challenges in Saskatchewan but we on this side of the House 
don’t sit around and just complain about everything, Mr. 
Speaker. We take action. 
 
We take action on oil and gas royalty reform, building the 
mining sector, reforming taxes, investing in the infrastructure 

— highways, education, and building the health care system, 
Mr. Speaker. And it is positive people that will build the 
province, not a bunch of gloom and doom naysayers like those 
people over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
minister may be hopeful. Mr. Speaker, I’m hopeful too. But the 
inaction of the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Order. 
I must be able to hear the question being put. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The inaction of 
the NDP government is driving people to hopelessness to the 
point where 35,000 people have left Saskatchewan under the 
NDP reign over the last four and a half years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are young people — primarily young people 
— from every nook and cranny of this province, from every 
city, from every rural area who have left Saskatchewan not 
because they want to, Mr. Speaker, but because the NDP 
doesn’t care about them; the NDP has driven them from the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier, in light of this revelation — 
another 1,500 people leaving the province in the last quarter — 
stand up in this House and admit that his government has 
absolutely failed to keep people in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat this because I don’t 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
report retail sales are up, urban housing starts are up, building 
permits are up, department store sales are up, natural gas and oil 
well drilling is up, potash sales are up, manufacturing shipments 
are up. And, Mr. Speaker, the number of people working in 
Saskatchewan is up. 
 
The only thing not up, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, is the 
attitude of the Leader of the Opposition and his party because 
they’re unhappy, Mr. Speaker. Because when things are going 
well in Saskatchewan, they’re fearful that they won’t get what 
they want, which is power at any cost, Mr. Speaker. Even at the 
cost of trashing this province and trying to get people to have 
the same gloomy, down-in-the-mouth attitude that they have. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? People don’t share their 
attitude. People love Saskatchewan. They love living in 
Saskatchewan. And we’re going to have a very great future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Advertising During By-election Campaign 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if the minister believes the Future is Wide Open 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

 

campaign is working so well, get the Premier to call the 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve always said the 
future wide open campaign is not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the future wide open is simply a political campaign and today 
we have the proof, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have two . . . I have received copies of two 
government ads that appeared today in The Nipawin Journal 
and the Hudson Bay Post-Review. One is an ad from the 
Department of Highways, Mr. Speaker, and the other is an ad 
from the Future is Wide Open campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Election Act clearly prohibits the government 
from running taxpayers-funded government advertising during 
an election campaign. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why is the 
NDP government breaking the election law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I must admit that I haven’t read either of those papers 
this morning. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that we will check and 
verify the facts. And once the facts are known, we will act 
appropriately. And if we have, if we have erred, we will correct 
it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, The Election Act reads as 
follows: 
 

During a by-election, no Government department shall 
publish in any manner any information with respect to the 
activities of the department. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the clear is intent — even though the member 
opposite continues to laugh about it, Mr. Speaker — is so that 
the governing party does not have an unfair advantage in an 
election by running taxpayers-funded advertising to the benefit 
of the governing party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a clear violation of The Election Act and 
the member from Cumberland should know it very well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Will the Premier explain why his NDP government is breaking 
the law by running these ads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my 
first response, we will check the facts and if there were 
improper actions, the proper response and the proper correction 
will take place. We’ll take the proper action if there was in fact 
wrongdoing, but we’ll check the facts, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These are the 
advertisements. The people in Nipawin and Hudson Bay and 
the Carrot River riding are seeing them today for an election 
that happens tomorrow. And the government’s saying, we’ll 
look into it. 
 
They knew what they were doing, Mr. Speaker, and the law is 
very clear. The government is not allowed to run government 
advertising during an election campaign. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. We must be able 
to hear the words distinctly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s an election taking place in the Carrot River constituency 
— in Nipawin, in Hudson Bay, in Arborfield — areas served by 
The Nipawin Journal and the Hudson Bay Post-Review. 
They’re the only weekly papers in that constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The NDP are running behind in that election and perhaps their 
polling shows that they’re even running in third place, and this 
is sheer desperation tactics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, why is your government breaking 
the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
House that the departments are directed during an election 
campaign not to place ads that are not in compliance with the 
elections Act, and that is very clear. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
if that has not been followed and if those rules have been 
broken, the appropriate action will be taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will check into it and I assure you that the 
appropriate action will be taken if wrongdoing has taken place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Appropriate 
action when the election is tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, and those 
ads just came out today in the paper, from the Department of 
Highways and the Future is Wide Open campaign. 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, exemptions to the law. Those are in the 
case of emergencies only. The future wide open campaign is not 
an emergency, Mr. Speaker, it’s a political campaign. 
Advertising for highway construction across the entire province 
is not an emergency, Mr. Speaker. So neither one of these fall 
within the exemptions. So clearly the NDP is breaking the law. 
 
Will the Premier admit that the NDP are breaking the election 
law and what does he intend to do about it? How is he going to 
demonstrate, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP actually believe in and 
practise democracy, as in their party name, Mr. Speaker, or is 
that just political rhetoric? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — How does Grant Schmidt feel about 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting 
that the Saskatchewan Party would raise the issue of democracy 
and belief in democracy after the performance of their leader 
and their political party in Melville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have indicated, I have indicated to the House that government 
departments are directed to be in compliance with the electoral 
Act which was passed by this House. I will check the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, and if there hasn’t been compliance with that Act, the 
appropriate action, believe me, will be taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. Alberta Premier Ralph Klein met yesterday at 
the White House with senior American government officials, 
including Vice-president Dick Cheney. And the news, Mr. 
Speaker, is both good and bad. 
 
The good news is that the Alberta Premier Klein’s strong 
relationship with the United States is helping to raise the 
concerns of Saskatchewan cattle producers in Washington, and 
Premier Klein has indicated that the Americans are satisfied 
with the Canadian efforts to address the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) issue. 
 
The bad news is that the Americans are saying it is the 
Government of Japan that is now blocking the US (United 
States) border from reopening to Canadian cattle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps is the NDP government taking to assist 
in persuading Japan to remove the roadblocks to reopening the 
US border for Canadian cattle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all 
recognize the work that is being done by the Premier of Alberta. 
When we met in Kelowna it was understood among all premiers 
that the Premier of Alberta would be travelling to Washington 
and he would represent all Canadian provinces, and we wish 
him well. 
 
I want to say today though, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s become 
more apparent that the role of the Japanese and South Koreans 
in this debate is having an effect on decision making in the 
United States. This morning I have been able to establish 
appointments to speak with, by telephone on Friday, the 
ambassador of Japan to Canada and the ambassador of South 
Korea to Canada. 
 
When I speak to the ambassadors on Friday I will describe, of 
course, the safety of the food supply in Western Canada and I 
will invite both of those individuals to come to Saskatchewan 
and experience for themselves, and learn for themselves, the 

safety of food in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation Program for Beef Industry 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to move on to the 
applications for the federal BSE compensation program which 
are finally available today. Many cattle producers are looking at 
the program applications and coming to the same conclusion. 
The program absolutely fails the producers hit hardest with the 
BSE crisis. 
 
For example, assuming that the federal government gets around 
to establishing a fair reference price, a market price drop of 25 
per cent will trigger a federal compensation payment that will 
cover 94 per cent of the producer’s actual loss on the sale. But 
if the market price nose-dives by 65 per cent, that same 
producer would be financially devastated because the 
compensation program would cover just 41.5 per cent of the 
actual loss on the cattle sale. 
 
Does the minister support the flawed compensation formula in 
the federal government’s BSE recovery program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, from the onset we’ve said 
that we wanted the premiers’ option to be the option that would 
be entertained by the federal government, and that’s the ones 
that the premiers put forward. Those are exactly the same 
positions that all Canadian Agriculture ministers put forward. 
At the end of the day the federal government said we’re going 
to have the current formula that we have today, shared on a 
60/40 basis. 
 
Would we like to see the premiers’ formula in place? We 
would. But we need to remember that when we put the 
premiers’ formula in place where you pay the first 90 per cent 
to a level of 50 or 55 per cent, the taxpayers across the country 
are the ones who will pay the cost, whether or not meat in this 
country moves or not. 
 
The federal government was of the view that if you have a 
sliding scale, you will promote the movement of livestock in an 
orderly fashion in Canada. That has not yet happened today and 
I expect that it likely would not happen on a fixed percentage to 
90 . . . on the 90 per cent to 50 cents per pound today or 60 
cents per pound today. 
 
What would happen, Mr. Speaker, is that you’ll pay a larger 
amount of money to the packers because meat yet in Canada is 
not moving. Meat’s not moving, Mr. Speaker, not on the basis 
of what we’re compensating producers; it’s not moving, Mr. 
Speaker, because the border isn’t open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that the 
industry recognizes the compensation package is severely 
flawed and they would prefer to see a compromise between the 
premiers’ option and the existing program. 
 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

 

They would like to establish a floor price of 50 cents a pound 
which . . . under which there would be no compensation. But 
anything sold above 50 cents a pound would be compensated a 
full 90 per cent. The proposal would still encourage that there 
wouldn’t be dumping into the market irresponsibly. Does the 
minister support that proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal that the member 
is reading from is a Saskatchewan industry proposal. It is not a 
national Cattlemen’s Association’s response to what the 
changes should be. And I’m very familiar with that package. 
I’ve just read it from Mr. Wildeman this morning. 
 
We just got off a conference call this morning with Western 
ministers. Western ministers and the Canadian industry is 
recommending as well, yet, a sliding scale, not as deep as the 
previous proposal that the federal government had put forward, 
capping it . . . not capping it, Mr. Speaker. That proposal from 
Mr. Wildeman talks about capping. 
 
The Canadian industry is talking about reducing it on a sliding 
scale of which 90 percentile would apply up until 70 cents. 
From 70 to 50 cents there would be a reduced level of 
compensation, and then onwards into the lower prices. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, it is not the compensation package 
that will get the meat moving. Movement of the meat will only 
occur on the opening of the border. Will it help the producers in 
the industry? The truth is, is that it would. But it doesn’t get the 
animals moving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we fully recognize that 
ultimately we need to get the border opened. We recognize that. 
But we have to know what to do in the meantime. 
 
Setting aside the inadequacy of the compensation formula for 
just a moment, there’s another major problem with the federal 
BSE compensation program. It requires the producer to sell his 
cattle in order to trigger a compensation payment. 
 
The problem is that in Saskatchewan there’s virtually no market 
for our cattle. Almost no cattle are being sold for slaughter in 
Saskatchewan because there is no place in Saskatchewan that is 
slaughtering animals. 
 
Producers can’t ship their cattle to Eastern Canada or west to 
Alberta because the slaughter facilities are full. So there is no 
Saskatchewan market for cattle and therefore producers have 
not been able to move their animals. 
 
What is the minister doing to assist the opening of slaughter 
capacity in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the movement of slaughtered 
meat is the responsibility today of the slaughtering plants and 
slaughtering houses in Ontario and in . . . primarily in Ontario 
and in Alberta. 
 
The member is not right when she says that meat is not moving 

in Ontario. Meat is moving in Ontario and local meat is moving 
in Ontario, Mr. Speaker. Meat is not moving to Ontario, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Meat in Western Canada is not moving, Mr. Speaker, because 
the slaughtering houses are not able, Mr. Speaker, the 
slaughtering houses, Mr. Speaker, are not able to move the meat 
as quickly into the retail outlets. Why? Because the retail outlets 
today, Mr. Speaker, are buying the meat out of the US. That’s 
why. Because the border, Mr. Speaker, is closed. Because the 
border is closed, Mr. Speaker. And in fact the retail industry in 
Canada is buying the meat cheaper today and we don’t have a 
market today for our own meat in Saskatchewan. That’s why 
the meat isn’t moving in Western Canada today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when the member opposite says we need to move the meat 
in Western Canada, we need to move the meat in Western 
Canada. But you know what we need to do? We need to ship it 
east in Canada, Mr. Speaker, which today their own packing 
houses are supplying their own industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Health Care in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, to share some more good news about the state of 
health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
This morning I had the opportunity to participate in three events 
in Saskatoon: the College of Medicine’s 50th anniversary 
celebration, an announcement of an additional $6 million 
investment into the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, and an 
announcement of $900,000 investment into the Saskatoon 
Health Region for the expansion at the Royal University 
Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along with the Minister of Learning, I was pleased 
to be able to participate in the celebration of a major milestone 
for the College of Medicine, five decades of achievements. 
These achievements are the results of many years of 
commitment and dedication of the faculty, administration, and 
students. 
 
A commitment to support a strong and vital College of 
Medicine is a major component of our Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care which the Premier and I were 
pleased to announce in December 2001, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was also pleased today to announce that we are 
investing an additional $6 million in the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency to purchase two new linear accelerators as well as to 
make renovations to their existing facilities and to increase 
radiation therapy staff training. 
 
We know that everyone in our province has been touched by 
cancer. Nearly 5,000 new cancer cases were reported in the year 
2001. As we all know, these are not just cases — these are our 
friends, our family members, our colleagues, and community 
members. That is why today our government has invested this 
$6 million, with 4.8 million going towards to new cancer 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

treatment equipment and staff training and 1.2 million for 
renovations to the bunkers that house the linear accelerators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this announcement is also important to the health 
care providers who work closely with patients to achieve the 
best results. We all know new equipment means very little if we 
do not have the necessary professionals to use it. Having access 
to advanced technology is a factor that is known to keep and 
attract health care providers. I’m pleased to recognize, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency’s strong 
recruitment and retention initiatives have been paying off over 
the past few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a $900,000 investment by our government to the 
Saskatoon Health Region will allow the planning team to 
finalize the scope, costs, and design of a multi-phase project to 
expand the emergency department, to upgrade the operating 
rooms, and to redevelop the critical care areas at Royal 
University Hospital. 
 
The Royal University Hospital emergency department and 
critical care units treat patients from all over the northern half of 
the province and continue to provide most of the complex 
tertiary care services for the region. The emergency department 
requires more space to house the high-tech medical equipment 
of today’s health care environment, Mr. Speaker, and to be able 
to handle these volumes more efficiently. 
 
The redevelopment and expansion of the intensive care unit and 
the cardiac care unit will allow medical staff to provide 
state-of-the-art critical care to all patients who need it. This plan 
to expand emergency and critical care services within the 
Saskatoon Health Region is a key element of our Action Plan 
for Saskatchewan Health Care. 
 
Earlier this year we announced a $61 million investment in our 
provincial budget over the next two years for new and upgraded 
health care facilities. This commitment allows us to approve 
and support a number of new projects such as this one, Mr. 
Speaker, that are necessary to sustain our province’s health care 
system. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, this government continues to invest 
in our health care system so all people in this province have 
quality and accessible health care services that will be 
sustainable into the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to respond to 
the ministerial statement. And I appreciate that I did receive the 
ministerial statement some half hour ago, so thank you for that, 
to the minister. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is encouraging to see that the provincial 
government is moving forward and addressing some of the 
concerns in our health system today. And, Mr. Speaker, the $6 
million that will be put into the Cancer Agency I’m sure is very 
welcome news for all citizens of Saskatchewan and especially 
for those citizens whose family and friends today are dealing 
with the very serious issue of having cancer. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is good news to see that we are moving 
forward with these concerns because in the past there have, and 
continue to be, serious concerns over the waiting time that 
people do incur in this province, whether it be for cancer 
treatment or for other services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think back to just last year when the whole 
. . . when I brought up the issue around a gentleman that was 
seeking care for cancer and how the doctor that he was . . . that 
was servicing him tried to get him in for treatment for cancer 
and was told that he was not . . . did not have priority status and 
so the waiting time for his patient would be somewhat longer 
than for other doctors. And there was certainly grave concern 
by the doctor when he heard that news and even more concern, 
Mr. Speaker, by the individual that was waiting for the care. 
 
And so I am hopeful that the addition of two new linear 
accelerators for the cancer society will indeed speed up the time 
that people have to wait for care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I noted that the minister also spoke about 
how the health care providers in cancer clinics and of course 
throughout the whole health care system are the most important 
part of the system. 
 
And today I would like to commend the health care providers in 
this province, not only those that work in the health . . . for the 
Cancer Agency but all health care providers for how they have 
stepped up to the plate over the last several years and have held 
the health care system together in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I notice that, I believe it was a week or two ago, that the 
nurses in the province made a statement about how they want to 
have a greater part to play in the solutions to the health care 
system in Saskatchewan, that they want to be recognized for the 
contribution that they can make. And indeed it has been my 
experience when I have spoke to nurses and doctors throughout 
this province that they do have solutions and they do want to 
have the opportunity to bring those solutions forward, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so it is good to see that they have been recognized as a 
very important part of what our health care system is all about 
and that they are indeed providing much needed care for people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I noted that the minister also referred to that 
it is necessary . . . not only important to have the new 
equipment which he has announced today, but it is also 
important to have the professionals to operate that equipment. 
And that again has been a great concern over the last several 
years in the province, about the number of professionals that we 
have and certainly many that we have lost from our province. 
And we would hope that in the future we will see that improve. 
 
And certainly one of the major concerns, especially for 
specialists, is the type of equipment that they have to use — 
whether it is in good repair, whether it is up to date. And I know 
that there was great concern especially in Regina by some of the 
specialists because of the age of the equipment they had and the 
lack of funding that had been in the budget over several years to 
purchase new equipment. And so, Mr. Speaker, I am 
encouraged that we are moving forward in this front. 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

 

The second part of the minister’s announcement is the $900,000 
investment by the government especially into . . . focusing on 
the emergency department of the Royal University Hospital in 
Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, again this is an area that has been 
a grave concern for many people, not only in Saskatoon but 
throughout the province about the emergency department and 
the service provided. 
 
And one of the major concerns has been the waiting time that 
individuals experience when they go to the emergency 
department. And if I refer back to the 1999 election campaign 
and the promise by the NDP government at that time was that 
there would be a 15-minute, only a 15-minute wait at 
emergency and that certainly has not been the case since, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 
We think of the dedication of the nurses and doctors that work 
in emergency and who provide excellence of care every day in 
our province but who work under very, very, very stressful 
situations. I have spoken many times with nurses that work in 
the emergency department and they have stressed to me their 
concern over the number of nurses that they sometimes have to 
work with because of a shortage of staffing, about the overtime. 
I remember one time being in Saskatoon and the concern was 
about having to put patients in the hallway. And, Mr. Speaker, 
so there are great concerns around the emergency wards and the 
ability for nurses and doctors to be able to provide the 
appropriate care and in a timely fashion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally I would like to just reference the 
College of Medicine, their 50th anniversary, and to congratulate 
the college on their commitment to the province and recognize 
the facility and the administration and the students, the part that 
they have played in Saskatchewan. And we hope that they will 
be there in the future. It is a much needed addition to our 
province and to our university. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 763 through 774 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — 763 to 774 inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
(EX01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier and ask the 
Premier to introduce his officials. 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. With 
me today is Mr. Dan Perrins, who is deputy minister to the 
Premier. Immediately behind Mr. Perrins is Ms. Barb MacLean, 
who is the acting director of senior management services. And 
just behind myself is Ms. Bonita Cairns, who is the director of 
administration and information services. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I would like to 
welcome the Premier to the Assembly with his officials for this 
exercise called Executive Council estimates, or Premier’s 
estimates perhaps is the more common term given to the 
process where the opposition is able to ask the Premier 
specifically about his role and his department’s role in all 
aspects of the government and decisions made by that 
government. 
 
Just by way of introductory comments, I would just like to 
mention to the Premier that under our system we all have arenas 
in which we have to be accountable and where we have to 
answer. 
 
And certainly as Leader of the Official Opposition I know that 
there are times when I am called into account and have to be 
prepared to answer questions, and I am happy to do that. I have 
done that before the media. I have done that in front of the 
chamber of commerce. I have done that at the FSIN (Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations). I have been even answerable 
at the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour convention, and I 
don’t mind doing that. And of course when the election is 
called, Mr. Premier, we will all have to answer for our positions 
and be able to explain and account for ourselves. 
 
However in this process I am paid a salary by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan to ask questions. I think it’s in the, around the 
neighbourhood of $100,000 that I get paid to do my job, and the 
Premier gets paid a little more — I’m not sure what it is, 120, 
$130,000, somewheres in that neighbourhood — to do his job. 
And today his job is to answer the questions and my job is to 
put the questions. 
 
I will do that job to the best of my ability and will try to cover a 
fair bit of ground so long as the Premier sticks to his role in 
trying to answer the questions and doesn’t make the answers 
excessively long. And if we can get this process working really 
well perhaps, Mr. Chair, we can do a lot of work on behalf of 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, the first question is more of a housekeeping nature, 
just for my own records and our own information. Regarding 
his department, that’s actually the Executive Council, and I 
don’t ask this question in any sort of accusatory manner, it’s 
just for information, wanting to know what the guidelines are 
for travel by Executive Council members — that would be 
cabinet ministers, the Premier himself, and then the officials 
who work in Executive Council, and also family I suppose in 
some cases? 
 
Now if the Premier, Mr. Premier, if you actually have that in a 
document, a procedures manual, that you could provide to 
myself, that would be a satisfactory answer. If I could have 
access to that document, it would again save the time of trying 
to go through your procedures in detail. 
 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we do not have the document 
with us in the House but we can have it brought to the House 
and a copy provided to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Premier. First area that I want to talk about is the role of the 
Crowns because there’s been a lot of debate about the role of 
Crown corporations in the province of Saskatchewan. There’s 
been a lot of rhetoric and there is quite frankly, a lot of interest 
in the province about the role of Crown corporations. 
 
My question is to the Premier. Once we get past the rhetoric, is 
he happy with the current management and the corporate 
structure of the Crowns as they now exist? And is that the way 
he would prefer to see the structure remain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the . . . Mr. Chair, the 
current structure of the Crowns, which has . . . is a structure that 
has existed for some period of time — there was modifications 
made as a result of a Crown review in the 1990s — that current 
structure which involves noted Saskatchewan citizens serving 
on the boards of the utility Crowns, it involves the oversight of 
the utility Crowns and the investment policy through the Crown 
Investments Corporation, that structure and those people who 
have served on the boards and, if I may say, the administration, 
I would argue have provided some very, very good service to 
the people of Saskatchewan. And I have enjoyed a high level of 
confidence in the people and in the structure. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Chair, it is my observation that nothing 
improves, nothing gets better unless we engage in change. And 
I’m always looking at opportunities for change that can make 
any aspect of the public sector better. 
 
And in regard to our Crown corporations and public utilities 
and public investments, yes, I am looking at opportunities for 
change to make them stronger and better — the change that 
perhaps may affect reporting and accountability. 
 
We’ve heard our own Crown Corporations Committee just this 
week talk about improvements that can be made in 
accountability. Can we look at different processes of structure 
or involvement of citizens in our public utilities and public 
investments? I think there are ways we can do that. 
 
Have I made decisions? I have not, Mr. Chair. But I would say 
to the Leader of the Opposition, I am more than willing to look 
at a process of change in our Crowns or in government 
generally if that change can make them stronger and better. 
 
Let me just say finally, Mr. Chair, that I am not looking at a 
process of change that I think would be recommended by the 
Leader of the Opposition or is certainly recommended by many 
of his members, that that change should engage itself in a 
significant privatization of our public utilities or the ending of 
public investment in Saskatchewan. Those are not areas that I 
want to move the public sector in. I want to move them in areas 
where they’ll be stronger, better, perhaps more accountable, and 
stronger for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the Premier. 

Mr. Premier, yesterday we were given a document that was 
done by an advisory board. Can you tell the people of 
Saskatchewan who appointed that advisory board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I listened with interest 
yesterday as the Leader of the Opposition’s critic for the 
Crowns stood in this House and waved about a document, then 
provided this document I understand to the Minister of the 
Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Point no. 1. This is a document that has been prepared as a 
background piece for the board of the Crown Investments 
Corporation. And I would argue any responsible board and any 
responsible administration would have qualified Saskatchewan 
people presenting options and ideas. I’m sure the Leader of the 
Opposition has read this thoroughly and he will know that the 
people involved in presenting some of these optional directions 
are highly qualified people, well recognized in the provincial 
community. So we have received their work. 
 
It had not been brought to the attention of the minister or to the 
level of the board . . . or perhaps to the level of the board, but 
certainly not to the minister’s attention before the critic from 
Swift Current was waving it around here in the House. But what 
I found very peculiar, Mr. Chair, very peculiar, and perhaps the 
Leader of the Opposition could explain this — he says he 
doesn’t want to be accountable in this House — but I’d like him 
to explain this: how it is that the document originally provided 
by these noted Saskatchewan citizens had on every page, on 
every page, clearly indicated, draft for discussion; it said that on 
every page. Now when the critic from Swift Current produces a 
document in the House, which is obviously a xeroxed copy of 
this, words are removed. Words are removed. What words are 
removed? Draft for discussion, from every page, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now, I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to explain how 
it is that his critic for the Crowns will, I can only conclude, 
doctor a document before he lays it on the Table in the House? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’m a 
little disturbed with the Premier’s comments. I mean, the 
Premier is making some accusations in the House, but I believe 
he should be asked to withdraw. I mean, it just could have 
easily been that the document that he has had the words added, 
draft for discussion only. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, the Premier’s making an accusation 
and I would like to see him be able to back that up or actually 
apologize for the statements that he has made. 
 
He very conveniently though forgot to answer my question. My 
question to the Premier was, did he appoint the advisory board? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Okay. Mr. Chair, to be very, very clear, 
to be very, very clear, the advisory committee to the Crown 
Investments Corporation of these noted Saskatchewan citizens 
— and I would enjoy the moment the Leader of the Opposition 
wants to stand up and criticize any one of them — this advisory 
committee was established by order in council. It was 
established by government for the purpose of advising the 
Crown Investments Corporation. I’ll tell you why, Mr. Chair. 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

 

Because this is a government that believes in change, that 
believes in making our public utilities and our public 
investments stronger; ergo, we invite Saskatchewan people of 
significant stature to advise. 
 
We did not ask them to produce this particular report. They are 
an independent thinking group of men and women and they 
have looked at some of their challenges and responsibilities 
which they feel are challenges to the Crown sector and public 
investment, public utilities, and did this piece of work for 
internal purposes only. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition stands up and 
will not explain how it is that the document that his critic 
produces for this legislature has been altered. He says we’ve 
altered this? Mr. Chair, this is the document produced by these 
. . . noted group of Saskatchewan men and women. And if he’s 
suggesting otherwise, I ask him to just ask any one of them if 
the document they produced did not say draft for discussion. It 
said draft for discussion. When it was produced in this House 
by that party and that critic, those words were removed, and I’d 
like to know why. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Premier, I want to assure 
you that we received the document in the exact form in which it 
was tabled. If there was any alterations, it was made prior to us 
receiving it. And if there were other changes that were made on 
your copy, they were made by somebody that you received the 
document from. 
 
But I still want to know, Mr. Premier, did you . . . I still want to 
know, Mr. Premier, did you choose the members of the 
advisory committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, you know, let me explain 
to the Leader of the Opposition how the process of government 
works. The fact of the matter is if a government takes a policy 
position and we . . . Now the member from Kindersley wants to 
get into the debate. He’ll have lots of time later this afternoon; I 
invite him to get on his feet and ask his questions from his feet 
and not from his seat, Mr. Chair. 
 
In government, when we set a public policy like support of 
public utilities and public investment, wanting to make them 
stronger for the future, what do we do? We want to engage 
Saskatchewan people; we, of course, choose names from 
Saskatchewan people. They will be brought as 
recommendations to cabinet. We’ll look at a variety of names. 
We want a balance, of course, of business interests, community 
interests, from working people’s interest. We want a balance — 
women, men, Aboriginal people, First Nations people. We try 
and put together these kind of committees as a broad-based 
committee with the expertise that we need. 
 
Of course, I say to the Leader of the Opposition, of course we 
chose these names. We put them in an order in council and gave 
them the responsibility. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Premier, if you 
were involved in choosing the names of the advisory council, 
why was the minister responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation left in the dark and unaware of what was going on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Minister of the Crown 
Investments Corporation was absolutely, fully, 100 per cent 
understanding that we were appointing an advisory committee. 
He had not received their work. He had not received their work; 
he had not received their report. 
 
Mr. Chair, today in government, across the 11,000 people who 
work in the public sector of executive government and the 
thousands of people who are today at work in our Crown 
corporations, they are at work. They are at work on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan. Is this to say that the Premier 
knows every piece of work that’s going on in Saskatchewan 
today at this hour? Of course not. The minister in charge would 
have received this report in due course after it had been given 
discussion and decision through the process. The advisory 
committee have been hard at work and this report was somehow 
provided to the member of Swift Current and then provided in 
an altered form to this legislature. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, it has been reported that you 
were fully aware of the members of the advisory committee. In 
fact, it has been suggested that you actually initiated the 
formation of the advisory committee, that you did so without 
the knowledge of the Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation, who had no knowledge whatsoever of what was 
occurring. In fact, there is speculation that the Minister of 
Crown Investments Corporation won’t even be in the portfolio 
that much longer and that is why you went around him. 
 
Can you clarify that matter for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, just to clarify any 
misunderstanding in the Leader of the Opposition’s mind, 
because there seems to be some misunderstanding, I said 
earlier, and perhaps he didn’t hear me, that this committee was 
established by an order in council — an OC, an order in 
council. Order in councils are debated and approved at the 
cabinet table. 
 
The Minister of the Crown Investments Corporation sits at the 
cabinet table, participates in the debate, participates in the votes 
around OCs. This was a cabinet decision. The establishment of 
the committee was no secret within government. It was debated 
and established by the Crown . . . by the cabinet of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, of which the Minister of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) is a very 
prominent member — and if I may say, Mr. Chair, will be a 
prominent member of that body for a long time to come. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Premier, but your 
minister on many occasions has refused to answer questions. 
He’s said that the people of Saskatchewan through the official 
opposition doesn’t have the right to the answers of any 
questions. But yesterday he declared that he had no knowledge 
of this advisory committee whatsoever, that he was totally in 
the dark on its formation, on its work, on the report that it had 
done. 
 
Mr. Premier, don’t you think that if a CIC advisory committee 
does a report, that the first person who should see it should be 
the minister? 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we get this on a daily basis 
from the member of Swift Current and now we’re getting it 
from the Leader of the Opposition. It is absolutely false what 
the Leader of the Opposition just said on the floor of this 
legislature — absolutely false — when he said that the minister 
of CIC yesterday said that he did not know about the advisory 
committee. That is absolutely false. 
 
And if we’re going to engage in the process of questioning and 
answering here, I would appreciate from the Leader of the 
Opposition some accuracy in what he says. What the minister 
made clear yesterday, which I have repeated today, is that this 
report was not brought to the attention of the Minister of CIC, 
had not been brought to his attention, nor had it been brought to 
the attention of the CIC board. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Chairman. Mr. Chairman, under the rules of the Assembly 
you’re not allowed to do indirectly what you cannot do directly. 
You cannot say that a member was lying, Mr. Speaker, and to 
say what the . . . What the Premier just said about the Leader of 
the Opposition, that what he said was absolutely false, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, is against the rules in this Assembly. 
 
And I ask that you ask the Premier to retract and apologize for 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with all respect to the 
opinion of the Opposition House Leader, it is the rules of the 
Assembly that allow for there to be debate in this House. There 
will often be occasions, Mr. Chair, in which hon. members will 
not agree as to the accuracy of the information being used by 
one another. 
 
The Premier has indicated that he believed that the information 
provided by the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party was false, 
and he said that. He did not imply that the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party did that intentionally. 
 
As I listened, Mr. Speaker, he indicated clearly that in his view, 
the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party is misinformed. And, Mr. 
Chair, there is a . . . the rule regarding language in the use of the 
House has to do with attack on character and the intention, the 
intention to deliberately mislead the House. The Premier did not 
make that accusation, and I would contend, Mr. Chair, that the 
remarks are in order and that the point of order raised by the 
House Leader for the Saskatchewan Party is not well taken. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It’s the Chair’s opinion that it is a 
matter of debate. So I would ask though, that the members be 
cautious of the language they use. This will likely be a long 
afternoon and I would ask the members to be very cautious on 
the language they use in the House. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I 
want to inform the Assembly that my colleague, the member for 
Swift Current, has contacted us and said that he is watching this 
by television and that the document that he received, he did not 
nor did anyone amongst our staff or colleagues, doctor in any 
way. I want the House to be absolutely aware of that. 
 
My question to the Premier — if his colleagues might let me 
ask questions, if the Premier’s colleagues might let me ask 

questions without interference — what is the OC number and 
what is the date of that order in council that created that 
advisory committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I apologize to the 
Leader of the Opposition and I apologize to the House that the 
information I was provided here not moments ago is not 
correct; that in fact there was no OC for this advisory board, 
that this advisory board was provided . . . was appointed by the 
CIC administration and has been internal to CIC. And I 
apologize to the Leader of the Opposition and I apologize to the 
House. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I have been notified 
that I have to talk to the media about people leaving 
Saskatchewan. I’ll turn the question over to my colleague for 
just a few minutes and return very quickly. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. And it gives 
me pleasure to be able to stand and present some issues of 
concern to the constituents of Cypress Hills to the Premier and 
his colleagues this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have two or three subjects I’d like to broach if 
time permits. But let me start with the most contentious and 
most unsettling issue of recent concern to our constituency. 
 
As you are well aware, Mr. Premier, late last fall and into the 
early part of this year, there were four different treaty land 
entitlement claims placed in the constituency of Cypress Hills. 
The understanding of everybody was that the first two were set 
aside by the provincial government because of environmental 
concerns and other related issues. 
 
The latter two claims that were placed by two First Nations 
were put in abeyance. Those were the words of the Minister of 
Agriculture, put in abeyance. Now he and I have had this 
discussion a few times and I asked him at the time how and by 
what legal authority the minister could put those land claims in 
abeyance since the terms of the Treaty Land Entitlement 
Agreement clearly state that a decision one way or the other had 
to be made within 90 days. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m sorry. Mr. Chairman, to the Premier, 
given the fact that this issue has created so much uncertainty in 
the ranching community, would the Premier give us an 
understanding today as to what length of delay we should 
expect in view of the abeyance and what mechanisms is the 
government considering to achieve reconciliation on this 
particularly difficult issue? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I would want to report to the 
member that we anticipate the work that’s going on now will be 
completed by this fall. And we need to have this work 
completed by this fall for some of the, some of the important 
reasons that the member identifies. 
 
I’m informed that the committee at work on this, the committee 
internal to government, is a committee made up of Justice 
department people and officials, officials and people from the 
Department of Agriculture, and people from the Department of 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

 

the Environment. They are working together to seek appropriate 
resolution to this matter, and the Minister of Agriculture has 
indicated that he wants this work done by this fall. So give it the 
course of the summer and we should have a clear response this 
fall. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, through you to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, is it likely that ranchers can expect to 
have their renewals to full term made available to them if their 
land has not been accepted for TLE (treaty land entitlement) 
settlement or will there be some other renewal possibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think as the member well 
knows from his, I think lengthy conversations with the Minister 
of Agriculture and perhaps the Minister of the Environment on 
the subject — and I understand his concern and interest because 
of his own constituency and the impact of this — as I 
understand it, Mr. Chair, there are renewals have been granted 
for one year. 
 
His ranching families would be looking for the longer-term 
renewal. And that’s part of the discussion we’re having with 
hopefully resolution this fall. But it’s clear that we’ve 
established the principle that no decision should impact 
negatively, in a significant, negative way on our ranching 
families. We have to take that into serious, serious account and 
we have to ensure the future of our ranchers, and we have to 
ensure that they do not bear an unfair burden of social or 
economic hardship. 
 
At the same time we want to respect — entirely respect — the 
treaty land entitlement process. We are firmly committed and 
believe in that process. As we heard very eloquently earlier this 
week from the Minister of Environment, we are here talking 
about at maximum 2 per cent of the land mass of Saskatchewan. 
And we know how crucial those treaty land entitlements are to 
the future of our First Nations and those First Nations people. 
 
Equally, as we discuss the area of the Sand Hills and areas of 
environmental sensitivity, again here is another very 
challenging, very challenging set of circumstances, and so we 
have our officials working together very hard. We look forward 
to the resolution and the proposal they will bring forward to us 
and we anticipate that by this fall. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Premier, through the Chair, I would like to 
put on record again, and I think I’ve done this before, that 
through the entire uncertainty of this process with the claims 
coming unexpectedly quite out of the blue on large tracts of 
land — some 50 or 60,000 acres in my constituency— I have 
yet to hear any of the individuals affected say that they didn’t 
think that it was important that treaty land entitlement claims be 
met and the claims be honoured in a fair and equitable way. 
 
I don’t think yet I have heard anybody complain about the 
prospect of First Nations land holdings going from 1 to 2 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Premier, the concern is that these things are brought to 
reality in the lives of people out of the blue. They have no 
advance notice. They have no warning. And there is no serious 
effort to reassure these people that an honourable settlement and 
agreement will be attained. And in the meantime, until that 

point is reached, individually these people feel like not only is 
their future threatened, that their history is being ignored. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, I would ask that as the Leader of the 
Government, as the man who is responsible for all things 
undertaken by the government, that you recognize not just the 
necessity to honour the claims but that you recognize the 
necessity to inform people and to deal with integrity and 
forthrightness and openness. 
 
And if that is not achieved, Mr. Premier, the problem will be 
suspicion and antagonism. And that can only foster ill will 
between the First Nations people and the people that are being 
affected in my constituency. 
 
And I assume, Mr. Premier, that that problem will be 
exacerbated and replicated around the province unless a more 
open, forthright, and integrity-filled process is established. And 
what we see at this point, Mr. Premier, is clearly a situation 
where not enough information has gone out and where people 
have been put on the spot and asked to agree to a process that 
they knew nothing about. 
 
So if your government is in any way able to bring clarity to that 
process, to bring transparency to that process, it would be 
greatly appreciated by the people whose livelihood and history 
is affected. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 
approach that he is, that he is bringing this . . . to this subject. I 
hear him saying, on his own behalf and on behalf of his 
constituents, that what is desired here is a process which is fair 
and equitable. I think we share that. We share that commitment. 
 
And somebody over there says, transparent. Well obviously we 
want it to be transparent, as the TLE settlements have been 
from day one. 
 
And when we speak of transparency and fairness and equity, I 
think the member knows that in bringing and seeking resolution 
to this issue, we are involving the ranchers. They’re open and 
have been invited to make presentation. We’re talking to First 
Nations people; we’re talking to the industry committee. This is 
a very wide open and transparent discussion; there’s nothing 
happening here behind closed doors. It’s a very wide open and 
transparent discussion with the goal of fairness and equity to all 
concerned. 
 
If I may say, Mr. Chair, that in other circumstances we have 
achieved fairness, equity, success in treaty land entitlement 
settlements. In the Onion Lake, in the Onion Lake settlement, 
Mr. Chair, you’ll be perhaps surprised to know that we have 
reached agreement on a settlement of 90,000 acres — 90,000 
acres — in fairness and equity with all concerned; a happy, 
happy conclusion. 
 
There have been no decisions made here; precisely why we are 
going through this sometimes difficult but necessary process. 
And we see as the summer unfolds, the work being done. And 
we can hope for resolution, look for resolution this fall. 
 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
thank my colleague from Cypress Hills for pinch-hitting for me 
when I had to stand up. And I appreciate the very important 
issue that he raised with the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, when I was called out, you indicated that you were 
mistaken, in fact an order in council had not been issued 
establishing the advisory committee on the restructuring the 
management of CIC. So does that perhaps then explain why the 
minister of CIC was unaware that the advisory committee was 
even struck and doing an inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Chair. That does not change the 
reality that the minister was completely aware of the committee 
— not aware of the work that they had produced for draft 
purposes — aware of the committee, but not yesterday aware, 
or had he seen, this draft report that the committee had put 
together. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, in light of the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) fiasco, 
you stated to the people of Saskatchewan that the government 
and the Crowns had to be more accountable and more open. Do 
you feel that you have accomplished or are in moving in the 
direction towards accomplishing that goal, given the fact that 
the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation wasn’t even 
aware that the report had been completed and was being 
circulated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to re-emphasize for 
the Leader of the Opposition that the . . . because you see, either 
. . . The report that his critic laid on the table had the words 
removed, for draft discussion. I want to assure the Leader of the 
Opposition that’s exactly the words that came from this 
advisory committee, for draft discussion. There had been no 
decisions made, therefore no forwarding it to the CIC Board or 
forwarding it to the minister. 
 
We are here debating what are some draft thoughts and, having 
reviewed the document myself now, there are clearly some very 
creative thoughts within the document — and I’m not surprised 
given the authors of this document, a noted group of 
Saskatchewan men and women — I believe options that should 
be looked at very seriously. But at this point they are as 
described on the very front cover of the document, for draft 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Does the Premier agree with 
recommendations 2 and 3 which would privatize the 
management of the CIC III (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Industrial Interests Inc.) holdings in the 
NewGrade Upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it’s not even, as the minister 
points out, a completed document. I’ve not made any decisions 
on any of the options in that document. Clearly there are a 
variety of options presented. 
 
I would dispute the choice of language used by the Leader of 
the Opposition when he talks about privatization. We know 
what he’s trying to do here. The options as I’ve read them 
would — one option — would engage private sector 
management of some portion or all of the assets held by CIC 

III. That is an option. 
 
That option has been exercised in terms of some of the public 
sector pension funds which are now managed by private 
management firms. No one would ever suggest that those 
pension funds have been privatized, not at all. Engagement of 
the private sector in partnership or in management is not at all 
to be confused with the privatization agenda which I believe he 
believes in. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, if in fact this is not a process 
that is being driven by yourself and Executive Council — and 
you’ve been less than clear on whether that was the case or not, 
suggesting only that it was an initiative of CIC — if that be the 
case, would you think that perhaps CIC was launching on this 
initiative to privatize the management of the CIC III holdings to 
try to insulate themselves by establishing themselves as those 
private sector managers in case of a change of government after 
the next election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the answer is absolutely not. 
Absolutely not. 
 
This, Mr. Chair . . . I think it probably is appropriate that I 
would share with the legislature, and therefore with the public, 
the names of those who have been engaged in this work. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has stood in his place this 
afternoon and has suggested that somehow this piece of work is 
to provide for certain officials within CIC — I’ve heard the 
accusation made in the public by the critic and others over there 
— that these options and suggestions are being made to create 
some private sector entity that would benefit, including officials 
that now may be employed at CIC. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, the people who are involved in this advisory 
committee I would never suggest, nor should the Leader of the 
Opposition, would be engaged in this kind of activity. This is 
simply not the case. Nor would these noted Saskatchewan 
people engage in this kind of activity. I want to share with you, 
Mr. Chair, and the House and the public, just who has been at 
work in this advisory committee. 
 
The first, Mr. Donald Black, chief executive officer of 
Greystone Management Investments, a highly respected 
business person. Not only in this city but across this province, if 
I may say, across the nation. 
 
The second, Mr. Maurice Delage, the former president and chief 
executive officer of the Aventis Crop Science Group in North 
America — Aventis. 
 
The third, Mr. Frank Hart, appropriately the CEO (chief 
executive officer), president and CEO of Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Thirdly . . . Fourthly, Mr. Bob Peterson, president and chief 
operating officer for Denro Holdings, a huge real estate 
development firm. 
 
Next, Mr. Jim Scharfstein, Q.C. (Queen’s Counsel), senior 
managing partner of the law firm Scharfstein Gibbings Walen 
& Fisher, a noted Saskatchewan attorney. 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

 

And finally, Ms. Carol Teichrob, a former minister of the 
government. A member of this government, a noted 
Saskatchewan business person, a farmer, and politician. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Chair, this group of men and women who did this very 
significant piece of work, providing options as they were 
charged to do, would not compromise themselves, would not 
compromise themselves to recommend that which would 
somehow create a private sector entity who could then 
somehow benefit from one of their options. They would not do 
that and we would not accept it. There is nothing, there is 
nothing in what this Leader of the Opposition or his critic 
suggests in this matter. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I’d like to thank the . . . thank the Premier 
for that assurance which of course then would mean that, given 
his answer, that if there was a privatization of the management 
of some of the Crown Investments Corporation holdings, that 
Mr. Hart and those under him would not be part of that private 
sector new management team. And they would not then be in a 
conflict of interest in fact recommending such a structure that 
they might ultimately benefit from. 
 
Another question I have for the Premier is, of the equity 
investments Saskatchewan Crowns have made outside of 
Saskatchewan, can the Premier tell us how many returned a 
profit in the year 2002, and which incurred a loss or were shut 
down completely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I do not have that level of 
detail here in the House. We can get that level of detail. 
 
Obviously in the realm of public investment and engagement 
and partnership in this economy and investments that have been 
made by our Crown utilities, some of them have been very 
successful and some of them have not been successful. That 
would come I think as no surprise to anyone in this House or no 
surprise to anyone in Saskatchewan. It would certainly come as 
no surprise to anyone in the business community where 
investments, as I think as we all recognize, have not been, have 
not been entirely successful in the last several months for many, 
many people. 
 
We will provide for the opposition in due course the detail for 
which he asks of the year . . . 2002, I believe he said. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I’d like to thank the Premier for that 
assurance and we’ll be looking forward to the list. We 
anticipate it’s going to be very long on the loss side and there 
may not be any items or entities on the positive side of the 
ledger. 
 
We have heard the minister, your minister, Mr. Premier, for 
Crown Investments Corporation say over and over again that 
the purpose of foreign and out-of-province investments is to 
keep services, the cost of services low in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The matter of the fact is though, SaskTel lost money on their 
out-of-province ventures. We can mention SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) who bought an insurance company in 

Ontario called Coachman Insurance. SGI actually made a profit 
on their business ventures in the province of Saskatchewan, 
even the general insurance side of the business was profitable in 
Saskatchewan. But that profit was not even wiped out, but it 
was certainly obliterated and we’ve incurred a large debt 
because of the losses of Coachman Insurance in Ontario. 
 
Can the Premier explain or tell us whether he agrees with his 
minister that in fact these investments out of the province, the 
majority of which have been losing money, are . . . Does he 
agree that they are somehow magically and inexplainably 
keeping utility rates down in the province of Saskatchewan or 
keeping insurance rates down when they’re losing money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the people of Saskatchewan 
today — particularly today — are very, very supportive of: one, 
their publicly owned, driver owned auto insurance in this 
province. When we look at what’s happened in other regions of 
Canada, the New Brunswick, Ontario, Alberta, where we have 
seen skyrocketing insurance rates for drivers and the relatively, 
relatively small rate increases that we’ve seen in Saskatchewan, 
the people of Saskatchewan are very appreciative today of their 
publicly owned auto insurance and SGI overall — SGI overall. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition will today, as I’m sure he will 
over the course of the next weeks and months, dwell on those 
investments that have not proven successful or those 
investments that have endured some short-term loss. He will not 
ever dwell on the investments that have made in the public 
sector by CIC or by our utility Crowns, he will not dwell on 
those that are very successful, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now I think I heard a member say name one. Well I will name 
one. She challenges me. I’ll name as many as she wants. She 
calls me to task for one that’s successful. Well I wish just 
yesterday, Mr. Chair, that you and all members of the 
legislature could have joined with me as we celebrated with the 
Great Western Brewery the awards that the Great Western 
Brewery have recently won in Europe at the Monde Selection 
where the Saskatchewan-based brewery was in competition 
with beer makers from around the world. At the Monde 
Selection Great Western earned not one, not two, but three gold 
medals. That is a proud accomplishment for a group of 
Saskatchewan men and women at work at Great Western 
Brewery. 
 
Mr. Chair, you know and the people of Saskatchewan know, 
and if the opposition is honest they will also admit, that the 
Great Western Brewery would not exist today in Saskatchewan 
had it not been for appropriate public investment. 
 
Ah, the member from Wood River has a question. He’ll want to 
stand up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He’s asking, I think 
he’s asking from his seat. I wish he would get up and ask it 
from his feet. He’s asking how much does the Great Western 
Brewery owe us. Is that what you’re asking? How much does 
Great Western owe us? 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Member, nothing. Great Western Brewery has 
repaid to the people of Saskatchewan and the province of 
Saskatchewan every penny that was invested in Great Western. 
That’s what they’ve done. 
 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Now I’ll tell you, Mr. Member of Wood River who won’t stand 
on his feet, I’ll tell you that brewery would not be here if your 
philosophy and your philosophy was in place; the philosophy 
enunciated by the member of Cannington. The philosophy 
enunciated by the member of Cannington who said that the 
Saskatchewan Party would never, never — underline it — 
invest public dollars in this province. That’s what he said. 
 
If that philosophy, that policy were in place, there would today, 
Mr. Chair, be no Great Western Brewery in Saskatchewan; 
we’d have no brewery in Saskatchewan. What we have is one of 
the most successful breweries in Canada, if not the world, 
producing gold-medal-winning ale, beers, in Saskatchewan. 
That is a great success. 
 
Well now the member from Wood River says that’s pretty 
weak. He says the Great Western success story is pretty weak. 
Well I think the people who work in Great Western Brewery, 
and the people who enjoy their product across Saskatchewan 
and across Canada, would find it very interesting that the 
member of Wood River would say this is a very weak success 
story. We think it’s a tremendous success story, Mr. Chair, and 
it’s a success story because this government and the philosophy 
of appropriate public investment was in place. We’ve built a 
great industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Chair, I can go on and on about the 
successes of public investment in Saskatchewan and our public 
utilities, unlike our friends across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Premier, you didn’t give us the 
example of a single, out-of-province Crown investment that 
made money in the year 2002, none of them came to mind. 
 
You did talk about a private sector company now that won an 
award. I notice you didn’t mention that SPUDCO had won any 
awards. You didn’t talk about the wonderful progress . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — You didn’t talk about the wonderful 
progress or awards that you’re receiving for your work in the 
ethanol industry. We haven’t seen anything yet. We’ve many 
examples of how Crown Investments Corporation has failed 
under your leadership, Mr. Premier. 
 
There’s been a great deal of discussion about what information 
the Crowns should have to release to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The general opinion of CIC — and they’re on 
record as saying this — the general opinion of CIC and the 
Crowns is that no information has to be released. Is that your 
view? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again the Leader of the Opposition 
makes statements in this House that do not reflect the reality. 
The CIC has never made the statement or claimed that no 
information should be released. We could pattern a pattern of a 
growing accountability and transparency over these last several 
years where more and more is released. 
 
Have we gone far enough? Has CIC gone far enough? I think 

not. I think not. And the Crown Corporations Committee of our 
legislature thinks not, and is recommending that there be further 
avenues of accountability and transparency and I agree with our 
committee — made up of all members if I may say so. 
 
So . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now the member of 
Arm River has questions. He too should get up on his feet and 
ask his questions if he has questions. 
 
Now there will be, Mr. Chair, as we progress into the future 
there will be change and I think accountability and reporting 
will be, generally. But it is simply not fair that the opposition 
leader would stand in this House and make a claim that the CIC 
has said there should be no accountability. That’s just simply 
not accurate. 
 
Now he started his question here about the potato industry in 
our province. And there is no question, Mr. Chair, no question 
mistakes were made in those investments of many years ago. 
 
But let me say this, as a result, as a result of these investments, 
5,000 acres of potato being grown in this province has now 
expanded to 10,000 acres of potato production because of, 
because of those investments. There has been $20 million in 
economic development to this province. There’s very important 
new investment in and around the Outlook area taking 
advantage of the irrigation infrastructure that had long since 
been paid for by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition would have you believe 
and so it is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now you see, the 
member from Arm River is very anxious to get into debate. Get 
on your feet, Mr. Member, and get in the debate. We will enjoy 
it. You will enjoy it. 
 
You see now he wants to talk about . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . He just made the point. Exactly, Mr. Chair, the member of 
Arm River says, well all of this money was spent in the ’80s to 
build the infrastructure. Yes, we sat over there and we watched 
the money being spent. We did not oppose that investment in 
infrastructure because it’s important infrastructure for our 
economy. But what did they do with the infrastructure? There it 
was not being used. 
 
Now when a government and a community get together to 
attempt to build an industry based on that infrastructure, what 
do they do? They oppose it and they criticize it all the time. 
And today we have an industry. 
 
Yes, mistakes were made. We’ve admitted to those mistakes — 
no doubt about that. But I tell you there’s an industry there 
today that was not there when those folks were in charge and 
wouldn’t be there if those folks were in charge at all. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I want you to understand and I want the people 
to understand, of Saskatchewan, that when we talk about this 
potato industry and they talk about the $28 million, the fact of 
the matter is if you travel there today, Mr. Chair, you will see 
those potato storage facilities. You will see the asset that’s in 
place. And you will see those facilities in use and you will see 
crops of potatoes in the ground, and you will see a growing 
industry. 
 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

 

Why? Because this government is willing to work with people. 
We’re willing to work with people. Yes, we’re willing to invest 
in this economy because we believe in this province and we 
believe in its future and we believe in its people and we believe 
in partnering with those people. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, on occasion we’ll make mistakes. And 
on occasion there will be failure. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Chair, 
there will never be success with a government that simply will 
not partner with Saskatchewan people, will not invest in this 
economy. I’ll tell you that’s the recipe, that is a recipe for 
disaster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I was listening very close, Mr. Premier. I 
was listening very closely for an answer to my question. There 
was no answer there. 
 
I didn’t say that the Crowns refused to release information. I 
said that some of them said that they don’t have to release any 
information. And I asked if you shared that view and you did 
not clarify what your answer was. Rather you actually, very 
interesting, launched out in a defence of SPUDCO’s fiasco with 
the potato industry. 
 
I would remind you, Mr. Premier, that in 1999 in the poll of 
Lucky Lake rural, which was the poll was closely associated 
with the SPUDCO venture, the NDP received a grand total of 
nine votes. People, farm families lost their investment. Some 
went bankrupt. Machinery dealers were left in the lurch. People 
who had relocated to the community of Lucky Lake found their 
houses devalued as everything collapsed around them. 
 
Mr. Premier, there was only one local potato grower left who 
still dared to grow potatoes when Pak-Wel was established in 
the community of Lucky Lake to replace the Diefenbaker valley 
potato corporation. 
 
Mr. Premier, in fact for Pak-Wel to actually process potatoes, 
they had to import them from the United States because the 
policies of your government so disabled and crippled the potato 
industry in the Lucky Lake/Lake Diefenbaker area. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, SPUDCO is a swear word around Lucky Lake and 
if you want to go out and try to defend the actions of your 
government, you go right ahead because you’ll probably lose 
those nine votes in the next election. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you was whether you felt that the 
Crown Investment Corporation was correct in their attitude, that 
they don’t have to release any information to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Yes, they do release some but they say they 
don’t have to. 
 
In fact it was reported that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from Regina South says who asked that? Well there 
was a story in the paper about Don Ching being in his caucus 
meeting, Don Ching in his caucus meeting, at the front of the 
caucus meeting while the Premier sat in obscurity at the back of 
the caucus meeting — so we have the Premier at the back; we 

have Don Ching at the front — and Don Ching is refusing to 
answer the questions of that member and his colleagues in their 
own caucus. He said, I don’t have to be answerable for the 
actions of SaskTel. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, that’s the way it was reported. And I didn’t 
hear a very strong defence in the House and I didn’t hear a very 
strong defence outside of the House from yourself in regards to 
Mr. Ching’s appearance before your caucus. So that’s the way it 
is. Recently, recently that happened in your caucus. 
 
I want to know, as the Premier of Saskatchewan, did you find 
that acceptable? Are you prepared to sit at the back and let 
Crown Investments Corporation rule the roost, let Don Ching 
tell you exactly what to do, when to do, and where to do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be a long, 
long, long time before that Leader of the Opposition ever sits in 
the government caucus room. That is for sure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Chair, if the Leader of the 
Opposition takes as his authoritative source of information an 
editorial comment written in the Regina Leader-Post, if that is 
the Leader of the Opposition’s authoritative source of 
information, then they are in bigger trouble than I thought. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is this. It is, it is not the case that 
officials of the utility Crowns or Crown Investments 
Corporation would suggest that information should not be 
provided to the public. 
 
I have said very clearly in the House this afternoon, I’ve said it 
very clearly to the media that in fact I believe there are 
opportunities to improve our accountability and transparency 
and reporting from the Crown sector. Our own Crown 
Corporations Committee have made, I think, some very 
significant recommendations. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Chair, we have moved to a summary 
budgeting position, where next year we’ll have summary 
financial budgeting. The Crown Corporations Committee has 
recommended a broader disclosure of payees in the Crown 
sector, as we have in executive government. I am 100 per cent 
supportive of the directions taken by our Crown Corporations 
Committee. But this is never to suggest, Mr. Chair, as the 
Leader of the Opposition just has, that officials of the Crown 
corporations, be it the public utilities or the Crown Investments 
Corporation, have ever taken a position that information should 
not be shared with the public. 
 
Now he’s very concerned about Mr. Don Ching. I noted, I noted 
he’s raised Mr. Don Ching’s name in the House again this 
afternoon. I noted, Mr. Chair, that the Leader of the Opposition 
several days or weeks ago stood in the rotunda and said that if 
he were to form government the first thing he would do is fire 
Mr. Don Ching. I want him to confirm that, if he will, for the 
House today. And while he’s at it perhaps he can give us the 
whole list. Will he give us the list of those he intends to fire? 
Obviously he’s made decisions that if he were in this seat he 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

would start firing people right away. 
 
So he’s announced that Mr. Don Ching is to go. Is he now 
going to tell the House that he’s going to . . . Well who’s next? 
The president of the Power Corporation, the president of the 
energy corporation, the president of the transportation 
corporation, the president of ISM (Information Systems 
Management Corporation)? Which public servants — he must 
have a list — which public servants does he intend to fire the 
day he forms, fills the office of premier? Although I may say, 
it’s so far, far in the distant future — in fact it’s probably never 
— that we shouldn’t want to worry. But maybe he’ll be 
forthcoming this afternoon and expand upon the list of those he 
would fire if he were in this desk. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Premier, 
I’m happy to respond. Obviously any public servant that says 
they will not be answerable to the elected Assembly needs to be 
. . . and the member for Prince Albert Northcote confirmed that 
that’s what he said, Mr. Chair. No one who refuses to be 
accountable to this Assembly should be serving the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, you’re sending some very, you’re sending 
some very confusing signals. First of all the Premier says that it 
will be a long, long, long time before we will form government 
and they will sit in opposition. And then he says, when you 
form government who are you going to fire? Like it’s going to 
happen tomorrow, as soon as he has the courage to call the 
election. 
 
Well I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I’m actually very impressed 
with a number of professional people in the public service. And 
professional people in the public service are looking forward to 
a new government because they want a professional 
government as well. 
 
Mr. Premier, we know that if the NDP were in a position to win 
the election, we would have had it called this spring. We’d 
already have had the election occurred. If we’re going to have 
to wait a long, long, long time, that means the Premier is afraid 
to call the election. He wants to wait until the Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan orders him to call an election. 
 
The Premier is following in Grant Devine’s footsteps. He’s 
making the same mistakes as Mr. Devine. When you’re afraid 
to go to the people, you don’t have the courage to make the 
decision and call an election. And the member from Moose Jaw 
recognizes that his government is following in the steps of 
Grant Devine and will bear the same fate as the Devine 
government when the election finally is forced upon them. 
 
My question to the Premier . . . If the heckling on the NDP side 
would subside a bit, my question to the Premier is, if the total of 
the province is climbing every year since you became the 
Premier, do you still try to claim that you have a balanced 
budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I’m not 
aware who it is that prepares the questions that the Leader of 
the Opposition reads this afternoon, but I’d recommend that 

perhaps he get a new writer. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition wants to talk 
about election timing. I’m more than happy to talk about 
election timing. He seems to be very, very anxious — very, 
very anxious — that I should call an election. He seemed very 
anxious that I should have called it last spring . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well now you see the member of Saltcoats, the 
Saltcoats, he wants an election called. I know why these fellows 
want an election called, because they’re so scared for their own 
political skin. That’s why. 
 
They see the fortunes going like this. I think they peaked some 
time ago, and they see the fortunes going like this, and so the 
sooner I can call the election they think it’d be better for their 
fortunes. But I’d also be concerned if I was the leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party about getting this election underway, and I 
would be very concerned if I were the member of Saltcoats in 
this circumstance, just by virtue about what’s going on in the 
Melville constituency. 
 
Look, we’ve had a whole session here. The Leader of the 
Opposition, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, has really 
been called upon to make one decision in the whole session — 
one decision in the whole session — and that was what to do 
about the duly nominated candidate in the Melville 
constituency. He had one decision. 
 
Well I think he made the wrong decision. I think he made the 
wrong decision by telling the former minister, the former 
member of the Conservative government, Mr. Grant Schmidt — 
I think they made the wrong decision by telling that minister, 
that member — that he could not run for the Saskatchewan 
Party, that he was just off the ship. 
 
And so Mr. Schmidt who, as we all know, is out there mounting 
a campaign to win that seat for himself . . . And he’s taken half 
the Sask Party membership with him, I read in The Melville 
Advance, on a regular basis. 
 
Then what happens, then what happens up in the Carrot River 
constituency? They take the hand-picked candidate of the 
Leader of the Opposition, and in this one he puts in his 
hand-picked candidate — he won’t take the people’s choice 
there either — puts in his candidate, Al Kerpan. 
 
What happens now? The Saskatchewan Party’s revolting. 
They’ve called a nominating meeting. They’ve already called a 
nominating meeting and they’re running against the very 
candidate who’s running in a by-election for them tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Chair, if I were the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
of Saltcoats, and members over there, I’d be very anxious to be 
going to an election too because it’s going downhill on a daily 
basis. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition has a question about debt. He 
talks about debt. And the fact of the matter — he well knows it 
and it’s widely known in the province — that we have increased 
the indebtedness of the province in the circumstance of the last 
two years. Why is that, Mr. Chair? Why is there an increase in 
the indebtedness of Saskatchewan over the course of the next 
two . . . the past two years? 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

 

The fact of the matter is — and I guess the opposition leader 
just will simply not admit this — the fact of the matter is in the 
last two years Saskatchewan lived through the worst drought in 
the history of this province. 
 
Now when you’re sitting on the government benches, not in the 
opposition benches where you don’t have a decision to make, 
but when you’re sitting in the government benches, you have to 
decide. You have to make decisions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This government decided to support the people of 
Saskatchewan through this period of drought. This government 
decided we would accept new indebtedness in the crop 
insurance program. This government decided we would accept 
new indebtedness to fight the fires in northern Saskatchewan 
and central Saskatchewan. And this government accepted that 
we would accept indebtedness to stand behind our livestock 
producers in a period of drought and now in a period where 
we’re attacked on the BSE crisis. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition will go about the province 
attacking us for taking on new indebtedness . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well now the member of Moosomin has 
something to say. He ought to stand up in this House. 
Everybody’s got an opinion; they just say it from their seat. The 
Leader of the Opposition goes around the province attacking 
this government for taking on new indebtedness on behalf of 
farmers, ag producers, and communities of the North. 
 
Well the member of . . . where’s he from? The member of . . . 
the Finance critic, he’s waving a book around now. 
 
I ask the Leader of the Opposition today in this House to stand 
up. If he criticizes this government for taking on new debt, 
which of the above would he have not have done? Would he 
have chosen not to fight the fires in the North last year? Would 
he have chosen not to provide the support through crop 
insurance? Or would he have chosen not to support the 
livestock producers of Saskatchewan? Which of the three would 
he have not chosen? Because, Mr. Chair, that is precisely where 
the indebtedness has grown. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I just wanted to raise a 
couple of points. One is while this . . . these estimates are 
usually quite boisterous, the level has gotten beyond where I’m 
having difficulty hearing the member that has the floor, and I’d 
ask members to give both sides an opportunity to be heard. And 
second, just to remind both members that comments should be 
addressed to the Chair and through the Chair. Thank you for 
your consideration. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and through you to 
the Premier, the Premier didn’t have the courage to say that the 
budget wasn’t balanced. I listened very closely. He just didn’t 
have the courage to say it. Or else he believes — or else he 
believes — that the debt of the province can go up and 
somehow the budget is balanced. I think he studied some 
economics. That simply doesn’t work. That doesn’t cut it. 
 
So then he talked about maybe he could, maybe he could, 

maybe he could justify an unbalanced budget by blaming the 
agriculture sector. I heard him say that, even though his 
government has raised crop insurance premiums and reduced 
funding for agriculture. The NDP government under this 
Premier has substantially raised crop insurance premiums, 
making it unaffordable to producers, and has reduced funding 
for agriculture. And yet the Premier has the gall to blame 
agriculture for his fiscal problems. 
 
Mr. Chair, his problems are that his tax base is leaving the 
province of Saskatchewan — rural and urban. They’re fleeing 
the province of Saskatchewan because they can no longer 
stomach his economic policies. 
 
I’m going to ask the question a different way and give the 
Premier a chance to redeem himself. In your three years as 
Premier, how many times has the total debt of the province 
gone up on an annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is in the 
calendar year 2002 to 2003 the budget of the General Revenue 
Fund of the province of Saskatchewan was balanced without a 
single dime of withdrawal from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
There is no doubt about that. That’s widely known. It’s widely 
recognized by the banking institutions and the credit rating 
agencies. 
 
(15:45) 
 
When, Mr. Chair, we are going to stand behind Saskatchewan 
people in a time of crisis and we take on new indebtedness in 
crop insurance, that is not a part of the General Revenue Fund 
operations of the Government of Saskatchewan. We accept that 
new indebtedness. There is no doubt about that. 
 
The balanced budget that’s been achieved by this government 
for the last — now how many years, 12, 13 years? — 12 years, 
has been recognized by every credit rating agency in the nation 
and in the continent. We have year after year, year after year 
after year, received credit rating upgradings, credit rating 
upgrades. The member of Saltcoats, Saltcoats, says that’s not 
true. 
 
Please to stand on your feet, Mr. Member, and explain to me 
which credit rating agency in the continent has not given this 
province credit rating upgrades. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Chair, if it’s listening to them or listening 
to Moody’s of New York, I’ll listen to Moody’s of New York 
every day of the week when it comes to financial advice. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition talks about — in his 
language, exaggerated as it is in his negative, predictably 
negative style — talks about the people, he says, fleeing the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well as we learned in question period today, when his hero 
Grant Devine was in charge over here they were leaving at the 
rate of 15,000 a year — 15,000 a year. 
 
We have seen population loss and we are taking on the 
challenge of turning it around. That’s what we’re doing. We’re 
taking on the challenge of turning it around. And you know 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

what encourages me most, Mr. Chair, is when I speak to young 
people across Saskatchewan, when I hear the voices of young 
people across Saskatchewan, and I hear their opinion. 
 
Now the member of Kindersley, I’m sure he’ll be very 
interested in the comments that were made in his community by 
many of his young people. The Kindersley Clarion, the local, 
the weekly, the paper at Kindersley, went and spoke to the high 
school students of Kindersley, this year’s graduates within the 
Kindersley School Division. 
 
And I just want to quote the article from the Kindersley 
Clarion, not from some political . . . not some political 
promotion of my party but from the Kindersley Clarion. It says 
they surveyed the students, they surveyed the students in the 
constituency, the graduating students this year, and this is what 
it says: 
 

The survey reveals that about half of those students will 
attend post-secondary education within the province, about 
a third plan to work in the province, and the majority think 
there is opportunity in Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We share the opportunity and the 
optimism of the young people of Kindersley. The young people 
of Kindersley wish that we had in this province an opposition 
that shared that same kind of optimism and confidence in the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well I share the optimism of the people of 
Kindersley and particularly the young people, because they 
elected a Saskatchewan Party MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and they’re convinced there’s going to be a 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The same thing is going to happen in the 
Carrot River constituency, in spite of the government illegally 
advertising in that constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now the Premier talked about bond rating 
agencies. And his ministers, the Minister for Industry and 
Resources, his former Finance minister and current Justice 
minister, are always quoting bond rating agencies. Yet the 
Dominion Bond Rating agency said that, after the March budget 
was released, that there was a deficit of $450 million. 
 
So I ask the Premier: does he agree or does he disagree with the 
Dominion Bond Rating agency that his government has brought 
forward a $450 million deficit budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think the Leader of the 
Opposition will know this, if not . . . Dominion uses the 
summary financials. The other investment houses, the other . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . You see, Mr. Chair, it’s impossible 
to answer this opposition. When you begin an answer, they all 

begin to chirp. 
 
Mr. Chair, Dominion, as I’ve said, uses the summary financial. 
Clearly in the summary financial, the summary financial 
statements of this province and made by Dominion, assessed by 
Dominion, will indicate greater indebtedness. I’ve talked about 
that this afternoon. 
 
The vast majority of that greater indebtedness will appear in 
Crop Insurance. There will be a portion in WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) as a result of the investment portfolio. 
There will be indebtedness shown as a result of support to the 
drought-stricken livestock producer last year, and to the 
expansion in expenditures in forest fighting. 
 
It’ll be shown. There’s no mystery about it. Dominion 
recognize it. Our own summary financial statements will 
recognize it. 
 
Other, Mr. Chair, other investment houses will look at the 
General Revenue Fund statements. And it’s in that General 
Revenue Fund that you will find that this province has 
maintained balanced budgets for the last 12 years, as opposed to 
a time when the Leader of the Opposition’s friends were in 
government — some of them who still remain in this 
legislature, many of whom still advise the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
When that group of men and women were in government, never 
mind were they sinking the debt of the province in the Crown 
sector and every other sector, they were running huge deficits in 
the General Revenue Fund. So they ran the debt up to well over 
$15 billion, which has handcuffed and handicapped this 
province for a decade, and will for many years to come. 
 
Yes, Mr. Chair, there is no denying the fact and no one would 
want to deny the fact that we’ve taken greater indebtedness for 
the province as a result of standing behind the producers of 
Saskatchewan through a period of extended and extensive 
drought. We’ve stood behind the communities of the North in 
choosing to stand with them as we fought the fires last summer. 
We’ve stood beside the livestock producer as they fought the 
conditions of drought last year, and now we’re into the 
conditions of the BSE. 
 
Yes, we’ve taken on new indebtedness. That is no mystery. In 
the General Revenue Fund, in the expenditures of government 
through the line departments of government, we have balanced 
the budget; did it last year without one penny being withdrawn 
from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
And finally, Mr. Chair, may I just point out this. Dominion 
Bond Rating Service has maintained the credit rating of the 
province of Saskatchewan through a period of deep distress to 
our economy occasioned by drought and so on. The Dominion 
Bond Rating Service has looked at the work done in 
Saskatchewan, has praised that work, and has therefore 
maintained our credit rating with no credit downgrade. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And the Premier 
keeps to referring to the drought as the culprit and yet the 
indebtedness of Crop Insurance from last year to this year is 
slipping down a little bit, it’s going the other way. It’s only a 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

 

small portion of the increased debt that your government has 
incurred. 
 
Mr. Premier, from the time that you have taken office until 
today, the provincial debt has increased from $11.1 billion to 
$12.2 billion, which means under your watch we’re going into 
debt at the rate of $1 million a day. Crop insurance and the 
agricultural drought was only . . . represents a very small 
portion of the cause for the fiscal mismanagement of the NDP 
government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Quite frankly, Mr. Premier, since you have assumed the chair of 
Premier, we’ve been going downhill ever since. We’ve been 
going deeper and deeper into debt every year. Three deficit 
budgets in a row. Three unbalanced budgets in a row. And yes, 
we’re looking at summary financial statements without the 
charade of a Fiscal Stabilization Fund without any money in it. 
 
Quite frankly, the Premier has one of the worst fiscal records of 
a premier in Canada over the last three years and stands in stark 
contrast to other governments who are trying to move their 
economies and their fiscal situation the other way. 
 
I’m wondering what the Premier’s opinion is on balanced 
budget laws. We have a very weak one in Saskatchewan now 
that requires that a budget be balanced over a four-year period, 
and if it isn’t, there’s absolutely no consequences. There isn’t 
one minister over there that sees their pay docked if the budget 
is not balanced even over a four-year term. There’s no 
consequences for the NDP whatsoever for not being able to 
balance the budget. 
 
Does the Premier support strengthening balanced budget 
legislation so that there is a balanced budget required over a 
shorter period of time and there are actually consequences for 
not balancing the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
stands and says without any demur that the budgets of the 
province of Saskatchewan since I’ve assumed the role of 
Premier have not been balanced. That’s what he just said. 
That’s the . . . and his Finance critic says that’s correct. 
 
Okay. I ask the people of Saskatchewan who may be watching 
this afternoon to judge that opinion against the opinion of the 
Bank of Montreal, the Bank of Montreal Nesbitt Burns who 
say, in reporting March 28, 2003 — March 28, 2003 — just 
days after this spring’s budget . . . This is the Bank of Montreal 
who have a headline, a headline on their summary statement 
about Saskatchewan, “Balanced Budgets — No Drought About 
It.” Balanced budgets. 
 
The Bank of Montreal Nesbitt Burns says, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s Finance Minister Jim Melenchuk presented 
the Province’s tenth consecutive balanced budget today. 

 
In the assessment of the Bank of Montreal Nesbitt Burns, in the 
assessment of the Bank of Montreal Nesbitt Burns, the budgets 
of the province of Saskatchewan, including this budget, are 
balanced. 
 
Now who are you going to believe? Are you going to believe 

the political voice of the Leader of the Opposition? Or are you 
going to believe the Bank of Montreal Nesbitt Burns? Which 
one? Who is more apt to be telling the exact truth of the matter? 
 
I’ll take the word of the bank every time. But I don’t need to 
take the word of the bank . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh I 
see, the member doesn’t like the Bank of Montreal. Well I can’t 
help that, if the member doesn’t like the Bank of Montreal. 
 
Well I can bring other banks. If he likes other banks, I’ll bring 
him the reports from the other banks. They all understand that 
the budget is balanced. The budget is balanced . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You know, it would be very helpful if members 
opposite, Mr. Chair, got to their feet when they have questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition tries to paint a 
picture that in the last three years this province has found itself 
in financial difficulty. Well that’s an interesting situation. You 
can take the opinion of the political leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party or you can take the opinion of Moody’s investment house 
of New York City, likely this continent’s most, likely this 
continent’s most authoritative investment house. 
 
What does Moody’s of New York say about the state of affairs 
in Saskatchewan? Well I’ll tell you this. In the year 2002 the 
province received a credit rating upgrade from A1 to Aa3 from 
Moody’s of New York. 
 
Now you can believe the Leader of the Opposition or you can 
believe the Canadian chartered banks; you can believe the 
investment houses of North America or you can believe a 
politically motivated Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Now, they want to talk about the predictions in growth rate 
here. Yes, we have a confidence in this economy but it’s a 
confidence that’s founded on the research of officials in the 
Department of Finance whose track record over the years has 
been impeccable in predicting the growth levels of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We share their enthusiasm, we share their encouragement, but I 
tell you it’s not just shared by officials in the Department of 
Finance and by members of the government, it’s shared equally 
by the Global Insight. 
 
The Global Insight now predicts, on May 23 of this year, just 
weeks ago, that in Canada the strongest growth is now forecast 
for Saskatchewan. Not for British Columbia, not for Alberta, 
not for Manitoba, Quebec, Ontario, or the Atlantic provinces. 
Not for any of the territories, but predicted for Saskatchewan. 
And I want to quote Global Insight: 
 

This will lead to an extremely strong recovery (it said), 
forecasting growth this year of five and a half per cent. 

 
We believe in Saskatchewan, Moody’s of New York believes in 
Saskatchewan, the Bank of Montreal believes in Saskatchewan, 
Global Insight believes in Saskatchewan. There seems to be 
only one group of men and women who do not believe in the 
strength and the future of this province and I’m afraid they’re 
mostly seated right across from us in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And it’s 
actually now becoming insulting to the people of Saskatchewan 
to hear an untrue picture painted about the province’s finances. 
I asked the Premier about summary financial statements. He 
prefers not to talk about summary financial statements. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I clearly explained to the Premier, using his own documents, 
that debt under his watch has increased from $11.1 billion to 
$12.2 billion. The auditor of Saskatchewan, a non-partial 
actuary, says that the Premier of Saskatchewan and his NDP 
government have increased the indebtedness of this province 
over the last three years. 
 
And yet the Premier is still trying to play the charade that he 
was successful with the first year of his premiership suggesting 
that somehow there’s good fiscal management and the budget is 
balanced. 
 
The Dominion Bond Rating agency says that the current budget 
is a $450 million deficit. The auditor of Saskatchewan, the 
Provincial Auditor, says that using proper summary financial 
accounting this province has had three successive deficit 
budgets. 
 
And the Premier still insults the people of Saskatchewan by 
playing word games suggesting that in fact that is not the case. 
Thankfully the people of Saskatchewan have caught on to the 
word games that the NDP have been playing. 
 
And it’s clear now to the media and everyone in Saskatchewan 
that this government is going backwards financially and that we 
are now increasing the debt burden on future generations. Just 
as the Devine government did. Just as the Rae government did 
in Ontario. Just as the Getty government did in the province of 
Alberta. We can lump the current Premier and his crew in with 
those folks who cared little for future generations and for their 
own political benefit increased the debt of the province for the 
short-term benefit — political benefit at that. 
 
Given Saskatchewan’s fiscal and political situation within 
Canada, we often find ourselves at the mercies of the policies of 
the federal government. And many times the Premier and I have 
agreed on federal-provincial issues. I would wonder if the 
Premier can give me thoughts on the state of relations between 
our province and the federal government at the current time? 
Are they improving or are they deteriorating in his opinion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to come to the Leader 
of the Opposition’s question because I think it’s an important 
question. But I need to go back and repeat again, because 
apparently the Leader of the Opposition has not heard my 
question. 
 
There is no denying — I do not deny, the Minister of Finance 
does not deny, the auditor recognizes it, Dominion Bond Rating 
recognizes it — that the indebtedness of the province has grown 
in the last two years. There is no denying that and nor would I 
want to deny it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — How many times have I said that this 
afternoon? I think I’ve said that seven times this afternoon. I 
think I have finally had a member over there hear it. 
 
The question is, Mr. Chair, when that indebtedness is 
significantly and by vast majority related to new indebtedness 
in crop insurance . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it is, Mr. 
Leader of the Opposition. And the fact of the matter, it is. 
 
When it is in . . . related to costs of fighting the forest fires last 
year . . . (inaudible) . . . some indebtedness in the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and to programs to support the livestock 
industry, I say to the Leader of the Opposition, number one, 
which of those should we not have done? Which of those 
programs should we have not supported? Crop insurance? 
Fighting the fires? Or supporting the livestock industry? Which 
would he not have us do? 
 
When he finishes answering that question perhaps then he could 
stand in the House and explain therefore how is it, almost on a 
daily basis and clearly during by-election campaigns, he and his 
party intend to spend upwards of $1 billion in new spending. I 
can document the expenditures that they commit in new 
spending. Every day they say there’ll be more spent on 
education, more spent on health, and they will fix all of the 
highways. 
 
Now it doesn’t add up, Mr. Chair, because they’re also saying 
they’re going to cut all the corporate taxes in Saskatchewan to 
give a huge tax break to the corporate bodies in Saskatchewan. 
They’re going to spend all this new money. And they’re not 
going to take on debt. 
 
Well there is only one answer and I hope the Leader of the 
Opposition is prepared today to say it. There is only one way 
you can fund that kind of a budgetary measure and that’s to sell 
off assets. There’s only one way you can manage the province 
the way they suggest they would want to manage the province 
or the way they suggest it should be managed and that’s just to 
sell off assets. Well that maybe gets you through a few years 
but it won’t get you through many years. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I think I’ll just move on to the question that 
the Leader of the Opposition has put here, which I think is an 
appropriate and a very good question. He talks about the 
relationships between Saskatchewan and the national 
government; between the region, Western Canada, and the 
national government, and it is not a happy circumstance that I’d 
want to report but in my view that relationship has not been 
improving but in fact deteriorating over the last several months. 
 
And it deteriorates when issues are being faced by Western 
Canadians or issues are being faced in regions of Canada, for 
instance the Atlantic region; it deteriorates when there is a lack 
of responsiveness or understanding or action from the central 
government. 
 
This is being felt by, I think, virtually every province in the 
West these days. And we’ve seen it vividly illustrated around 
the BSE file, on the relatively small issue of the change that our 
Minister of Labour requested in terms of the workers’ 
Employment Insurance and the waiving of the two-week period. 
The kind of response, the arrogant response that we’ve received 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

 

from Ms. Stewart and the federal government does nothing to 
build a solid relationship between the region and the nation. 
 
We had to fight tooth and claw to have Ottawa understand the 
depth of crisis that exists in the livestock industry as a result of 
the BSE. We’ve had to fight tooth and claw to bring about a 
change in agricultural policy generally, the APF (agricultural 
policy framework). We’ve had to fight tooth and claw for 
almost every issue that has faced Western Canada. This does 
not build a good relationship. 
 
The political balance in the nation, in my view, no longer 
effectively represents the economic and social balance of 
Canada. There is a political overweight in terms of the 
government’s representation in Central Canada, and under 
represented outside the centre where the economy and society 
of Canada is a much more balanced economy and society, 
where there is strength right across the nation both 
economically and socially. And that is currently not reflected, in 
my view, in the current makeup of the House of Commons. And 
I guess one can only hope and work hard to see that change. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the 
Premier, I was particularly pleased to hear him actually confess 
that we have a deficit budget. When you look at proper 
accounting such as summary financial statements that’s the way 
it is, and that really means that all that gibberish about what the 
Bank of Montreal had said, not based on summary financial 
statements, was in fact a way to try to be deceptive as far as the 
people of Saskatchewan is concerned. And the NDP just simply 
cannot get away with that kind of rhetoric anymore. 
 
As far as representation in the House of Commons . . . And I 
agree with the Premier on some of these matters. In fact 
Saskatchewan does not . . . has not shown the clout that we 
require at the federal level. 
 
Of course one way to increase our clout, one way to increase 
our representation in the House of Commons, is to grow our 
population. The Premier has no plan to do that. The Premier is 
planning on declining enrolments in school. The Premier is 
happy to see people leave at a rate of 35,000 people over the 
last four and half years; seems to think that’s not a bad record 
because it wasn’t as bad as one year that Grant Devine had. If 
that’s what he’s using for a measuring stick, heaven help 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. 
 
Quite frankly, also if the Premier wanted to see better 
representation in parliament he could be more outspoken and 
supportive of a Triple E Senate which would give 
Saskatchewan more representation in the Parliament of Canada, 
but I haven’t heard him be very outspoken on that issue as well. 
And his federal party wants to actually abolish the Senate. So 
they’re divided on the issue, Mr. Chair, which of course makes 
them very ineffective in dealing on the national level. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, you talked a bit about our impact on the 
BSE file, and it was just very recently as you alluded to that 
Jane Stewart, the federal minister of Labour, was in 
Saskatchewan, didn’t even bother to notify her counterpart, the 
Minister of Labour here in Saskatchewan, that she was coming 
even though there were some very critical issues that needed to 
be discussed. 

We also have a minister in your cabinet responsible for 
Intergovernmental Affairs. And I wonder if that might be part 
of the problem, part of the reason why the federal government 
pretty much ignores the NDP government in Saskatchewan. 
Because you see, the person that you chose to be your 
Intergovernmental Affairs minister happens to be the person 
who had to stand up and apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan for not being forthright with these people over 
the last six years on the SPUDCO file. 
 
And perhaps it’s difficult for our federal counterparts to take 
this government seriously when you as a Premier suggested this 
is the very best minister that you have in your cabinet and you 
put him in charge of the file of dealing with the federal 
government. That obviously has not sent the right message to 
Ottawa, an entity that often does try to overlook the province of 
Saskatchewan under the best of conditions. And it appears that 
the decisions that you have made have made it more difficult to 
have a good relationship and a stronger relationship and a more 
impactful relationship with our federal government. 
 
I wonder if the Premier would in fact comment on why he 
chose the disgraced minister responsible for SPUDCO to serve 
as the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Just before the Premier answers 
the question I just want to make a couple more points. 
 
One, the member in his comments made a reference to trying to 
be deceptive and I believe that that was unintentional, however 
that phrase would be unparliamentary. So I would just caution 
the member to be very careful to be on the correct side of the 
line. 
 
And second, if members could speak to the Chair and through 
the Chair — both sides — I would appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I appointed the member from 
Prince Albert, the hon. member from Prince Albert, as Minister 
of Intergovernmental Affairs and Aboriginal Affairs for one 
reason: he is one of the most experienced and competent 
ministers and members that sits in this legislature today. He is 
head and shoulders above, in competence and experience, any 
member that sits across the way. Any member. Any member. 
Including, for certain, the member of Weyburn. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition, who we all know spent a 
tour of duty in the House of Commons as a representative of 
Saskatchewan — you know that, Mr. Chair; I know that — he 
sat right there in the House of Commons, a Reform member of 
the House of Commons. Now wasn’t that an effective, wasn’t 
that an effective voice for Saskatchewan; wasn’t that an 
effective voice? The opposition leader thinks that he is 
respected in the national circumstance. I beg to tell him it’s 
somewhat different. 
 
Now is it any wonder we have some trouble in Ottawa when 
they were told by the current Leader of the Opposition when he 
sat in the House of Commons . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did he say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I’ve got pages of it, pages of it 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

here. Let me share this with the House. 
 
There should be . . . June 2, 1995. This is the current Leader of 
the Opposition of Saskatchewan when he sat in the House of 
Commons as a Reform member of the House; now a member of 
the Alliance, I assume. He said there should be no guarantees to 
small business and there should be no loan guarantees to farms. 
They should not be treated any differently. 
 
He said in the House of Commons: 
 

I am not complaining . . . 
 
In the House of Commons he said, on March 30, 1995: 
 

I am not complaining about the cuts in support to 
agriculture. 
 

I will say it again so that it’s clear to the House. 
 
I’m not complaining about the cuts to the support to 
agriculture. Probably Reform would have done some of the 
cutting differently (he said). 

 
June 19, 1995. The current Leader of the Opposition, then the 
Reform member of the House of Commons sitting in opposition 
in Ottawa, he said, quote: 
 

The time is now to move and prepare farmers for an open 
and more competitive market economy. Removing the 
restrictions on the movement of agricultural products may 
be painful initially but it will prepare farmers for the 
increased competition south of the border. 

 
I could go on and on, Mr. Chair. Is there any wonder we 
sometimes are fighting an uphill battle in Ottawa when we’ve 
had representatives of the Reform Party which now occupy the 
provincial benches that have painted that kind of picture on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Yes, Mr. Chair, we have to do battle with the national Liberal 
government. We have to do battle with . . . Sometimes we have 
to do battle with our international trading partners. We 
sometimes have to do battle on the international market sphere. 
But it’s tough when you also have to do battle against the 
opposition in Saskatchewan who have painted such a picture on 
behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And the Premier 
has misconstrued comments that I had made, as he has done in 
the past, as other of my political opponents have done in the 
past. 
 
The Premier, the Premier fails to understand that my support 
amongst the agricultural community has been humbling on my 
part. In fact, Mr. Chair, I heard our Premier, I heard our Premier 
in this very House say that he felt agricultural subsidies should 
be reduced. 
 

Now I will be fair to the Premier. The Premier made those 
comments in the context that that needs to be a global 
phenomena, that all countries need to reduce their subsidies 
since Saskatchewan producers will be more competitive and 
will fare better in a less subsidized global economy. 
 
That’s exactly the same position that I took when I was a 
member of parliament and it’s the same position the 
Saskatchewan Party takes in opposition. It’s the same position 
that the Saskatchewan Party will take in government. 
 
I would ask the Premier not to misconstrue my comments and 
to take them out of context as he has done in the past. Simply, it 
doesn’t work. It doesn’t benefit him politically. Perhaps it 
makes his colleagues feel good, most of whom know absolutely 
nothing about agriculture; don’t know the front end from the 
back end of a horse, Mr. Chair. But yet they allow their leader 
to misconstrue comments even though I refuse to misconstrue 
his same comments that he made in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I want to go on to the Future is Wide Open 
campaign. It’s been going on for some months now. In fact in 
the months of April and May, hundreds and hundreds of 
thousands of dollars of advertising were spent on the campaign 
and monies were spent prior to that. 
 
I think an edict went out from the government, put all the . . . 
every document that goes out from government, put the logo on 
there — the Future is Wide Open — unless it happens to be bad 
news and then just omit putting the Future is Wide Open logo 
on that type of information. So if you, you know, if you’re 
refused some benefits from the provincial government, don’t 
bother advertising the Future is Wide Open. But if it’s a 
feel-good news release or some Crown propaganda, by all 
means put the logo on the information. 
 
So I want the Premier to tell us, what are the tangible results 
that we have seen from this new slogan and the advertising 
campaign? The one tangible result that we were looking for was 
population growth. But that, in fact, didn’t occur and, in fact, 
we’re not even neutral on population. We’re declining in 
population in spite of the Future is Wide Open campaign. 
 
Now it’s probably good for the advertisers and I don’t begrudge 
them the same . . . you know, a single cent of money that they 
have garnered. I think the advertisements are actually quite 
good. I mean they show Saskatchewan’s landscape and 
Saskatchewan’s people. I have no problem, I have no problem 
with that. I love our lakes and our landscape, our forests, our 
prairies, our cities, our communities. We all love Saskatchewan. 
 
But what’s it doing to reverse the fortunes of Saskatchewan? 
What’s it doing to reverse the outflow of people from 
Saskatchewan? What tangible results are there that the 
advertising campaign is working? I don’t see any. Perhaps the 
Premier can tell us of a few. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I find in my travels 
across the province and my travels across the nation, that this 
campaign is applauded — applauded by people in the business 
community; it’s applauded by people in the labour community; 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

 

it’s applauded by people in small town Saskatchewan; it’s 
applauded by people in our cities; it’s applauded by people 
across the nation. 
 
Well, now the member from Weyburn, she wants to ask 
questions. Mr. Leader of the Opposition . . . I’m sorry, Mr. 
Chair, the Leader of the Opposition should permit some of his 
members to ask questions. They’ve all got questions from their 
seat. She said who is applauding? She said from her seat, who is 
applauding the Wide Open Future campaign? Well I am going 
to quote at length. And the Leader of the Opposition wants one 
tangible. I could give him dozens and dozens and dozens. He 
wants one? Here’s one tangible result of taking on this great 
campaign to celebrate and promote Saskatchewan. 
 
Headline from May 29 this year, days ago, headline, Alberta 
chief executive officer, Alberta CEO praises the province’s 
Wide Open Future campaign. Now they can, they can criticize 
all they want, they should just listen. Nancy Southern is a 
prominent . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Nancy Southern is, and I’m quoting the 
article from The StarPhoenix: 
 

Nancy Southern is a prominent member of Alberta’s 
business elite, but she was unabashed Wednesday in 
endorsing the Saskatchewan government’s Wide Open 
Future marketing program. 
 
Southern (further on in the article, Mr. Chair, Southern), 
the daughter of Atco chair Ron Southern, talked about the 
pride she felt in seeing a Saskatchewan government ad 
while reading the National Post Tuesday night on a flight 
from Toronto. 
 

Quote, Ms. Southern: 
 

“It brought me a great sense of pride when I was looking 
through the financial section to see Saskatchewan’s banner 
ad,” she said prior to quoting the ad’s catch line: “More is 
more. Saskatchewan. Our future is wide open.” 
 

Quote, Nancy Southern, CEO of ATCO, quote: 
 

“I think the marketing campaign Saskatchewan has 
undertaken is first-class,” she said. “It’s terrific and it’s 
going to be terrific for the economy here and your 
government is being extremely pro-active and is being 
entrepreneurially oriented in attracting new businesses.” 
 

Quote, Nancy Southern, CEO of ATCO: 
 
“It should be highly commended for the new opportunities 
being developed.” 

 
Mr. Chair, again I will take the opinion and the views of Ms. 
Nancy Southern, CEO of ATCO, way above any political 
harping and negativity from any member of the opposition in 
this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And I say to 
the Premier, we have no quibbles with the quality of the 
advertising. Actually Phoenix Advertising was at one of our 
fundraisers. They attended one of our fundraisers and I 
complimented them on the quality of the ads. The problem is 
that nobody believes the NDP government behind the ads — 
that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now I would say to the Premier I want to 
read a letter. If the Premier would settle down, I want to read a 
letter that I received back on January 28 when the Future is 
Wide Open campaign was being launched. And it says: 
 

To: Elwin Hermanson: (it’s got my e-mail address and it 
says) 
 
Subject: Keeping our young people in Saskatchewan. 
 
To whom it may concern, 
 
I read with great interest Elwin’s speech about keeping young 
people in Saskatchewan. I am one of those people he 
described. Everything that . . . (he) said in that speech was 
true. 
 

And I’m not making anything up here, Mr. Premier; this is what 
it says. 
 

I was born (I was born) . . . 
 

The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Member, I was not able to hear most of 
what you said in the last minute so you may want to go back 
and start it back from there. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Because of my humble nature, 
it’s a little hard to read those comments but I’ll try and do it 
again Mr. Chair. 
 

To whom it may concern, 
 
I read with great interest Elwin (Hermanson’s) speech about 
keeping young people in Saskatchewan. I am one of those 
people he described. Everything that . . . (he) said in that 
speech is true. 
 
I was born in St. Anthony’s Hospital in Esterhazy, a small 
town in the southeastern corner of Saskatchewan. My 
parents, like many of the people in (the) Esterhazy and area, 
worked in the potash mines close by. Upon my high school 
graduation in 1999, I packed my bags, kissed my mom and 
dad goodbye and moved to Saskatoon to attend the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The city of Saskatoon made such an impression on me in my 
first year that I decided that when I graduated, I would make 
Saskatoon my permanent home. I loved everything about 
Saskatoon: the big city with the small town feel, all the 
flowers in the summer, the beautiful university campus. I 
never dreamed I would leave my home province. 
 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Then (the) reality set in. I saw U of S graduates moving to 
Alberta and the United States and I heard the horror stories 
about the job prospects in Saskatchewan. Grads weren’t 
leaving because of . . . taxes anymore, they were leaving 
because there just weren’t any jobs. Even those who wanted 
to stay in Saskatchewan risked taking a lower-paying job that 
wasn’t even in their field. 
 
So I moved to Calgary. My heart ached to be that far away 
from my family and friends. I didn’t want to go, but I had 
to. If I wanted a future, it could only be in Alberta. 
 
I cannot tell you how many people that live in Calgary are 
originally from Saskatchewan. I’m willing to bet that there 
are more ex-patriots in Alberta than there are left in 
Saskatchewan. The greeting between us “ex-patriots” is, 
“Did you turn out the light when you left?” We all laugh, 
but deep down inside we hurt for our home province and 
long for the day we can move home (will that day come?). 
 
My husband and I often talk of returning home one day, but 
he . . . would have to take a significant pay cut if we did. 
It’s a sad, sad indication of the state of the economy when 
even accountants can’t find a job that will support the 
family. I don’t . . . know if I could (even) get a job in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What makes me . . . 

 
Mr. Chair, I hope that the NDP listen to this paragraph: 
 

What makes me (the) angriest is the attitude of the NDP 
government. They pretend like nothing’s wrong, that the 
economy is just fine. It’s not fine when Saskatchewan’s 
few taxpayers pay for my education and I have to work and 
pay taxes in another province!! I was livid when I saw TV 
ads promoting Saskatchewan. In fact, I wrote a letter to the 
editor of every newspaper in Saskatchewan expressing my 
displeasure: 
 

And the letter reads: 
 
Dear Premier Calvert: 
 
Do the taxpayers of your province (do the taxpayers of your 
province) a favour and cancel your ridiculous and 
expensive media campaign designed to convince people to 
move back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan does not need glossy ads bragging about 
sunshine and golf courses. Rather it needs a leader who is 
committed to fostering economic growth through tax cuts. 
It needs a leader who is committed to reducing the debt. 
And it needs a leader who will make government smaller 
and more efficient. 
 
Until Saskatchewan gets that leader, the best and brightest 
minds will continue to leave the province seeking 
opportunity elsewhere. 
 
I was born and raised in Saskatchewan. I went to 
University in Saskatchewan. I would have loved to have 
stayed in Saskatchewan. 

But I moved to Alberta where taxes are lower, government 
is less intrusive, and where hard work is rewarded. 
 
Mr. Calvert, there are countless others like me here in 
Alberta . We would love to move home one day. But it will 
not happen as long as the tax-and-spend socialist policies of 
your government are in (your) place. 
 
And no amount of government propaganda will change 
that. 
 
Sincerely 
 

And she gives her name and says that her age is 21 years. 
 
The PS (postscript) says: 
 

I want Calvert to see that the young people of 
Saskatchewan are not buying into his propaganda and that 
we are leaving and . . . will continue to leave. I want him to 
know that there are more tax-payers within Calgary’s city 
limits than there are in the entire province of Saskatchewan. 
With this in mind, how does he think Saskatchewan will 
look in 15 years? Will the light be turned out by then? 
 
I want to encourage you, Mr. Hermanson. You and your 
party are on the right track. Your policies will allow young 
people like me to work (and pay taxes) at home. I look 
forward to the day when your party forms Saskatchewan’s 
government and I can finally move back home. 
 

Mr. Chair . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — . . . this is not the only letter like this I 
have received. I have a whole file full of them, primarily from 
young people who have said they’re not listening to your Future 
is Wide Open campaign. They’re looking at the reality. They’re 
looking at the facts. How, Mr. Premier, do you respond to a 
heartbreaking letter like this one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I listen with interest and 
obvious concern when the Leader of the Opposition reads that 
kind of a letter in our legislature. And I too have received that 
kind of letter. Why precisely we are engaged in building the 
economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is why exactly we are taking realistic 
and practical steps to provide opportunities for individuals of 
his generation and younger generations and older generations. 
Why exactly, Mr. Chair, we have made our income tax system 
in Saskatchewan one which is now competitive with any 
jurisdiction in Canada and equally more fair than most 
jurisdictions in Canada to all people. 
 
Precisely why in the last several months we have undertaken 
significant renovation of our oil and gas royalty regime and 
taxation regime, such significant and dramatic activity which 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

 

has created new and dramatic activity in the sector, providing 
new employment opportunities; precisely why we have changed 
the mining regime in this province; precisely why we are 
expanding our economy; precisely why we are investing in this 
budget year, record dollars into education to train and provide 
opportunities for our young people. 
 
(16:30) 
 
When we hear the concern, Mr. Chair, we are driven to work, 
driven to act — just what this government is doing. And if I 
may say, doing something more than just the negative 
complaining on a daily basis that comes from members of the 
opposition. 
 
And you know, Mr. Chair, we have sat in this session — I don’t 
know what it is now — approaching 70 days, approaching 70 
days. I haven’t heard one positive proposal for the province of 
Saskatchewan from . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There it is, 
the one, the one proposal they will make when challenged is 
call an election. Their only interest is politics. Their only 
interest is politics; they have no interest in substantive public 
policy that might change this province in ways that we can 
provide an opportunity for that young man, his family, and 
many others. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I receive letters like that, but I receive 
thousands of letters which are quite different, Mr. Chair. I want 
to share then a few comments with the Leader of the Opposition 
from correspondence that I recently received. And I’ll read from 
a number of pieces of correspondence. And in fact we could 
spend the rest of the day with me quoting correspondence that I 
have received on the single issue of the Wide Open Future 
campaign. 
 
From British Columbia, in response, specifically in response to 
the Wide Open Future campaign, specifically a response that 
says: 
 

I recently read with interest and excitement of your Future 
is Wide Open campaign. I know that Saskatchewan’s a 
wonderful province and it’s the best kept secret in Canada. 

 
From Minnesota: 
 

Dear Sir: 
 
I heard you on the . . . 

 
You know, Mr. Chair, if the members opposite want to hear the 
response, they should — or if they want to ask questions — 
they should get up and ask the questions. If they want to hear 
the response, they should listen. They ought to listen to this 
voice from Minnesota who wrote me, and says: 
 

Dear Sir: 
 
I heard you on the radio the other night, CBC in Minnesota, 
and for some time I’ve been thinking about moving to 
Canada. Your comments have made me curious about your 
province. 

 
Well you see, you see, you see, Mr. Chair, it is virtually 

impossible in this legislature to have a serious discussion about 
the future of this province; virtually impossible with an 
opposition who is motivated by only one thing, only one thing 
— not good public policy, only politics. 
 
Day after day after day, only politics while myself and members 
of this government on a daily basis are out and about in 
Saskatchewan; when we’re across the country talking about the 
future of Saskatchewan; working with Saskatchewan 
communities to build that future; working with Saskatchewan 
young people to provide opportunities; investing in education 
when they say we shouldn’t invest in education; investing in 
education capital when they say we shouldn’t invest in 
educational capital; partner with communities to provide job 
opportunities like Great Western Breweries, where they say we 
shouldn’t be doing that; building an ethanol industry in this 
province when they criticize and say we shouldn’t be doing 
that; working in the forestry when they say we shouldn’t be 
doing that. 
 
They have one concern and it’s becoming more and more 
apparent today. The only thing they’re concerned about is 
politics — is politics. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, we are going to continue to work. 
We’re going to continue with the Wide Open Future campaign. 
We’re not going to be deterred by the negative nabobs and the 
negative voices that come from across the way. 
 
We’re going to continue with this great campaign because it’s 
appreciated by the people of Saskatchewan. It’s being 
welcomed across Canada. It’s drawing attention to 
Saskatchewan, the kind of attention that we’ve never had in 
past. And we simply will not be deterred by the negative voices 
of a bunch of men and women who simply are interested in 
their own political futures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
Premier has been suggesting that he has letters of support for 
the advertising campaign. I’m not quibbling with the Premier 
about the advertising campaign. In fact if there was some 
substance behind it, if there was a government of action behind 
it, I would perhaps do the same thing myself, Mr. Chair. 
 
But the problem is that people make inquiries. They like the 
advertisements but then they check into Saskatchewan and they 
find out there’s no jobs, there’s no opportunity, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
And the proof is in the numbers. The proof is in the numbers. 
Our population is declining. Every quarter for 18 consecutive 
quarters, thousands and thousands of men and women — 
citizens of this province who love Saskatchewan — have left 
because of lack of opportunity under an NDP government. 
Those are the facts. Those are indisputable. 
 
And it doesn’t matter how many letters we have praising the 
Premier’s advertising campaign. The numbers speak for 
themselves. The NDP government has failed to provide a 
climate, an environment, a province where people feel 
welcome, where they feel hopeful, and where they want to 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

make their future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, I have a letter that was written to the 
Premier. And this letter says, “My name is . . .” And they list 
their name, so the Premier has this letter as well. 
 

. . . and I am an environmental engineer who lives in 
Calgary. On April 1, 2002, I ceased to be a citizen of 
Saskatchewan. I believe that I am one of the people who 
your “Wide Open Future” campaign is targeted towards. 
 
Mr. Calvert, in my heart I will always be a 
Saskatchewanian. I grew up there, was schooled there . . . 
my parents reside there . . . (and so) do my wife’s. 
However, I will likely never return to live there. I didn’t 
always think this way — my move to Calgary was one to 
take advantage of a better job that I thought would allow 
me to move up the corporate ladder before returning in a 
few years with more experience and perhaps obtain an even 
better job back home. I realize now that this will never be 
the case. 
 
While the cost of living in Alberta may be more (A fact that 
was made abundantly clear to me through all the negative 
comments I heard once I announce my impending move to 
Calgary), my quality of life has skyrocketed upwards. In 
Saskatoon, I was part of a double income no kids 
household, with a small mortgage and two paid cars. 
 

Mr. Chair, the minister for governmental affairs does not care 
that people who love Saskatchewan are leaving. They’re 
begging, they’re pleading, for a government to listen to them 
and the minister heckles. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The minister has the nerve to sit in his seat 
and heckle the people of Saskatchewan who have left, who have 
given up on the NDP government. That is a shame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now I know that that minister is near the 
end of his career. I know that that minister will retire 
comfortably some day, but I’m concerned about future citizens 
who want . . . young people who want to stay in Saskatchewan 
and are appalled by the minister’s attitude, by the minister’s 
comments. That, Mr. Chair, is one of the most disgusting 
comments and just unacceptable a comment that I have heard in 
this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, if the minister of governmental 
affairs will let me continue . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I want 
to read this letter because it’s important that the NDP members 
hear these comments. The person goes on to say that: 
 

In Saskatoon, I was part of a double income no kids 

household, with a small mortgage and two paid cars. While 
we never really had trouble paying the bills, we didn’t have 
a lot to spend on ourselves for entertainment. Living in 
Calgary for less than a year and still paying for the capital 
costs of the move, I am in a similar situation, though with a 
house three times the size (of our home) of our one in 
Saskatoon, and enough left over every month to do 
something fun. Not all of this is due to raises - I pay ($4 in 
taxes) $4 less in taxes off my paycheque despite a 25 % 
increase in pay. 
 
My point of this letter is not to berate you for the socialist 
tendencies of your government, nor to try and rub your 
nose in my good fortune. My point is to try to help. I am a 
Saskatchewan boy, and will always be. Saskatchewan here 
(and probably in most places) is viewed as somewhat 
backwards, and I don’t like that impression. In Texas, they 
even call it “Red Saskatchewan”. I’ll let you guess why. 

 
In Alberta, the first question asked when a problem arises 
is: “Can someone make money fixing this problem?” and 
then (the) appropriate companies are asked to get involved. 
In Saskatchewan, the first question is “How can the 
government fix this problem?”. This attitude can only be 
changed through leadership (and) Mr. Calvert, that’s up to 
you. 
 
I won’t bore you with the facts like the consulting 
engineering business in Saskatchewan has to compete with 
SaskWater, the Saskatchewan Research Council, and other 
crown agencies, or . . . (the) capital investment . . . (of) 
Saskatchewan almost always has to be obtained through the 
Crown Investment Corporation. You likely already know 
these things lead to less competition, a lack of business 
investment, and subsequently a loss of people following the 
money out of the province. What I will do is ask you to be 
a strong leader. 
 
You know that in a strong economy, everything else falls 
into place. Good education doesn’t make a strong economy 
- a good business environment does. If you want people to 
stay in the province, create a place for business to thrive. 
This means doing things like privatizing the SRC and other 
crowns, not allowing government agencies to compete with 
consultants and other businesses, and abolishing the CIC. 
Let private investment fund the economy. Of course, there 
are many others, but you have many more tools to identify 
those opportunities than I. 

 
Mr. Chair, the letter closes by saying: 
 

I implore you to consider the effects of the current course 
Saskatchewan is on, and to take serious action to change 
this course. While I no longer have an immediate vested 
interest in seeing these changes to fruition, I do still have 
family in Saskatchewan, and (I) love my home. I hope one 
day to return. 
 
Sincerely. 

 
This was a letter that was written to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan and copied to the opposition. 
 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

 

Mr. Chair, for the period ending October 1, 2002, Saskatchewan 
experienced the worst population loss in a decade. And the only 
response from this government is to say, well it was bad when 
Devine was the Premier; during the ’80s they lost people too. 
That’s not good enough. 
 
Saskatchewan used to be the third most populated province in 
Canada. There was a time when we were ahead of Manitoba. 
Manitoba has far fewer resources than the province of 
Saskatchewan and yet Manitoba has surpassed Saskatchewan in 
population. Nova Scotia, I believe, is gaining ground on the 
province. We may actually get bumped — if we were to remain 
under an NDP government — be bumped from sixth place to 
seventh place, given the trends that we see in Saskatchewan at 
the current time. 
 
There is hope. The Saskatchewan Party talked about growing 
the population by 100,000 people in 10 years. The minister for 
Regina Wascana Plains said it was impossible. She said it was 
impossible. It was a story in the paper. Since that time . . . Well, 
Mr. Chair, the members of the NDP don’t believe 
Saskatchewan can grow. We know they don’t. They’re up in 
their . . . They’re yelling in their seats, suggesting that this is not 
an achievable goal. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, the mayor of Regina, Mayor Fiacco, suggested 
in the next 10 years he believes Regina can grow by two . . . by 
about 60 or 70,000, up to 250,000 people. That’s in the same 
10-year period. If Mayor Fiacco is correct — if Mayor Fiacco is 
correct — that’s more than half of the Saskatchewan Party goal. 
 
Just recently there was a conference in Saskatoon put on by 
Agrivision, and they suggested that they believe 
Saskatchewan’s population can be doubled in 30 years. His own 
ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) committee 
suggested there could be substantial population growth in 
Saskatchewan — even in rural Saskatchewan the population 
can grow. 
 
Why is the Premier’s, why is the Premier’s members casting 
doubt on the ability of this province to grow? Why does the 
Premier’s member from Wascana Plains say it’s impossible? 
Why does the Premier’s Education department suggest that 
enrolment is going to drop by 35,000 students over a decade? 
It’s obvious that if the Premier and his government sends mixed 
messages, on one hand saying that the Future is Wide Open but 
on the other hand preparing to govern fewer people rather than 
more, not making changes to taxation structure, not making 
changes to labour laws, not making changes to the corporate 
capital tax, not making changes to infrastructure — if the 
Premier’s not prepared to do anything, nothing will change. 
 
Now quite frankly the mayor of Regina, in spite of the Premier 
cutting his revenue-sharing dollars, is working on a plan. He 
has a committee. He has a group of people that are working on 
their task force that are prepared to grow the city of Regina. 
 
The chamber of commerce in Saskatoon are working on a plan 
to create thousands more jobs and grow the population of the 
city of Saskatoon. The community of Biggar, in my own 
constituency of Rosetown-Biggar, has a plan to grow the 
population. 
 

Why is the Premier of the province and the NDP Government 
of Saskatchewan the only major force and entity that have no 
plan to grow the province, as is proved by the fact that our 
people are leaving the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m sure all members 
enjoy when the Leader of the Opposition brings letters to read. I 
could summon up dozens and dozens of letters to read 
supporting the activities of this government, supporting the 
Wide Open Future campaign, supporting the directions they’ve 
gone. 
 
(16:45) 
 
I’ve quoted today one voice from Alberta, Ms. Nancy Southern 
from ATCO. We could spend the rest of this day quoting 
Canadians through their letters to me, through their public 
comments, about the strength of this great campaign. 
 
But I tell you, it does cause some concern for me when the 
Leader of the Opposition stands up in this House this afternoon 
and says of the Wide Open Future campaign and the message 
that we are providing to Canadians across the nation, when the 
Leader of the Opposition, her loyal . . . Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition in Saskatchewan, stands up in the House and says, 
quote, “there’s no substance behind it.” There’s no substance. 
That’s what he said. His House Leader, when we announced 
this campaign, said it’s snake oil. Snake oil. No substance to 
Saskatchewan; Saskatchewan is snake oil. That’s the 
description they give this great province. 
 
When people of Canada are looking at the activities that are 
happening in Saskatchewan — in the forestry, in the oil and gas 
industry, in the innovative industries, and high technology — he 
says that’s no substance. That’s what the Leader of the 
Opposition says. Is there any wonder that his voice grows less 
and less credible across Saskatchewan? 
 
You know, Mr. Chair, the leader . . . the member from Thunder 
Creek, who will not get on his feet either, asks all of these 
questions from his seat. He said, no results. No results. Did you 
hear the reports of the Global Insight that Saskatchewan’s 
growth is forecast to be leading in Canada? The leading 
province in growth in Canada, now forecast by Global Insight. 
He says that’s not result. Did you hear earlier today, Mr. Chair, 
the member . . . the Minister of Industry and Resources report 
the job statistics in Saskatchewan? Now 13 consecutive months 
of job growth in this province. Month after month after month 
of job growth, Mr. Chair . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
never mind that, it’s just a fact. Never mind that, it’s just a fact. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Chair, in the month of April — and I think 
members of the opposition would even admit this is not so bad 
— in the month of April there are in Saskatchewan 13,000 new 
jobs as opposed to an April ago. But what is perhaps even more 
noteworthy, Mr. Chair, that of those 13,000 new jobs about half 
of them are jobs for young people and the vast majority of them 
are full-time jobs in this economy. 
 
Now I noted with interest that the letter writer to the Leader of 
the Opposition . . . And I’m not surprised, the Leader of the 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Opposition will have some political supporters and some 
political support who will accept his view of the world. But I 
would take some exception with one of the comments made by 
the leader’s quote here in the afternoon. I think the letter writer 
pointed out that education is not the way to grow the economy, 
that education is not the most essential thing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I differ. I differ. I know it’s in the letter; it’s 
in the letter, you’re right it’s in the letter, and the Leader of the 
Opposition is quoting the letter. 
 
So I tell you I take the point of view that yes we need the 
conditions of good economy. What have we been doing? We’ve 
been putting the conditions of that good competitive economy 
in place. We’ve renovated the entire income tax . . . personal 
income tax system in the province under our personal income 
tax reform, the like of which the province has never seen. We 
are competitive with any jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
We have renovated the sales tax circumstance in Saskatchewan 
so that we have the lowest sales tax — the lowest sales tax — 
on the narrowest range of goods of any province in Canada, 
with the exception of Alberta. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, you know and Saskatchewan people know that 
we do not lay on our people a health care premium. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We do not do that. Even though 
members of the opposition have suggested it, we don’t do it. 
 
We have the lowest sales tax in Canada on the narrowest range 
of goods and services. Our manufacturing tax, our 
manufacturing tax provisions are now . . . are the lowest in 
Canada. We have reduced small-business tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, pardon me. We have put together a 
very competitive, very competitive economic sphere in which to 
do activity. So competitive that we’re recognized now, the cities 
of Saskatchewan — Regina, Saskatoon, Weyburn, Prince 
Albert; Weyburn, Prince Albert — these cities are recognized 
by KPMG as being some of the . . . and the most competitive 
cities of their size in the Midwest of the United States of 
America and in all of Canada. 
 
We have built a very competitive . . . Is there work yet to do? 
Yes sir. Yes sir, there is work yet to do. We’ve made some 
adjustments in this budget again but we do it, Mr. Chair, unlike 
the opposition, in a sustainable way. 
 
What do they say? They say somehow we’re going to grow the 
population of Saskatchewan by 100,000 people. How are we 
going to do it? Well we’re going to sell off the Crowns; we’re 
going to cut the corporate taxes; and we’re going to reduce 
labour laws. That’s their prescription for 100,000 people. Now 
how that works, Mr. Speaker, I don’t . . . Mr. Chair, I don’t 
know and most Saskatchewan people can’t figure it out either. 
 
Now what’s been going on? We’ve been making this a 
competitive, competitive place to invest and do business. 
Number two, we are investing in the education of our young 
people; we’re investing in the education of Saskatchewan 

people because the key to the future, Mr. Chair, is in education. 
 
We have in this province an asset unlike any other province in 
the nation, an asset which is our youthful population. We have 
now one of the youngest populations in Canada. We have one 
of the largest Aboriginal young populations in Canada and, Mr. 
Chair, that is a great, tremendous opportunity and asset to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In a time, in a time when there will be labour demands, the 
demand for skilled labour, the demand for trades, the demands 
for teachers, the demand for people to work in the public sector 
whether it be in education or in health care, the demand for 
people to work in agriculture and the diversified agricultural 
industries, we have a great potential in our young people and 
particularly our young Aboriginal people. And, Mr. Chair, this 
government believes in that generation and therefore we are 
investing in education. 
 
Now you will recall, Mr. Chair, I’m sure the Leader of the 
Opposition recalls, that when we went out in the last campaign 
that Leader of the Opposition and his entire party, what was 
their commitment to education? They said they would fund 
education at no more than the rate of inflation which essentially 
is zero — zero. 
 
When last year we endeavoured to expand the capital of 
education they fought us every day. They have fought us every 
day during this budget debate about the biggest, largest 
commitment to education in this province’s history. Every day 
they come in here and they fight us on this. Well we’re not 
going to be stopped. We are not going to be stopped investing 
in the future of Saskatchewan and investing in the future of our 
young people. 
 
Yes we need a competitive place in which to do business. We 
need a competitive place in which to live with a good cost of 
living. But equally we need to be providing the tools for our 
young people to take advantage of that economy that’s building. 
 
And then, Mr. Chair, we decided that it’s about time that 
Saskatchewan began to tell its story. It’s about time we began to 
blow our own horn because this is a government that believes 
there is tremendous substance in this province, tremendous 
substance, unlike the House Leader over there, now unlike the 
Leader of the Opposition who says there is no substance . . . and 
snake oil says the House Leader over there. We don’t believe 
that. We believe there is a tremendous potential in 
Saskatchewan; a province of tremendous resources, of 
tremendous people, and of tremendous innovation. 
 
And while I’m speaking of innovation, Mr. Chair, here too, here 
too is a great key to our future that is fought by the opposition 
all the time. Mr. Speaker, you know . . . Mr. Chair, you know 
that we soon will be home to Canada’s first light source 
synchrotron, a tremendous innovation for the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people of Western Canada, the people of 
Canada. In fact, one of four in the world. That synchrotron is 
being built in Saskatoon today because of the hard work of this 
government, the University of Saskatchewan, the private sector, 
and the Government of Canada. No assist, no assist from over 
there. They fight us all the time. They don’t believe in that kind 
of public partnership or that kind of public investment; no, they 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

 

don’t. 
 
We have developed here in the city of Regina and in the city of 
Saskatoon, through public investment, through partnerships 
with the private sector which they would not be involved in, or 
so they tell us, Innovation Place in Saskatoon, the Research 
Park here in Regina; partnering here in Regina for instance with 
the oil industry in the oil and gas research centre out here, in the 
greenhouse gas centre out here. We’re now partnering with the 
community of Regina to make this a national research site for 
sustainability, for community sustainability. And add on to that 
— and oh they have fought us on this one; every day they fight 
us on this one — a forestry research centre in Prince Albert. A 
forestry research centre in Prince Albert. 
 
That’s what you do, Mr. Chair, to expand your economy. Look 
what’s happening in our forestry. Just look what’s happening in 
our forestry. In the last three years $900 million of new private 
sector investment in the Saskatchewan forestry. That’s opening 
an economy to northern people, to people across Saskatchewan. 
 
What have we had to do? Of course we’ve had to fight the 
softwood lumber. We’re in the midst of debating within this 
legislature a Bill that hopefully will help us reduce that or 
eliminate that tariff on our softwood lumber. And we appreciate 
the opposition’s support in getting this Bill passed. 
 
But they’ve fought us on the forestry research. One of the key, 
one of the key industries in the future of the province, and what 
do they do? They send their, they send their . . . the member, if 
you can believe, Mr. Chair, they send the member from Sask 
Rivers out to criticize this decision to build a forestry research 
centre in Saskatoon. 
 
Well he goes up and he talks to the people in Prince Albert . . . 
I’m sorry, in Prince Albert. He goes up and talks to the people 
in Prince Albert and they tell him this is good work. This is 
good work on behalf of the business community. It’s good work 
on behalf of the government. It’s good work on behalf of the 
citizens of Prince Albert. 
 
So that member from Saskatchewan Rivers he comes back and 
he reports publicly here: no, no, I made a mistake; we shouldn’t 
be criticizing that. The next thing you know the leader’s out in 
the rotunda saying, no, no, the member’s wrong; it’s a mistake; 
they shouldn’t be building that forestry research centre. 
 
The fact of the matter is this is a government who believes in 
working with communities, who believes in working with the 
private sector and the business community, who believes in 
working with the trade union movement and labour people in 
this province, who believes in working with Aboriginal people 
and First Nations people. 
 
And that, Mr. Chair, is how you build the future. You don’t 
build the future with empty slogans like 100,000 in 10 years. 
You don’t build it with empty slogans. And I’ll tell you for sure 
you don’t build it by simply slashing the taxes on the 
corporations and selling off the Crowns and decimating the 
labour protection for Saskatchewan citizens. You’re not 
building a future there. 
 
Do we believe in growing and seeing the expansion of the 

population of Saskatchewan? You bet we do. And like the 
mayor of Regina and the city council of Saskatoon and people 
right across Saskatchewan, we’re telling the Saskatchewan 
story. 
 
You’ll know the I Love Regina campaign, Mr. Chair. You’re a 
member here. You’ll know the Saskatoon Shines campaign. 
And you know the campaign that’s reaching right across the 
nation: Our Future is Wide Open. It’s a wide-open future. And 
we’re not going to be stopped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, when the Premier has trouble 
answering the questions, then he filibusters on the answer. That 
was a long, rambling discourse about nothing in particular and 
everything in general. 
 
I do want to respond to a couple of earlier comments he made. 
He talked about some facts and he’s using job numbers. Well in 
fact job numbers have gone up and down since the 1999 
election but quite clearly there is no way that the Premier will 
keep his first promise in the last election campaign to create 
30,000 jobs in four years; no way that he will keep that first 
commitment with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So that’s the first promise and it was a broken promise. And 
what’s sad, Mr. Chair, is that goal of 30,000 jobs created was a 
very, very modest goal. It wasn’t very imaginative at all. So 
quite frankly, the Premier throwing out job numbers is not very 
impressive at all. 
 
And the two facts that are important, which the Premier always 
wants to dodge, is the fact that the population is dropping and 
the debt is rising under the NDP government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now one other comment I want to make, and I want to make it 
clear that I agree with the Premier, that education is important. 
And it’s important to this economy. He referred to that 
comment in the letter. The problem of course is under the NDP, 
funding was cut for education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I think through the 1990s, under the 
Romanow administration to the tune of about $350 million, 
education was cut. And so quite frankly, the NDP government 
have failed the young people of this province by cutting funds 
to education. And I want to assure the people of Saskatchewan, 
and I certainly will tell the Premier of Saskatchewan, that a 
Saskatchewan Party government will not ignore the educational 
needs of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now in the wake . . . And the Premier 
seems to have lost interest. He can’t answer the questions so 
he’s lost interest — he’s adjusting his hair I see — but I’m 
going to keep asking him questions anyways. In the wake of the 
SPUDCO affair, the Premier suggested that he was going to 
start making changes to procedures in cabinet. 
 
And I would like to know what changes he has already 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

implemented? What changes has he made as a result of 
SPUDCO on who signs off on what, what amounts are 
authorized by a minister, what amounts have to come to the 
whole cabinet, how he deals with CIC? What actual changes 
and procedure and spending limits and authorization procedures 
for ministers and Crowns has the Premier actually implemented 
since he made a commitment to do so to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(17:00) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think, as the Leader of the 
Opposition knows, over the last number of years there have 
been significant changes in the Crowns and in decision-making 
processes within the Crowns. 
 
His very specific question has to do with the change, the exact 
change, that I will have made since the work that was done 
around the SPUDCO investigation. I think the most obvious 
and clearly public change is that now all investments of any 
substance, standard investments in this province, before that 
decision is made, those will be reviewed by a respected third 
party . . . entity, very often a financial house or one of the 
banks. 
 
That is a very significant change, Mr. Chair, that I think has 
some significant import on ensuring that we are able to make 
. . . And as I’ve said many times in this House today, we are 
deeply committed to partnering with communities and with 
private businesses in building the Saskatchewan economy. We 
want to ensure that when those decisions are made they can be 
the best possible decisions. Therefore we have undertaken this 
new level of rigour which will involve on any substantive 
investment, a third party review by an outside source of 
expertise. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I thank the Premier for that answer. We 
unearthed another scandal that must be owned by the NDP 
government regarding the mega bingo losses. Originally the 
government indicated that the loss would be $6 million. 
Suddenly they were caught up in some facts that that wasn’t 
correct and that the total cost to taxpayers were $8 million. 
 
Given the commitment that the Premier has just made about 
changes, can he assure the people of Saskatchewan that had 
mega bingo occurred after these changes, that they would have 
been reviewed by a third party, before it happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in looking back at all of the 
events around the mega bingo, there’s been much debate during 
the course of this session. In fact, in the case of the mega bingo, 
my understanding is that in fact there was a third party review 
conducted. In fact, it was Western Canada gaming that was 
engaged at that time to give the third party review. In this case, 
that did not provide for a success in the endeavour. That’s 
pretty obvious. 
 
I will argue, as I’m sure most citizens would argue, that you 
want to work with your charities. You want to work with those 
who are at work in the community. I remember those days. I 
was part of the community. I was part of a service club that was 

involved in bingos and fund raising. And I know how there was 
a desire at the community level to see this province engage 
itself in this mega bingo concept. 
 
In my experience, it didn’t work. It didn’t work on the ground. 
It didn’t work with the players. It had some flaws. In this case, 
it was reviewed third party and that did not ensure that we still 
did not have the resulting activity of the mega bingo. 
 
So in answer to the Leader of the Opposition’s question, yes, 
that kind of an arrangement would likely receive a third party 
review. But I can’t commit to the Leader of the Opposition that 
that third party review could absolutely guarantee that you 
wouldn’t find a similar circumstance. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — My question to the Premier: is that third 
party review a public document and if so, could he provide it to 
the opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m not clear. Perhaps the 
Leader of the Opposition could re-ask the question. 
 
The fact of the matter is, as I understand it, the Western Canada 
Lottery Corporation was engaged to review the proposals as a 
third party, independent body. They reviewed the proposals and 
provided to SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority) the recommendation on . . . to move forward. 
 
Now the minister has many times in this House explained this, 
and I think has provided all of that detailed information and that 
detailed report. It’d be in the Hansard; he’s provided it to the 
media. 
 
In this case the third party review was conducted by the 
Western Canada Lottery Corporation who . . . I can’t think of 
anyone else who would be better qualified. They looked at the 
proposals and recommended the one that was eventually 
undertaken those years ago. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, to the Premier. We understand 
that there was a, that there was a authorization to tender for 
contracts for software. But prior to that a decision had to be 
made to get involved in the whole mega bingo issue, project. 
And that decision, we understand, was made by SLGA. It 
wasn’t made by any other party. So there would have needed to 
be a third party consultation done to make the decision as to 
whether to go, to launch into the mega bingo project or not — 
not as far as tendering for software and those subsequent 
decisions that were made after the major decision was made to 
go forward. 
 
So I’m wondering if the Premier could table the study, the third 
party study that was done that convinced cabinet to launch into 
the mega bingo project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I . . . The fact of the matter is, 
and I don’t want to mislead the Leader of the Opposition, there 
was not a third party study done for the decision. Once the 
decision is made, then third party expertise is sought. That’s 
usually the way it works in government. You make a decision 
and then you, and then you . . . well the leader of . . . the 
members opposite find this amusing but I tell you this is how it 
works in government. They’ll never know this because they’ll 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

 

never be here. But this is how it works in government. 
 
The public policy makers, your decision makers within the 
government, are called upon to make decisions. You make the 
best possible decisions. If you are going to implement, you 
want to get the best possible advice. So . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you know, I’ll tell you. I’ll tell you who 
should be seeking some advice. It’s the member from 
Cannington. That’s the member who should be seeking some 
advice. 
 
Because you know what the member from Cannington says, 
Mr. Chair? You know what the member from Cannington says? 
Well I could pull it out here, I could pull it out here. The 
member . . . I’m going to quote now a news release, a media 
release from the Saskatchewan Party caucus, a Saskatchewan 
Party caucus news release dated January 15 of this year. This is 
a straight quote from the House Leader across the way: 
 

D’Autremont said a Saskatchewan Party would not make 
any equity investments in any private sector company. 

 
They would never, ever make an equity investment in a 
company in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I guess there is some protection in that. If you would never 
make an investment in the economy of Saskatchewan, there is 
some protection in that; you can never make a mistake. I guess 
there’s some protection in that. If you would never partner with 
community-based organizations in trying to seek their 
charitable revenue status improvement, if you would never 
partner with community organizations, you can never make a 
mistake. If you would never invest in the Great Western 
Brewery when they needed that investment, you can never 
make a mistake. 
 
But I’ll tell you, you’ll never see any positive economic 
development or social development in this province if these 
people adopt that kind of attitude and that kind of policy, as 
indicated by the member of Cannington. 
 
Mr. Chair, a decision was made by cabinet that there would be a 
linked bingo game as part of a larger gaming strategy that was 
put in place at that time. The various ministers . . . 

 
I’m just going to read this because I know the minister has read 
it, but apparently the opposition doesn’t get it. 
 

. . . the various ministers responsible for the SLGA over the 
period of time during which this linked bingo was 
approved, developed, and implemented, and operated 
would have been monitoring all of SLGA’s work. 
 
. . . (That) monitoring would have occurred through regular 
meetings and briefings, as well as updates provided to . . . ( 
the SLGA) board . . . (which consists of) the minister 
responsible . . . and another member . . . (of) cabinet. 
 

The minister responsible was aware of the decisions being made 
in SLGA. The cabinet approved them, Mr. Chair; there’s no 
doubt about that. Again we repeat in this House time after time 
after time, over and over again, all through the session. They 
haven’t got one new thing to ask, so we’re back to mega bingo. 

Well the fact of the matter is, the decision was made for a 
linked bingo as part of a larger gaming strategy. When that 
decision was made, we went to the appropriate third party, 
which in this case would be the Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation, for an assessment of these proposals. 
 
The Western Canada Lottery Corporation . . . I don’t know, the 
opposition doesn’t like them, either; it doesn’t trust their views. 
They don’t trust the Bank of Montreal; they don’t trust 
Moody’s; maybe they don’t trust the Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation. But the fact of the matter is that in their capacity 
they advised this government; the decision was made. 
 
Now again, there is no denying the fact that the mega bingo, the 
mega bingo project did not have the desired results. It didn’t 
have the desired results but is it therefore the position of the 
opposition that the government of the day should not have 
engaged in this effort with the charitable organizations of 
Saskatchewan? Is that their view, that we should not have 
listened to the voices of the charities across Saskatchewan? Is 
that their view? 
 
Is it the view still that the government should never involve 
itself in partnerships or public sector or private sector equity 
investments and partnerships? Is that the view? If that’s the 
view, then let the leader stand up and let’s declare it so the 
people of Saskatchewan can hear it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well the Premier’s, 
the Premier’s answer was indeed insightful. 
 
The Premier indicated that decisions are made by cabinet 
without due diligence being done. And then the third party, the 
third party inquiries are undertaken. That means that in the case 
of SPUDCO, the government, the cabinet — the NDP cabinet 
— decide they’re going to go ahead with SPUDCO before they 
have done due diligence. They make that decision without 
information, without knowledge. And farther down the road 
they get due diligence done. 
 
In the case of mega bingo, they trusted the Western Canadian 
Lottery Corporation to do the diligence for them. But in fact 
Western Canadian Lottery Corporation communicated to the 
NDP government that they do not consider themselves an 
expert in the work and therefore that they will rely in the skill, 
expertise, and judgment and representation of suppliers. 
 
That was the third party recommendation that the government, 
the NDP government was relying on after they’d already made 
the decision to go ahead with mega bingo. It’s no wonder none 
of their projects are turning out. They do not have a proper due 
diligence process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, I know now why they’re in 
trouble with the Broe deal. Broe has no knowledge of the 
ethanol industry. They’ve not been involved in the ethanol 
industry. And yet they’ve decided, they’ve made the decision to 
marry themselves to Broe without having done due diligence, 
without Broe having their financing in place. We just see the 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

same mistake repeated over and over and over again. 
 
So they lose $28 million on SPUDCO because they have 
improper procedures. They lose $8 million on mega bingo. And 
I think the Premier said that all of his, all of his changes in 
procedure wouldn’t have corrected that — wouldn’t have 
corrected that. They’re still using the same process. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Chair, they’re going down the same road 
with the Broe deal — the same road. And that is absolutely 
appalling. It is absolutely unacceptable that a government that 
has the trust . . . that is entrusted with billions of taxpayers’ 
dollars do not put in place proper accountability, proper 
spending authorities, proper reviews, proper investigations 
before they commit these millions and millions of dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The result, the result is disaster after 
disaster. The result is the minister getting up in the legislature 
and apologizing for the mess that he’s been responsible for six 
years. And he’s still in cabinet. It’s absolutely appalling. 
 
(17:15) 
 
Now I want to turn briefly to agriculture because it still is an 
important industry in Saskatchewan, not the only industry, but a 
very important industry. With the outbreak of the BSE and 
ensuing aid package, the federal government has upped the 
pressure to sign the implementation agreement for the 
agricultural policy framework. Can the Premier give us the 
timetable for signing on to this agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it would appear that the Ag 
ministers are all meeting in July. Four other provinces have 
already signed on, so it may be fair to say that July is a likely 
sign-on date. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I thank the Premier for that answer. There 
have been a number of concerns raised about the signing of the 
implementation agreement, mostly having to do with the lack of 
detail surrounding the programs under the APF. I want to know 
if this is a concern of the Premier. For instance, can he give us 
the details into how the new super NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) program will work and what the cost 
will be for producers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I am not able to speak to 
some of the detail of the new NISA. I’m confident that the 
Minister of Agriculture would have had this discussion with the 
Agriculture critic in his estimates. If there is detail that the 
Leader of the Opposition wants, we’ll provide all the detail that 
we have. There’s no doubt about that. And I think it’s important 
that we get the detail right. In these matters, it’s important to 
have the detail right and so I want to be sure that we can send it. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Chair, we’ve worked pretty hard, particularly 
the Minister of Agriculture, but government generally worked 
pretty hard to try and shape this new agricultural policy 
framework to be the best that we can build. For too long, for too 
long in this country, we’ve gone with the ad hoceries and so on 

that we’re trying to build what could be a sustainable long-term 
support program for agriculture, not just in Saskatchewan but 
across Canada. 
 
I would argue that some of our goals have been achieved in the 
APF; that we are in much better shape today than we are when 
we began this discussion. 
 
But at the same time there are areas that we think yet need to be 
addressed, particularly indexing in the programs and in the 
matter of trade injury. And here we have simply not seen the 
response from our national government that is absolutely 
required in the matter of trade injury. I believe that we as a 
province happily accept our responsibility to support agriculture 
in our province in appropriate measures through appropriate 
programming when that support is occasioned by climatic 
conditions, drought, infestation, whether it be grasshoppers or 
you name it. 
 
But in the matter of trade injury, injury that’s occurred, that’s 
occasioned by international subsidies, by treasuries much, much 
greater than the province of Saskatchewan —whether it be the 
European treasuries, the American treasuries, or Asian 
treasuries, it doesn’t matter — that that requires a much more 
proactive response from the national government. 
 
We do not see in the APF what I think is anywhere near an 
appropriate response to trade injury. So there will be, we would 
hope, an addendum. 
 
We think the areas of achievement are substantial. We’ve come 
a long ways but there is yet work to do. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the Premier, 
we have obviously many times discussed the inadequacies of 
the APF and in fact my Agriculture critic has questioned the 
Minister of Agriculture on many occasions, and any solid 
information has been very difficult to get most of the time 
because your Minister of Agriculture indicates that he wasn’t 
fully informed or the decisions hadn’t been finally reached as to 
what shape the new programs would actually take. 
 
There is in fact a real concern that this new super NISA will not 
look at all like the old NISA program, but it will look an awful 
lot like the old AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) 
program and CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) program 
which your government and which the official opposition have 
equally been very critical of — agriculture programs not well 
suited to the agricultural needs of the province of Saskatchewan 
and its producers. 
 
In the new APF that we are contemplating or I understand your 
government is contemplating signing perhaps as early as this 
month, that of course is one portion or one step in the signing of 
an agreement. There are more than one step to signing the APF 
and in fact the first step is the agreement of intent and that 
doesn’t include all of the details, it just means you intend to 
follow through and put together a program that will serve the 
needs of producers. 
 
Saskatchewan was very slow in signing the intent portion or 
stage of the new APF. In fact it had gone a long ways with a lot 
of other provinces before we signed on, on the intent stage. And 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

 

yet we seemed to be quite eager to sign on to the 
implementation stage, which of course actually is the agreement 
that will deliver the program to the producers. 
 
Does the Premier agree with being very slow in signing on the 
intent stage and being very hasty in signing on in the 
implementation stage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I don’t think it’s quite fair, Mr. Chair, to 
describe our signing of both intent or the detail as hasty. As I 
pointed out, a number of other provinces have already 
committed and signed to the full level of detail and 
implementation. 
 
I’m informed by the Minister of Agriculture those provinces are 
our neighbours to the west, Alberta and British Columbia; our 
neighbour to the east, Manitoba; and Newfoundland and 
Labrador. And in those four are of course a significant, a 
significant, significant level of the agriculture-producing 
provinces of Canada. 
 
So I wouldn’t describe as hasty our intention to move into the 
implementation phase. 
 
And I’m reminded by the Minister of Agriculture this afternoon 
that beyond the programs we’ve discussed, the four other pillars 
of the APF are food safety, renewal, science and technology, 
environmental stewardship, and there’s a package there of $28 
million. And particularly at the top of that list, food safety of 
course is a matter of significant, of significant concern right 
now. And we want to be sure that we can access for 
Saskatchewan producers the full benefits. 
 
And so we look to the signing in July with the caveat that I’ve 
already put on the thing, that indexing and the whole matter of 
trade injury, we feel that needs yet to be addended, addended to 
the discussion and addressed more so than we’ve seen 
addressed to date. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I thank the Premier for that answer. And 
in fact if these concerns are not met, what is the plan of the 
Minister of Agriculture; what is the plan of your government? If 
we don’t get that addendum, if we don’t get those 
considerations, will the APF be signed on to? Or is it the 
commitment of this government not to sign on to it until those 
details are put in place in a way that is acceptable to the 
industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well as I think I observed earlier, Mr. 
Chair, in our discussion this afternoon, it would seem in recent 
months at least, or perhaps in recent years, that every time we 
have to engage Ottawa it’s a fighting and a clawing to move 
things forward. It’s taken quite a substantive battle to move us 
to this date. 
 
If those are not achieved prior implementation, then we’re 
going to be where we were in the negotiation of the APF. We’re 
going to be working with the industry. We are working with the 
industry. And we’ll work with other provinces, including those 
who have signed up, to move to the next step, which is going to 
have to fight for the old trade injury piece and the indexing 
piece and other areas that may be identified that are insufficient. 
 

I just want to be very clear. Our commitment to sign the APF 
moves us into the programming as it’s been described. This is 
not a commitment that we remain silent or will somehow then 
say everything is fine. No. We’ve achieved this much; what 
more do we need to do and how are we going to work at it? 
 
As we’ve brought it to this state, we’ll work with other 
provinces, we’ll work with other ministries of agriculture, and 
we’ll work with the industry. And I think in combination that’s 
how we’ve been able to move the Government of Canada to the 
place at least where they are now. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — That’s not, Mr. Chair, that’s not a very 
clear answer. And obviously it doesn’t give us much of 
substance to take back to producers in the province as to what 
they can expect from this program. And we feel really badly 
about not being able to communicate more clearly to our 
constituents what the details of this new APF will be and what 
the bottom line is for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year and somewhat the year before, much of Saskatchewan 
was in a severe drought climate, and the Premier alluded to that 
earlier. What is in the new APF that will protect producers from 
the ravages of droughts like we have seen in the last couple of 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I would like to be able to report to 
the Leader of the Opposition that somehow we had some 
significant control over the climate or the weather and we could 
prevent the drought. We can’t guarantee that. 
 
But that’s why we’ve built the safety net programs to deal with 
the circumstances that may be by drought or by flood, as I said, 
or by insect infestation, or whatever challenge may occur. 
When those challenges are of nature, we think there is an 
appropriate response. 
 
When those challenges come to us from international trade 
subsidy, again I repeat we think there needs to be a much more 
significant national response. 
 
But in answer to the Leader of the Opposition’s question, we 
are building and strengthening those long-term safety net 
programs. There is the APF. There are the crop insurance 
programs. These we see as the response necessary to those 
particular challenges to producers and the farm community of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If the Leader of the Opposition has more to say about what 
should be done than they are saying in their current campaign 
literature, I would very much appreciate the opposition advising 
this legislature, advising government, on what he thinks we 
should do — what programs should be put in place, what is the 
level of funding they should have, where does this level of 
funding come from? 
 
It’s one thing to get up and say, what are you doing? It’s 
another, in a responsible situation, if the Leader of the 
Opposition would stand up and say, well here are some 
programs we think you should implement and here’s how they 
can be funded and here’s how they will benefit the producer. 
I’m more than happy to listen to any ideas that the Leader of the 
Opposition may have. To date in this session, I have not heard 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

one. So perhaps today will change that pattern. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — If the, Mr. Chair, if the Premier would 
check out his history, he would know that following the 1999 
election, when agriculture was in a very critical situation, in fact 
there was an emergency debate in this very legislature on the 
issue of agriculture, the Saskatchewan Party was involved . . . 
The Premier is not listening to my response, but I will give it to 
him anyways. The Saskatchewan Party was involved with the 
industry and with the government, the minister at the time was 
Mr. Lingenfelter, and we were involved, we were inside the 
doors discussing the details that were required to help 
agriculture. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party was informed by the NDP government 
that we could only be a part of that group as long as we did not 
criticize the NDP in Saskatchewan. We could criticize the 
federal government, but we weren’t permitted to say anything 
negative about the NDP in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Obviously the official opposition cannot fulfill its role if it’s not 
allowed to review the province’s role in agricultural issues. So 
the Premier’s predecessors, Mr. Romanow and Mr. 
Lingenfelter, were making gag orders for the official 
opposition, telling them, telling them that they had to march to 
the NDP’s step or they couldn’t play in the, they couldn’t play 
in the band. 
 
Well quite frankly, Mr. Chair, the parliamentary role of the 
opposition is to be in a position where it can review the actions 
of the government. That is our responsibility. As I mentioned to 
the Premier at the beginning of these estimates, that is why we 
are paid by the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. If 
we are going to be gagged by the government and have to play 
only by their rules and praise the government even should they 
deserve some criticism, well, Mr. Chair, we are not fulfilling 
our responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(17:30) 
 
I would say to the Premier, when he calls the election, we will 
clearly outline our agriculture policy. And I daresay it will be 
miles and miles ahead of the agriculture policy that the NDP 
might want to propose. So again I would ask the Premier to 
answer the questions. 
 
The federal Finance minister, Mr. Manley, has suggested that 
federal economic growth projections will be revised downwards 
because of the SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) 
outbreak and because of the BSE outbreak. I want to know from 
the Premier of Saskatchewan, what are his new economic 
projections for economic growth in Saskatchewan given the 
impact of BSE on our provincial economy? How much lower 
than 6.8 per cent will our real GDP (gross domestic product) 
growth be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I don’t think the Leader of the 
Opposition can get off the hook quite this easily. It is passing 
strange that the Leader of the Opposition can stand in the 
Saskatchewan legislature and say, I’m not going to divulge any 
of our policy until you call an election. Now that indicates to 

me one or two things — either there is no policy or it’s a policy 
he’s not very proud of. 
 
Obviously we are in an election year. Between now and the 
fifth anniversary of the last election there will be a call to the 
polls. It is very interesting that the Leader of the Opposition 
will refuse not to . . . to discuss even their policies on 
agriculture within the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
He says no, no, we’re not going to speak; you’ve got to wait for 
an election and then I will reveal all. 
 
Well now this . . . I believe it’s unheard of in Saskatchewan 
politics. I tell you, when most oppositions are looking to seek 
government, they’re more than happy to talk about their 
policies. They’re more than happy to advise the government on 
what the government should be doing. 
 
What we have is an opposition that says, we have no advice to 
give the Government of Saskatchewan. And the Leader of the 
Opposition just stood in the Saskatchewan legislature and said, 
I will not give advice to the Government of Saskatchewan 
because in 1999 we joined a committee, a committee which 
went to Ottawa, came home, and then violated all the 
commitments that we had made to hang together and fight 
Ottawa; no, they went offside as soon as they got home. 
 
Now I do have at my disposal — I think so — a bit of campaign 
literature that seems to be going around the city of Regina here 
about agriculture. Now I guess what I can do is see if the 
Leader of the Opposition will in the legislature at least admit 
that this is the policy of the party. 
 
He says here that under agriculture they would negotiate a new 
long-term safety net program to stabilize farm businesses and 
protect farm families from international commodity price wars. 
Well that’s the policy. What’s the detail? What are the details of 
the long-term safety net program that will differ from the APF? 
What’s the detail? 
 
He says that they’re going to introduce an enhanced crop 
insurance program. Well tell us about the enhanced crop 
insurance program. Tell us how it will be funded, because all 
day they’ve criticized this government for accepting new debt 
under crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Chair, they can’t have it both ways. You can’t have an 
expanded crop insurance program and not provide the public 
funding. So how much public funding are we going to have for 
that? 
 
They’re going to reduce, he says under agriculture, the burden 
of education property tax on farm land. Well let’s hear the 
detail. Let’s hear the detail. And then interestingly enough, Mr. 
Chair, the Leader of the Opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, 
say that they support producer choice in grain marketing. They 
support producer choice in grain marketing. 
 
Now just what does that mean? Does that mean they support or 
do not support the single-desk marketing of the Canadian 
Wheat Board? Does that mean they do not support the Canadian 
Wheat Board? Well then, let us have them stand up. The Leader 
of the Opposition has an opportunity right now in the legislature 
to stand up in public and answer some of these questions. 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well the Premier’s 
not doing his job; the Premier’s not answering questions. He’s 
pretending to be the Leader of the Opposition and after the next 
election he’ll have the opportunity to be the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Saskatchewan Party has been crystal clear on 
agriculture policy. There was a drought last year. We came up 
with five emergency measures we were prepared to implement. 
The government, I believe, rejected about four of them. They 
were excellent and they were specific details. 
 
On the marketing of our wheat, we support the Canadian Wheat 
Board but we believe it should be a voluntary marketer of 
Prairie producers’ wheat. We’ve been clear on that since the 
inception of the party. I don’t know where the Premier’s been; 
maybe he’s been hiding in the basement in Moose Jaw or 
something. 
 
Our agriculture policy is clear. All of our policy is clear. And 
there will be more details when the election is called. We’re 
prepared to do the job. The Premier just has to call the election. 
 
Now I mentioned, Mr. Chair, that the NDP slammed the door 
on the Saskatchewan Party being involved inside the tent on 
agriculture issues back in 1999. But under our current Premier 
— that was the former premier, Mr. Romanow and the former 
Agriculture minister, Mr. Lingenfelter — but today nothing has 
changed. We have the worst crisis facing agriculture in my 
lifetime — the potential destruction of the beef industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that extends beyond our borders 
to all of Canada. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture, who also was the minister of 
industry and trade, Industry and Resources — I’m not sure 
which one — got up in this House and criticized the Parliament 
of Canada for recessing last week when the BSE crisis was still 
not yet resolved. And at the same time, the other minister and 
the member for Regina Victoria criticized the official 
opposition in Saskatchewan for wanting to be at work on behalf 
of the people of the province. 
 
Now we know that the NDP are taking a rough ride and they’re 
really hammered whenever they come and sit in this Assembly, 
and we know that they really want to get out from under their 
responsibility. But it was appalling, in the midst of the BSE 
crisis, to hear the member for Regina Victoria and to hear 
members of cabinet suggesting we should just all go home and 
abandon the people of Saskatchewan, abandon the beef industry 
— that the Minister of Agriculture had everything under 
control; it’s all in his capable hands and we should just trust 
him. 
 
Total disregard for the Legislative Assembly. Total disregard, 
Mr. Premier, for the MLAs who represent most of rural 
Saskatchewan, most of the beef producers, most of the feedlot 
operators, many of the auction markets in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We were told to just go home; everything would 
be fine. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, we suggested a way, we suggested a way so 
that the member for Regina Victoria could go home and relax in 
his backyard. But we are prepared to stay on top of this issue. 

We suggested that the Agriculture Committee — and it seems 
appropriate that there should be an agriculture committee in the 
province of Saskatchewan — should meet regularly to be 
briefed on the BSE issue. I mean we were briefed, Mr. Premier, 
on the 9/11 issue. You ensured that the official opposition was 
briefed on what Saskatchewan was doing on security issues out 
of 9/11. This is a crisis of greater immediate impact on the 
province of Saskatchewan, the BSE crisis, and yet your 
government is suggesting that we should all go home, we 
should put our feet up on the deck, and just ignore the problem. 
 
Mr. Premier, we want the Agriculture Committee to meet on a 
weekly basis and if need be we want you to recall the 
legislature in August if the US border is not reopened. Will the 
Premier show consideration to one of the province’s most 
important industries and agree to our very reasonable and 
appropriate request? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
today began his presentation in this process of estimates by 
making it very clear that he was not today going to answer any 
questions — that he today, in this legislature, would not 
advance answers to questions; that he would not be discussing 
his party policies and so on. He made that very clear in the 
comments that he made at the start of this process this 
afternoon. Now he says he needs this legislature to voice his 
opinion. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, since the day that we became informed about 
the situation of the one isolated case of BSE in Alberta, every 
day hence, this Minister of Agriculture has been at work on this 
file. He has consulted . . . he has consulted regularly — it 
cannot be denied — with the Agriculture critic across the way. 
If there’s any denial of that, I’d like to hear it now. 
Immediately. He has participated in conversation and 
consultation with the opposition. 
 
We have appreciated; as I’m sure the livestock producers of 
Saskatchewan have appreciated, as I’m sure the citizens of 
Saskatchewan have appreciated it, for the most part we have 
dealt with this issue in a non-partisan fashion in this legislature. 
And there’s no use in now trying to engage in partisan 
discussion about it. We face a common problem. 
 
Now the fact . . . But you see, you see, Mr. Chair, they will look 
for any opportunity to criticize, to pull down. 
 
Now the solution, Mr. Chair, is to continue working together. 
Decisions that will need to be made, if they are required to be 
made in the legislature, we will call this legislature. If the 
Leader . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . But you see, Mr. 
Speaker, you see, Mr. Chair, my point is made. All they want to 
do is make noise. All they want to do is make noise. All they 
want to do is to try and be heard. 
 
Is there a deep concern over there? Well I’m not so sure of the 
deep concern. Well the Leader of the Opposition says the 
legislature should be sitting to deal with this. Well interestingly 
enough, he should have his members show up. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, I’m sorry to see the Premier 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

losing his temper. 
 
We’re doing our job. We’ve not missed a single assignment in 
this legislature since he recalled the legislature. For him to, for 
him to suggest that in some way we have not been involved in 
every question period, every . . . We have not . . . We have been 
involved with every Bill, the few that they have introduced. 
And, Mr. Chair, we have handled the estimate process 
extremely well and professionally. 
 
So I would suggest the Premier should apologize for those 
uncalled-for comments. 
 
Now the Premier suggested that we should continue in a 
non-partisan way to deal with the agricultural issue, the BSE 
issue. What better way to do that than to allow the Agriculture 
Committee to continue to meet in July? If he’s sincere, that’s 
what he would do. 
 
And you know, it’s just bizarre that he would forget that he’s 
the Premier and start asking us questions about what our 
agriculture policy is. I gave him two or three specific examples 
but that wasn’t good enough because simply he doesn’t have a 
position. He doesn’t have an agriculture policy. 
 
And so he thinks that perhaps because the NDP doesn’t have a 
policy, maybe the official opposition doesn’t either. Well I tell 
the Premier, we are very clear and specific on our positions, and 
our policy is very complete and detailed — far better than 
anything that the NDP has proposed. 
 
Now let us . . . Because we’re not getting answers on 
agriculture, I just simply ask the Premier a question that I know 
he’ll answer off the top of his head. When will construction 
begin on the Broe ethanol plant at Belle Plaine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — When, Mr. Chair, the appropriate 
financing is in place. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, I asked . . . Mr. Chair, I ask the 
Premier when will the construction on the Broe ethanol plant at 
Belle Plaine commence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, why does the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party fight ethanol? Why? It 
will commence, I tell you, Mr. Chair, it will commence when 
the appropriate financing is in place. 
 
You see, Mr. Chair, we’ve spent some good quality time this 
afternoon and in this session with the Saskatchewan Party 
demanding that we do extreme due diligence when we are 
going to partner or take equity positions in expanding the 
economy. Fair enough. They claim great due diligence. We are 
doing just that. We are ensuring that the best possible financial 
arrangement can be achieved before we commit to enter into 
that financial arrangement. 
 
They know the parameters that we have set out. We have been 
very, very open about the parameters of this deal. They seem to 
have a desire that this deal should not proceed. They seem to 
have a desire that this industry should fail. That of course would 
be good, I suppose, for their political future so they could tramp 
around and make some political hay. I’m not interested in 

political hay. 
 
I’m interested in building an ethanol industry in this province. 
I’m interested in building an industry that will provide a clean 
fuel source, that will use the grain of our producers, that can 
provide the distillers grain for a growing livestock feedlot 
industry. I’m interested in building an industry, not taking shots 
. . . taking pot shots. 
 
We will, as the opposition has recommended, we will do the 
due diligence. We will take the time to ensure that the best 
possible deal is put in place, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — My question, Mr. Chair, to the Premier, is: 
when will construction of the Broe ethanol plant at Belle Plaine 
commence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the construction will 
commence at the Broe . . . at the ethanol plant in Belle Plaine 
when the appropriate financing that is respectful of the interests 
of the Saskatchewan taxpayer is in place, and not before. 
 
(17:45) 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, he . . . the Leader of the Opposition was part 
of a political movement that once formed government in this 
province in the 1980s. 
 
Oh he shakes his head. He said he wasn’t supportive of the, he 
wasn’t supportive of the Conservative government. The Leader 
of the Opposition did not support the Conservative 
government? He shakes his head. Well this is a shock to me. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, when his political persuasion were 
in government here, I tell you, deals were being made right, left, 
and centre; and we’re still paying for some of them, and we’re 
still renegotiating some of them. 
 
When we are going to sign a deal to provide for ethanol 
financing in Belle Plaine, it will be the best deal that we can 
achieve for the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s when the 
construction will begin. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I guess we’re still paying 
for GigaText, we’re still certainly paying for SPUDCO, we’re 
still certainly paying for mega bingo. The Premier is as guilty as 
anyone in Saskatchewan for misspending taxpayers’ money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The Premier stated categorically that the 
funding, the financing is in place. He also said when the 
financing is in place, the construction will commence. So I ask 
the Premier, when will the Broe ethanol plant facility at Belle 
Plaine’s construction commence? When will it happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think I’ve said this now four 
times. When all of the appropriate financing is in place, 
achieving the . . . Mr. Chair, you know it would be very helpful, 
I think, if the Leader of the Opposition and some of his 
colleagues took advice from their member from Lloydminster. 
If they would listen to their member from Lloydminster on 
occasion, I think they would be well served. 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

 

Now I’m going to quote, I am going to quote their member 
from Lloydminster. The Leader of the Opposition should listen 
to this because if he took counsel from that member more often 
than some of these other members, I think he would be well 
served: 
 
This is a report from the Meridian Booster, Lloydminster: 
 

While there is concern from the Saskatchewan Party the 
financial plans seem to be delayed, (fair enough) 
Lloydminster MLA Milt Wakefield isn’t entirely critical of 
both parties(CIC and Broe) for taking their time in the deal. 
 
“I’m concerned but when you’re . . . 

 
This is quote, the member from Lloydminster, he says: 
 

“I’m concerned but when you’re talking about a project this 
big, there has got to be adequate and thorough 
pre-preparation done so that we don’t mess up. To attract 
ethanol in the province and make Saskatchewan the 
production leader, I still think this is a great objective.” 

 
Why doesn’t the Leader of the Opposition stand up right now 
and say you’re doing the right thing? You’ve got a great, 
you’ve got a great objective in ethanol and you’re doing the 
right thing by taking your time to get the financing right. Why 
doesn’t he have the courage to say what his member from 
Lloydminster will say, instead of just trying to play pure politics 
now with ethanol? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The official opposition cannot give the 
government support because they have not convinced us that 
they know how to do due diligence yet. They have not put the 
procedures in place to ensure that taxpayers’ dollars are not 
being squandered. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I think I misunderstood the Premier, and I 
apologize if I did. I thought he said in his first answer that the 
financing was in place. I understand now, and he has said, that 
the financing is still not yet in place, and so I apologize if I 
asked him questions that did not properly relate to his answer. I 
did not hear him correctly. 
 
But then that begs the question, when does the Premier 
anticipate that the financing will be in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, obviously the financing has 
not come as quickly as we all might have hoped. And now we 
have a circumstance, and I think even the most partisan of the 
voices over there would admit, we have — if the partisan voices 
would be quiet for five seconds — Mr. Chair, I think even the 
most partisan of voices over there would admit that this BSE 
circumstance is affecting the entire livestock . . . (inaudible) . . . 
and that the ethanol industry and that distillers’ grain is deeply 
involved in this ethanol industry. One more reason we need to 
move forward on the BSE file. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there is little use in me trying to 
communicate a sensible answer to this opposition because they 
simply, they simply will not listen. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s unfortunate the 

Premier is losing his concentration over there, so we’ll change 
the focus. Perhaps we can get him back on track. 
 
I would like to ask the Premier, does he still believe that nuclear 
energy is dirty energy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I believe that the waste 
product of nuclear reactors is an extreme hazard to human 
health and the environment and must be handled with the kind 
of diligence unlike almost any other substance or product on 
earth. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The Premier didn’t quite answer the 
question. He made a statement earlier that he thought nuclear 
energy was dirty energy. Well it depends on a person’s 
perspective. There is . . . Nuclear energy produces no 
greenhouse gases. The Premier has been supportive of Kyoto. 
Nuclear energy is in fact good for our, good for our . . . good for 
the people who are supporting the reduction in greenhouse 
gases. 
 
In fact we rely, our economic future relies on countries 
purchasing uranium mined in northern Saskatchewan to 
generate nuclear energy. The United States generates a large 
percentage of its electricity from Saskatchewan uranium. 
They’re providing jobs for Saskatchewan people, including 
many Aboriginal people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
France generates I think a majority of its electrical energy 
powered by nuclear plants with uranium from Saskatchewan. 
 
Obviously if our future is wide open and we’re promoting 
Saskatchewan and its potential, it’s not helpful for the Premier 
of Saskatchewan to go around saying that nuclear energy is 
dirty energy. So I think he needs to be very clear. Does he 
believe that nuclear energy is dirty energy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, would the opposition leader 
be so kind as to pass me the quote that he is citing in the House 
— my comment that he cites today that I have declared nuclear 
energy to be dirty energy? Would he provide the quote for me? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don’t have it on 
my desk but my colleagues will try and track that down and we 
will present it a little later. 
 
However I wanted to also pursue another issue with regard to 
energy. And the Premier talks in a somewhat holier-than-thou 
attitude about how non-partisan his side of the House is and 
how in fact we’re playing politics all the time. Well it so 
happens that one of my colleagues introduced a private 
member’s Bill. And is it ever a terrible private member’s Bill 
because it suggested there should be an oil and gas recognition 
week. 
 
Now oil and gas happens to be the, you know, the major 
industry in Saskatchewan. I believe it’s now ahead of mining 
and perhaps agriculture as far as generating revenue. In a very 
. . . an appropriate way the member for Thunder Creek asked 
his NDP colleagues if they would lend support to his private 
member’s Bill. The oil and gas industry wants that recognition. 
 
Now we have mining week in Saskatchewan and we recognize 
agriculture and we recognize many other industries and very 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

worthy causes in Saskatchewan and nationally and 
internationally. We have earth day, we have all kinds of good 
things, Mr. Premier. 
 
But we don’t have a week in recognition of the oil and gas 
industry. So my colleague, in a spirit of non-partisanship, in a 
collegial way, approached this House and asked your side of the 
House to support his private member’s Bill which would 
recognize oil and gas week. 
 
But I suggest, Mr. Chair, and perhaps the Premier will refute 
this — and if he does, that’s great, they can still have a day or 
two to do something about this — but I suggest that because it 
was presented by the official opposition and the NDP did not 
want the official opposition to get credit even for the 
recognition of oil and gas week in Saskatchewan, they have 
refused to allow his Bill to move forward. 
 
Does the Premier support that type of petty attitude? And if he 
doesn’t, is he prepared to do something about it and let that Bill 
go forward before this House adjourns for the summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, on principle, on principle, in 
fact I have, and have appreciated, that we have in fact in past 
passed motions that have been presented by the opposition. I 
think the member of Moosomin recognized the food bank 
movement in this province with resolution. 
 
Now I’m informed — not having been privy to some of those 
conversations — but I’m informed that the negotiations towards 
the end of the session, that our House leaders have made 
agreements about the agenda. I am not confident that at this 
hour that that agenda will permit a change. It’s a discussion has 
been established between the House leaders and I don’t want to 
particularly intervene in the House leaders’ discussions of the 
agenda. 
 
But let me just say this, there is no principle that I hold or we 
hold that this could not be potentially a development here. But I 
would want to refer it to our . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, I can only speak to what I’m reported to through the 
matter of the House leaders. 
 
Perhaps if the member from Cannington wants the floor, he 
should take the floor officially. Please get to a microphone. Mr. 
Chair, I would invite . . . 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier asked 
if I would provide the source of his comment about nuclear 
energy. And you know, we have it here. It is from The 
StarPhoenix, January 31, 2003. It was on page A2 and it said: 
 

The Premier also made it clear (I’m quoting from the 
paper) (that) he doesn’t support nuclear power or a nuclear 
waste dump. 
 
“If we can supply power to Alberta, we’ll do it through 
cogeneration or wind. The notion that you could build a 
reactor that’s economic is a very, very questionable 
assumption. And this isn’t a clean source of power. It’s 
probably . . . 

 
He doesn’t even say dirty. He says: 

It’s probably the dirtiest, given what comes out (of) the 
tailpipe . . .” 

 
So I’d be happy to table The StarPhoenix article if the Premier 
so chooses or so requests. Obviously, obviously the Premier has 
forgotten the interview that he had just a few months ago with 
The StarPhoenix, or at least the news conference that The 
StarPhoenix was reporting. 
 
I would like to move on to the issue of revenue sharing and 
property taxes. The cities of Saskatchewan have expressed a 
grave concern at the reduction of revenue sharing they have 
received from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As a matter of fact when the new Finance minister released his 
budget in late March of this year, I think the most profound 
criticism of the budget came from the mayors of the cities of 
Saskatchewan who were appalled and who felt betrayed that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the NDP government did not 
come close to meeting the revenue-sharing amounts that they 
had anticipated would be forthcoming. 
 
Now I’m not sure what was promised by individual cabinet 
ministers on the other side, but we really sensed that from their 
public pronouncements of criticism over the budget and the fact 
that revenue sharing was not increased substantially, that the 
government had failed to keep commitments that the cities felt 
they had been entitled to and would be receiving. 
 
Mr. Chair, urban revenue sharing in 1991-92 was 62.2 million. 
Urban revenue sharing in 2001-2002 was $26.9 million. How is 
the Premier going to account for this drastic reduction in 
revenue sharing for our urban municipalities? 
 
(18:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we’ve enjoyed a very, very 
good working relationship with the urban municipalities, with 
rural municipalities, with our northern municipalities. 
 
Yes, it’s fair to say that inheriting the financial mess that we did 
in the 1990s, early 1990s, that revenue sharing was diminished 
in that period of time. But the record in the last two budgets and 
upcoming budget is a record of restoring a value of revenue 
sharing. So a 10 million last year, a 10 million this year, and a 
commitment to 10 million next year in direct revenue sharing. 
 
But in addition to revenue sharing for our urban municipalities 
and our rural municipalities, for municipalities across the 
province, we have instituted grants in lieu of taxes where there 
are provincial facilities. And now there is a program of grants in 
lieu of taxes and that has grown significantly. We have invested 
significant dollars in our centenary grants and our infrastructure 
programs, many of which have been of a direct benefit to our 
urban municipalities. 
 
Would our urban municipalities seek more support from the 
province? Of course they would. If we had resources that could 
be fairly applied, it’s a high priority area but there are also 
many other high priority areas. We have high priorities in health 
care, and education, and highways, and so on. 
 
There is a discussion, there has been a discussion about the 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

 

division of those revenue-sharing dollars. Some arguing from 
an urban perspective that they should be more matched to 
population, others from a rural perspective saying there should 
be an equal distribution. 
 
And that’s a discussion that continues to go on. I know there’s a 
fruitful discussion happening between SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and the department, the 
government right now, on that particular issue. 
 
We have come some significant way in the past several years in 
providing provincial support to our municipalities, and with 
revenue sharing over the last two budget years and our 
projection to the next budget year is increases in each of those 
budget years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, the Premier suggests that the 
reason why revenue sharing is low in 2001-2002 is because of 
mistakes made in the 1980s. Mistakes were made in the 1980s, 
but the urban revenue sharing, after all those mistakes were 
made, were still $62.2 million. After 10 years of NDP 
government that had been reduced to $26.9 million. So does 
that mean it was mistakes of the 1990s that caused the Premier 
to drastically cut revenue sharing to urban municipalities? 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Premier, SaskTel on its risky 
non-core investments lost $65 million — $65 million blown out 
the door. And yet the Premier cannot increase a paltry $26.9 
million of revenue sharing to urban municipalities. 
 
Mr. Chair, it is no wonder the urban municipalities of 
Saskatchewan feel betrayed by the Premier and his NDP 
government. 
 
I just want to ask a couple of questions on a different subject. 
Mr. Premier, has your government met with officials from the 
treaty governance office of the FSIN? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, just to be absolutely clear, the 
Leader of the Opposition suggests and says in his comment, 
why has this Premier cut funding to revenue sharing? The fact 
of the matter is since I’ve been Premier, there’s been increases 
in revenue sharing every year with a commitment to next year. 
That’s the fact. 
 
We meet regularly, Mr. Chair, we meet regularly with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. I very recently 
have signed a bilateral protocol to ensure that we meet 
regularly; both as individual ministers, as Premier with chief, as 
a cabinet with members of the FSIN. 
 
We are meeting very regularly with the First Nations in 
whatever area of endeavour that we’re engaged in, whether it’s 
in the treaty discussions or whether it’s in the discussions 
around gaming or economic development or social 
development, just as we meet regularly with individual tribal 
councils, individual First Nations and their chiefs. 
 
So if the Leader of the Opposition has a more specific issue or 
question to raise, I can try and address it. 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well I thought . . . Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
I thought I was fairly specific. We know that the Premier has 
met and his officials have met with FSIN. 
 
But we specifically want to know if he or his officials have met 
with the treaty governance office of FSIN. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, perhaps I can get from the 
opposition a little more clarity. 
 
We know the governance tables and treaty discussions 
happened there. There is the work of the Treaty Commissioner? 
Is he referring to the work that’s conducted by the Treaty 
Commissioner? What specific work is he requesting the 
information about? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — There is . . . Thank you, Mr. Chair. There 
is a treaty governance office as part of FSIN. And we’re 
wondering . . . I mean, they are involved in the negotiations 
over self-government. I mean they play a fairly important role 
in the future of the Aboriginal people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we are asking simply if your government, your officials, 
your minister or ministers have met with officials of the treaty 
governance office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I can’t detail the meetings of 
all officials in government. We’ll find out if there needs to be 
some detail provided about when, where, and so on. But I’m 
absolutely aware that we sit at the bilateral tables. We’re in 
discussions with the First Nations around treaty governance all 
the time. We’re meeting with . . . I meet with the chief 
regularly. We meet with the, as I said, the leadership, the 
vice-chiefs; we meet with the grand councils; we meet with 
individual chiefs. 
 
And if your question is, do some officials from the Government 
of Saskatchewan meet with officials about treaty governance 
with the FSIN, I assume they do. But we can, we can gladly 
provide you any detail you might want about it. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well we’d appreciate . . . Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. We’d appreciate it if the Premier would in fact do that. 
 
But we would also ask him if he can tell us today what his 
government is doing to fulfill the end of the tripartite 
agreements with relation to Aboriginal self-government. Where 
are things at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I suspect, Mr. Chair, that’s the question 
that the Leader of the Opposition is perhaps more interested in. 
And we’re in the midst of that process. It’s not a concluded 
process by any means. 
 
And we’re at table with on one hand, the MLTC, the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council, and the tremendous work that’s been 
going on there. And we’re at the table with the FSIN. And 
we’re at table with the federal government. And of course we’re 
there as the province. 
 
The work is not completed, as the opposition leader I am sure 
would recognize. It’s long and complicated and arduous but we 
have a deep commitment to that work. And I think some real 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

evidence of progress that has been made but the work is not 
done and we continue to be at it. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s not a very 
complete answer. I’ll ask another question. Perhaps I’ll be more 
successful. 
 
What, Mr. Premier, has your government done to educate the 
people of Saskatchewan on Saskatchewan’s role in the treaty 
governance process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it was just not 
so long ago that we’ve committed that treaty education would 
be part of our school curriculum in Saskatchewan, so that all 
citizens can understand the importance of the treaties. We have 
the work of the Treaty Commissioner’s office who is doing 
tremendous educational work right across the province. I would 
invite the Leader of the Opposition to review the kind of work 
that he’s doing. 
 
I wonder . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, is the question 
here . . . Are the questions being framed to have the debate 
about whether we support the process? If it’s a question about 
whether . . . If the question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
maybe this member . . . You know, all day I have had members 
of the opposition from their seats, very brave, but not a one of 
them will stand on their feet other than the leader. Now if the 
member from Sask Rivers, who apparently does not support this 
process by what he’s saying from his seat, wants to get on his 
feet and say it, then get on your feet and say it. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, if the Leader of the Opposition is seeking to 
ask the question, do we support the process, do we support 
moving to recognize the implications of the treaties, those 
important treaties between the First Nations of Saskatchewan 
and the Crown, you bet we support those treaties. And we, you 
bet, support the process of what needs to be done. And so, if it’s 
a debate about whether we support the process, there’s no 
equivocation on this side of the House. 
 
And if we want to engage in the debate, then I would ask the 
Leader of the Opposition, does he and the opposition members 
support the process? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well the Premier 
seems to be very uninformed about what’s happening, but we 
are concerned that tripartite agreements are ongoing and the 
province has been dragging its feet. The province hasn’t been 
playing its proper role in this whole process. 
 
You know, the members on the other side, they talk a good line, 
but when it actually comes to doing things, moving the process 
along, they’ve been sitting dead in the water, Mr. Chair. And 
quite frankly, there’s a lot of people losing a lot of patience with 
the NDP government over their inaction on this file as well. 
 
Mr. Chair, we’ll move on to the . . . Mr. Chair . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. There appears to be some private 
conversations going across the floor and I would ask the . . . If 
they do want to, if they do want to have the private 
conversation, I’d ask them to move behind the bar to have that 
private conversation. 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate that 
intervention. But I was rather surprised by the Premier’s 
comment that that was unbelievable when he really doesn’t 
even seem to know anything about the file himself. How would 
he know what’s believable and what isn’t believable? The 
Premier is out of tune with what’s going on and what the needs 
of the province of Saskatchewan are and particularly what the 
needs of our Aboriginal people are. 
 
Let’s move on to the issue of justice. Mr. Chair, from the past 
three years of statistics from Statistics Canada, numbers show 
that Saskatchewan is still having one of the highest crime rates 
in the country. That seems hard to believe because you know 
we think of Saskatchewan as a law-abiding, peaceful, warm, 
hospitable place, and for the most part it is. But for some reason 
we still have both property and violent crime problems in the 
province of Saskatchewan and it’s something that absolutely 
has to be addressed. 
 
We have one of the highest youth crime rates in Canada. And 
now, Mr. Chair, I have been privileged to meet with young 
people all across Saskatchewan and 99.9 per cent of our young 
people are outstanding citizens of this province. I’m proud of all 
of them. But in spite of that, we have a high youth crime rate in 
this province. Why is that so? Does the Premier admit that the 
NDP has failed to deliver on its promise to place 200 more 
police officers in the province of Saskatchewan? Might that in 
fact be contributing to our high crime rates in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, on the question of the levels 
of policing in Saskatchewan, the Leader of the Opposition will 
know but will not recognize, of course, that since 1999 this 
government has seen to it that all of the vacancies that existed 
within the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) across 
Saskatchewan that time are now filled, now filled. Not . . . Now 
filled. Vacancies filled. 
 
Now they will not count those as new officers. They are not 
new positions, but they are clearly new police officers in the 
field. The member of Humboldt seems to have some knowledge 
of this; I understand that. 
 
(18:15) 
 
In addition, 146 new officers. What does that result in, Mr. 
Chair? Well it results in a report from StatsCan that 
Saskatchewan’s police ratio is now the highest, highest in 
Canada. Saskatchewan has the most police officers per capita of 
all the provinces. Saskatchewan has 198 per 100,000 people, 
followed by Quebec and Manitoba, Friday’s report says . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . So now the member from Canora 
says that we still lead in crime. We do not lead in crime. We 
have some high crime stats in certain areas, there’s no doubt 
about that. Why the Leader of the Opposition, the member of 
the Saskatchewan Party, want to go tramping around the 
country saying we lead in crime — because it’s good for their 
political cause, I suppose. They’ll say or do anything. 
 
Now the reality is we have some high crime stats. We had some 
very high crime stats in terms of auto theft, particularly in the 
capital city, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, North Battleford. We 
have seen a significant reduction. We’ve seen a recent climb in 
those numbers, but again back down this month as the minister 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

 

reports. And we’ve been able to accomplish that, not through a 
process of throwing young people into inappropriate 
punishment, but by being diligent in their apprehension, diligent 
in their application to workers, and diligent in working with the 
police. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition says, why do we have this? 
Why do we have this? Well it is fair I think to say that much of 
the young offender activity in our province, criminal activity, 
may well be related to family conditions, to FAE (fetal alcohol 
effects) and FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome). I think that is a fair 
observation. Now if . . . What is the solution therefore? 
 
Well the solution is therefore much deeper than simply more 
police officers. We really do need to kind . . . do the kind of 
work that I know the member from Humboldt has been very 
supportive of. How can we work with families to eliminate 
these kinds of issues that have such a devastating effect on these 
young people? 
 
But I would ask the Leader of the Opposition, if he agrees that 
some of the difficulty we have with some of our young people 
is directly related to FAS and FAE — that was my observation 
when I worked in the field of young offenders — if he agrees 
with that, is then the solution to take the young person that’s 
been affected by this kind of tragic circumstance and put them 
in a boot camp? Is that the answer? I think not, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. The answer of 
course was again incomplete. The Premier talked about new 
police officers but we know that the total number of police 
officers given retirements and such have not allowed the 
province and the NDP to meet its commitment of 200 new or 
additional police officers here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s just one of many, many, many, many failed promises from 
the 1999 election campaign — a campaign that I think the 
Premier was involved behind the scenes as an advisor or as an 
election campaign strategist, something along that line. And 
that’s very, very disconcerting. 
 
Mr. Chair, the time has gone all too quickly and I wished we 
had as much time as we’ve already spent to deal with a number 
of issues. We haven’t talked very much about SPUDCO; we’ve 
brought that issue up a whole lot in the House. I have a number 
of questions that I wanted to ask about health care. And I’m 
going to run out of time and not be able to ask as many 
questions about health care, about education, and more 
questions that I wanted to ask about SLGA. 
 
Just on the health care file though, I have to make a couple of 
comments for which I want the Premier to respond. The 
problem that has been identified, it was identified by the NDP 
prior to the last election, is we do not have . . . we have too long 
a waiting list in the province of Saskatchewan. And the NDP 
made a commitment to reduce waiting lists by — I believe it 
was 30 per cent, if I remember correctly — 30 per cent smaller, 
shorter, waiting list for health care procedures in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, they haven’t shortened at all, they’ve doubled 
in length. People are waiting not just weeks for health care 
procedures, they’re waiting months, and they’re waiting years 
for some health care procedures. And no, they may not be life 

threatening but they hurt. They hurt a lot. If you need a hip 
replacement, it hurts not to have one. Every step you take hurts 
and the NDP government doesn’t care. They haven’t been 
prepared to fulfill their commitment to shorten waiting lists; 
they are longer than ever. 
 
Why are they so long, Mr. Chair? Well we have an inadequate 
number of health care professionals in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Now it would seem to me, Mr. Premier, that that 
would be a problem that could be fixed. If we don’t have 
enough health care professionals, let’s train more health care 
professionals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Under the NDP we have seen, we have 
seen seats for training for health care professionals cut — fewer 
nurses trained, fewer other health care . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member, the member for Regina South 
says, no. The member for Regina South is wrong. The numbers 
used to be over 400 nurses trained on an annual basis and now 
we’re somewheres in the neighbourhood of 2 to 250 nurses 
trained on an annual basis. 
 
Quite frankly, Mr. Chair, there are more nurses and other health 
care professionals in Saskatchewan retiring or leaving the 
province than we are training. We have nurses who are run 
ragged trying to care as best as they can for patients. They are 
frustrated. They communicated back to the NDP government 
prior to the 1999 election that they were upset. 
 
The Premier seems disinterested in this. I’m not sure why. I 
don’t know what he’s reading there but he doesn’t seem to care 
about our health care system. There have been incidences under 
his leadership, following his becoming the Leader of the NDP, 
where health care professionals have expressed not only their 
deep concern but their utmost frustration at the lack of NDP 
action in training more health care workers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we have a situation in our province where, if you want an 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), if you want an MRI, you 
have to hope that it’s either through SGI or Workers’ 
Compensation because otherwise if you have to depend on the 
normal health care system to provide you with an MRI, you 
wait for weeks and weeks and months and months. Of course if 
it’s costing MRI or SGI, they quickly transfer you to Edmonton 
and you can get one in just a few days. 
 
Now if the average citizen, if an MLA wants, needs an MRI . . . 
Perhaps, Mr. Chair, someone may have a tumour; someone may 
have a tumour and it’s growing. They may have to wait weeks 
and months to get an MRI unless, Mr. Chair, they dig into their 
own pocket . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know the 
NDP don’t take criticism on health care policy very well. They 
think that they somehow are the custodians of our health care 
system. They think they’re the defenders of our medicare 
system. Now, Mr. Chair, they’ve become the abusers of our 
health care system. 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — They allow people to suffer undue pain 
and hardship, be off work for months and months because they 
can’t get adequate health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan used to be a leader in health care. 
We are now trailing the other provinces in the delivery of health 
care to our people. 
 
If you think you may . . . If your doctor thinks you may have a 
tumour, you have to dig into your own money. So much for our 
medicare system. So much for availability of medicare. You got 
to dig into your own pocket if you want health care. You got to 
go to Alberta or some other place, spend $600 of your own 
money to get an MRI or else Saskatchewan’s NDP will leave 
you to perhaps die for lack of attention by our health care 
system. 
 
Mr. Chair, we have seen the greatest abrogation of 
responsibility by a provincial government on health care that 
this nation has ever seen — right here in the birthplace of 
medicare, right here in Saskatchewan, and under the watch of 
an NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, if this government had any 
courage, if this government had any commitment to the people 
of Saskatchewan, they would do one of two things. They would 
either act, they would put forward a program that they could act 
upon, or they would call an election and let the people of 
Saskatchewan sweep them out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, why doesn’t the government 
have the resources to fix health care in this province? Well the 
federal government have transferred more dollars for health 
care — still not enough, Mr. Chair, but more. And other 
provinces have taken advantage of those extra dollars. What 
have we done in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well I think SaskTel spent $100,000 to buy a balloon — 
$100,000 to buy a balloon and float it around Saskatchewan. 
How many MRIs would that have bought, Mr. Chair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — But it’s more important to this NDP 
government that they fly a SaskTel balloon around 
Saskatchewan for $100,000 cost to the taxpayer than it is to 
care for the . . . to look after the health care needs of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, it’s more important to invest 
money on the Australian stock market and lose it than it is to 
have safe highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, it’s more important to spend 
millions of dollars on a Future is Wide Open campaign than to 
put funds into education for Saskatchewan’s youth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, the NDP love to go floating 
around, go floating around, do their processes, do their news 
releases, cut the ribbons here and there, do their photo ops. 
 
I saw two of the ministers who were in trouble today in routine 
proceedings. It was a member’s statement. And I saw the 
member from Meadow Lake get up and try to make a good 
news announcement because he’s going to lose his seat in the 
next election in the Meadow Lake constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And, Mr. Chair, I saw the . . . I saw other 
members stand up in the House and give statements. I saw the 
Agriculture minister get up and announce he was handing out a 
few dollars to a few organizations in the Yorkton constituency. 
Why is he doing that in the last days of this session? Because, 
Mr. Chair, the Minister of Agriculture is going to lose his seat 
in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And, Mr. Chair, the minister’s not going 
to lose his seat by 6 votes or 100 votes or 200 votes, he’s going 
to lose his seat by hundreds and hundreds of votes. Because the 
people of Yorkton, the people of Meadow Lake, the people of 
Saskatoon, the people of Regina, the people across 
Saskatchewan have lost patience with an NDP government that 
has lost touch with the people of this province; with a 
government that’s more concerned about, as Janice MacKinnon 
said, at being wheeler dealers — being wheeler dealers. Going 
around making deals in Australia. Going around making deals 
in Nashville. Going out and making deals in Atlanta, Georgia. 
 
Mr. Chair, they’re trying to sell a land . . . an automated land 
titles system that doesn’t work. They’re going to Albania. 
They’re going to the Ukraine. Mr. Chair, they went to 
Manitoba. Nobody wants the thing because it doesn’t work. 
They spent $107 million on a plan that nobody else believes in. 
Why should the people of Saskatchewan believe in a 
government that cannot deliver good programs and good 
services to the people of this province? 
 
Mr. Chair, day after day after day the Premier, his minister for 
CIC, the Minister of Industry and Resources, the Minister of 
Agriculture get up and refuse to answer questions on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan. And they say, what would you do, 
to the official opposition. What a cop out. What a sad state of 
affairs when a government can’t get up and speak for itself, 
defend its actions, and tell the people of Saskatchewan what 
they’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, the only solution is to call an 
election. 
 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The Premier was not elected in the last 
general election. He won the leadership of the NDP Party 
because NDP members in this province wanted something safe. 
They wanted the status quo. And so the current Premier 
represented the status quo — wasn’t going to move the NDP off 
in any direction other than what they had seen in the past. 
 
What was the result, Mr. Chair? The result has been a 
government of inaction; a government where an unelected 
Premier is hanging on and hanging on in fear of going to the 
people of Saskatchewan and being repudiated. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Premier committed to calling an election in the 
year 2003. He’s already missed his primary opportunity. He 
should have called the election this spring. If he had any 
courage, if he really believed in his government, he would have 
called the election in the spring of 2002. Mr. Chair, he is going 
to regret not having called an election. The people of 
Saskatchewan this fall, when he does have the courage to call 
the election, will throw that bunch out and elect a Saskatchewan 
Party government and we will grow the province by 100,000 
people in 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(18:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, I expect that that speech might 
work at a Sask Party rally, but it sure doesn’t work in the 
legislature and it sure doesn’t work with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You know, I’m beginning to think, Mr. 
Chair, it doesn’t even work with the Sask Party membership. 
You know, we had a little discussion today about the political 
future of our various political parties here in Saskatchewan. 
Now I observe what’s going on in the Saskatchewan Party and 
it doesn’t bode well for that leader. 
 
He says he wants an election. Well it’s pretty clear why he 
wants an election — because every day we don’t have an 
election, they are going down in public popularity. They’re 
going down in the popularity of even their own party members. 
 
You take a look, Mr. Chair. I invite the members to take a look 
and I invite the public to take a look at the activity of this 
particular leader and this particular political party just over the 
last several weeks, just over the last several weeks. 
 
Now sitting in opposition, of course, I understand there’s not 
much you have to decide. There’s no real responsibilities, I 
guess, except to be a little bit upfront and honest once in a 
while. But you do have a responsibility to uphold democracy 
within your own party. Surely there’s a responsibility to uphold 
democracy within your own party. 

And what have we observed of late of the Saskatchewan Party? 
Well 1,200 of their members — a large membership if I may 
say — came together in the Melville constituency to nominate a 
candidate. They nominated in a properly conducted nominating 
campaign one Grant Schmidt. The Grant Schmidt victory in 
Melville was the voice of the people of Melville. The voice of 
the people of Melville in a democratic process. 
 
And what happens? In the most undemocratic of activity I’ve 
seen in the history of Saskatchewan, the leader of this official 
opposition says he will not be the candidate, I will not have 
him. He insults one of the most important citizens of the 
province, demeans one of the most important citizens of our 
province, says they won’t have him. That’s how they treat 
democracy. 
 
And so I ask the people of Saskatchewan, I ask the people of 
Saskatchewan if that’s how this political party and its leader 
will treat its own members — its own members— how will they 
be trusted to treat the people of Saskatchewan and listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan? How could they be trusted? 
 
The Leader of the Opposition started this tirade of the last 10 
minutes on the matter of health care. He was talking about our 
commitments to health care. Well let me talk about 
commitments to health care; let me talk about commitments to 
health care. 
 
In the province that has now developed, I would argue, the most 
substantive action plan for the development of health care 
coverage and services for the people anywhere in this country, 
you will not find in any other province as detailed or thorough 
an action plan as you will find in Saskatchewan — a plan by the 
way, Mr. Chair, that was built in co-operation with the people 
of Saskatchewan through the good work of the Ken Fyke 
Commission and some tough decisions that we have made to 
lay the groundwork for the future of health care in 
Saskatchewan. He asked some very pointed questions about the 
training of health care professionals. He would have you 
believe, he would have you believe that health care 
professionals are not being trained in this province. 
 
Just this past week, this Minister of Health, and this minister of 
Education . . . of Learning signed an agreement with the 
University of Saskatchewan and the medical college that will 
secure the future of that College of Medicine well into the 
future . . . (inaudible) . . . College of Medicine, with no 
assistance from that group over there, only criticism. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, in the most recent years, I just want to, I just 
want to share, if the member of . . . if the . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Members, the 
Chair does not want to be part of the debate, but I am having 
difficulty hearing the member who has the floor so if members 
could just bring the volume down a bit, I would appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now if you would listen to the member 
of Canora, or the Leader of the Opposition, you would believe 
that we are not training health care professionals in this 
province. 
 
I just want to read into the record the number of graduates 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

registering with the SRNA, the Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association, over the last number of years. Note these 
numbers: 1998 the number of graduates registering, 101; 1999, 
115; the year 2000, 149; the year 2001, 146; the year 2002, 253. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Between 1999 and today we have grown 
the number of nurses training seats in this province by 65 per 
cent, from 180 to 300. 
 
Now would that have happened under the leadership of that 
leader and that party? No chance. No chance. Because they 
absolutely committed in the last election, what would their 
funding to health be? Zero. They would freeze the funding to 
health. 
 
When we have given health increases ranging from 6 to 8 to 
more per cent every year because this is a government that 
believes in publicly funded medicare, publicly administered 
medicare, well-funded from the public treasury. 
 
Is the solution the solution that is proposed by the Leader of the 
Opposition to health? The solution proposed by the Leader of 
the Opposition, given particular voice by the member of 
Weyburn, what is the solution they say? The solution is private 
hospitals. That’s what they say — private hospitals. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, this government, this province and the people 
of Saskatchewan full stop reject the Sask Party’s notion about 
privatization of medicine, private hospitals, private-for-profit 
hospitals, not under the watch of this party or this government 
ever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And right as we speak, Mr. Chair, right 
as we speak their candidate in the Carrot River Valley has been 
running around that constituency saying that what we need is an 
Americanized model of health care brought into here. That’s 
what their candidates say. Is there any wonder therefore that the 
Carrot River Valley . . . that Carrot River Valley Sask Party 
want rid of that candidate? Is there any wonder about that? 
 
Now we have a situation here, Mr. Chair, where this province is 
moving forward. Appropriately in recent days this has been 
described as a province on a roll — a province on a roll. Now 
you would never know that, you would never know that by 
listening to that Leader of the Opposition or any member of that 
caucus. You would think this province is in the, in the basket 
case category it was when they left government. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, the prognosis of the officials, the prognosis of 
the bond raters, the prognosis of the bankers, the people who 
declare that this province is on a roll, are correct. They are 
correct. 
 
We’ve had some tough times and I’ll tell you, Mr. Chair, the 
test of a government is not how you do in good times; the test 
of a government is how you do in some tough times and we’ve 
had some tough times. There’s no doubt about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’ve had some tough times. We’ve just 
come through the two worst years of drought in the province’s 
history. That’s not been easy. We’ve just come through the 
circumstance of September 11 and all of that effect on the 
markets of the world. We’re now fighting our way through a 
BSE circumstance. These have not been easy times. 
 
Can you therefore believe it, Mr. Chair, that now this province 
in the last two years has moved from a circumstance where we 
were losing jobs in record numbers to a situation where now we 
have enjoyed 13 straight months of job growth — 13 straight 
months, 13 straight months. 
 
Can you, can you imagine a circumstance, Mr. Chair, where in 
the last two years we have taken this province from a 
circumstance, where we have a circumstance where our 
economy was showing modest growth to a situation where 
today we are predicted to lead economic growth in all of 
Canada — right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You’ll know, Mr. Chair, you’ll know 
and the people of Saskatchewan know right now we are 
enjoying record high — record high — vehicle sales, housing 
starts, consumer confidence. This is a province on a roll. 
 
Right now you’ll know, Mr. Chair, we’ve seen tremendous 
growth in our forestry. We’re fighting the battle of the softwood 
lumber. 
 
We’ve seen tremendous growth in the oil and gas, in the oil and 
gas economy of Saskatchewan. Year over year now 60 per cent, 
60 per cent growth in drilling and exploration in our province. 
We stand on the cusp, Mr. Chair, of perhaps one of the world’s 
largest, one of the world’s largest diamond developments. This 
is a province on a roll. 
 
And what this province will not do, will not do, is accept the 
negative voices, the voices of complaint, the voices of protest 
all the time from a Sask Party that has the gall to stand in the 
legislature and say we’re not going to share our ideas, only in 
election campaign. Can you believe it, Mr. Chair? We will not 
share our ideas unless it’s in a campaign. 
 
You know the member, the member of Estevan, the member of 
Estevan stood up in Estevan, according to The Estevan 
Mercury, stood up in Estevan in her own chamber of commerce 
and apologized — apologized did the member of Estevan to her 
chamber of commerce — that she couldn’t share any of their 
policy ideas. She couldn’t share their policy ideas. And when 
the local journalist asked her well why is that, she said well you 
know what, every time we share a policy idea the government 
steals it. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what, Mr. Chair. This government has no 
interest in many of the policies of the Saskatchewan Party. For 
instance, we have no interest in the policy of the Saskatchewan 
Party which was identified by the critic of Liquor and Gaming 
earlier this session, no interest in the policy that says they’re 
going to privatize liquor sales in this province — no interest in 
that policy. 
 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

 

In fact we have no interest in their policies of desiring to 
privatize the Auto Fund of SGI — that’s what it says in their 
public policy document. We’ve got no interest in pulling, in 
pulling the Crowns to such a circumstance that they’re on their 
knees and can’t compete anywhere. We’re not going to 
privatize the Crowns. And I tell you, we’re not going to accept 
this doctrine of theirs that there should be no public investment. 
We will not. 
 
So the member of Estevan does not need to worry about us 
stealing her ideas, Mr. Chair. We’re not about to steal their 
ideas because we and the vast majority of Saskatchewan people 
reject their ideas — reject their ideas. 
 
But I tell you what we are going to be about, Mr. Chair. I tell 
you what we are going to be about. We are going to be about 
continuing the work that we’re doing as government — 
continuing building, expanding the economy of Saskatchewan; 
continue to build and expand the opportunities for our young 
people in Saskatchewan, whether they be employment 
opportunities or educational opportunities. We are going to 
continue to build and expand the publicly funded, publicly 
accessible health care system that we enjoy in Saskatchewan 
and lead the nation. We are going to continue to care for our 
neighbours and our brothers and sisters who are in need. We are 
going to continue to build and expand resources for the 
province’s families. 
 
This budget year, Mr. Chair, this budget year we have 
committed to expanding the child care spaces in the province by 
1,200 — the largest expansion of child care spaces. In this 
budget we are reaching out to our disabled brothers and sisters, 
sons and daughters and neighbours to provide, to provide new 
resources, financial, and to provide new access into the 
workforce and contribution to our community. 
 
We are going to build and expand with our First Nations people 
in this province. And we are going to respect and treat with 
fairness and equity the First Nations people of our province. 
And we are going to respect agreements that we have made 
with our First Nations people. We are going to walk with 
dignity together into this new century. 
 
And I’ll tell you this, Mr. Chair, just while I am on my feet, you 
will not find this Premier or this leader saying one thing at the 
FSIN and quite a different thing in this legislature or in other 
circumstances. I’ll tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And what will we be doing? What will 
we be doing, Mr. Chair? We will be celebrating the future of 
this province because the future of this province is a wide open 
future, Mr. Chair. And against all of their protests, against all of 
their protests, this Premier and this leader, this government and 
this party will not cease in telling Canadians, in telling people 
across this province, in telling people across this continent that 
the future of this great province is a future that is wide open — 
wide open for those who will dream big, plan well, and work 
hard because we believe in this province, Mr. Chair, we believe 
in this province. 
 
(18:45) 

And you know we look down the road, we just had a 
tremendous visit in our province from the Earl of Wessex where 
together we celebrated with the communities of Regina, 
Lloydminster, Melfort, Moose Jaw, the centennials. And we’re 
looking down the road to 2005 when together across 
Saskatchewan we’re going to celebrate the 100th anniversary, 
the 100th anniversary of this great province. 
 
And we’re going to be celebrating the commitments of those 
First Nations who first wandered these prairies and forests, and 
we’re going to celebrate the contributions of the pioneers and 
the immigrants who have come over the generations. And we’re 
going to look to ways to introduce and welcome new 
immigrants to this province as we move to the centennial. 
 
And we’re going to be celebrating the innovation of this 
province whether it be in medicare or in the Arts Board or in the 
innovation that’s now occurring in our universities. We’re 
going to celebrate our innovative spirit. We’re going to 
celebrate our co-operative spirit. But more than anything else, 
we are going to understand that 2005 is the first year of our 
second century — the first year of this brand new century 
which, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, will be Saskatchewan’s 
century. 
 
You just mark my words and mark my words about one other 
thing, about one other thing. I know I’m going to be in this 
desk, these members will be on this side of the House; there 
will be more of them. And from this side of the House this 
government and this Premier will be celebrating the centennial 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to offer a sincere thanks to the officials who 
have assisted us in the deliberations this afternoon. I fear we did 
not draw upon their knowledge or expertise perhaps as much as 
we could have or should have, but I sincerely thank them. 
 
And because we are accompanied today in the House by Mr. 
Dan Perrins, who is deputy minister to the Premier and 
therefore the province’s most senior of civil servants — a man 
who has, if I may say, given a lifetime of public service to this 
province, began his career in the public service as a social 
worker —I want to say when I extend thanks to Mr. Perrins and 
to officials of his office, we are, I’m sure, as legislators 
extending thanks to the entire public service — the entire public 
service, many of whom over the course of this session and 
through the course of estimates have served us well in this 
legislature, but in vast numbers serve the people of 
Saskatchewan on a daily basis. So in thanking the officials 
today for their assistance, I want to, through them, thank the 
entire public service of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I want to move, after very much progress, that we 
report the Department of Executive Council and that we move 
to the Department of Learning. 
 
 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — And I recognize the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. To 
my left is Dr. Craig Dotson, the deputy minister of the 
department. Further to the left and one behind is Dr. Margaret 
Lipp, executive director of the department. Behind Ms. Lipp is 
Dr. John Biss, executive director of university services. 
 
Further along the back, next to Dr. Biss, is Brady Salloum, 
executive director of student financial assistance. In front of Mr. 
Salloum is Kevin Hoyt, director of financial and corporate 
services. Directly behind me is Dr. Michael Littlewood, 
executive director of school legislation and administration. And 
behind Dr. Littlewood is Darlene Heska-Willard, director of 
institutions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good evening 
to the minister and her officials once again. This is likely to be 
the last time we’ll have an opportunity to present questions and 
hear the appropriate answers. 
 
And we’d like to cover a variety of areas some of which we will 
re-cover from earlier discussions, areas where we didn’t get 
quite as in detail or in depth as we would have possibly liked. 
And we’re hoping to cover some new areas as well this 
evening. So thank you to the minister and her officials today. 
 
Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, when we were last 
speaking on the floor of the House, one of the questions that we 
had asked was the $750,000 that was given directly to a 
company by the name of StarTAC. 
 
And if I recall correctly, Madam Minister, you said that that 
money was given to the company specifically for proprietary 
training. Can you indicate for us, Madam Minister, where that 
money came from? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The money came from Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Through the 
Chair to the minister, was the Department of Learning ever 
asked to contribute that equal amount of money to cover the 
budgetary amount from Industry and Resources? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Not to our knowledge. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Is it just a coincidence then, Madam Minister, 
that some of the regional colleges lost an amount equivalent to 
$750,000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The money did not come from our 
department. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, did the money come from 
any of the agencies or colleges that report to the department? 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — No. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, is it anticipated that these 
types of cash, direct cash payments to businesses that want to 
come to the province of Saskatchewan for one reason or the 
other will become a hallmark of the NDP government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair or Mr. Chair 
of Committees. Since 1995 we have had in the department 
employer-specific JobStart and Future Skills money. So this is 
not a new endeavour. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, could you explain for us 
what circumstances would require money be given companies 
from the strategic initiatives fund and what monies might come 
from the JobStart, Future Skills program? What is the 
distinction that would decide where the money comes from? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The strategic initiatives fund is a 
component of the JobStart, Future Skills initiative. The criteria 
for that is . . . we will send to you. We don’t have the official 
here tonight that has that information, that detail, so we’ll send 
that to you, the criteria. 
 
Another thing I just want to add is that the Industry and 
Resources budget provided the $750,000. Our department 
provided 1.04 million over three years. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — As I understood it, Madam Minister, the 
additional money you talked about was for the StarTAC project 
over the next three years. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes, that’s right, through the JobStart, 
Future Skills initiative. 
 
(19:00) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I would like to . . . I’d like if I could get some 
additional information, Madam Minister, going to a different 
subject area, on student support programs. We had talked about 
that on page 94 of the budget and that arose, Madam Minister, 
out of a request for an indication of why operational support 
had dropped by $257,000. That figure can be found on page 92 
for this year. 
 
And at the time of the initial request you indicated that the drop 
was because of the transfer of the IT (information technology) 
technology capabilities from the post-secondary section, 
(LR11), and that had been transferred to student support 
programs, if I recall correct, (LR13). 
 
Now I looked at this and realized that there was a significant 
difference, about $600,000 roughly, in operational support in 
the student support programs category. So we’ve got a figure of 
about 300 and . . . I’m sorry, 257,000 that came from the 
post-secondary sector. But there’s probably $350,000 in the 
new area that you talked about that is over and above that 
figure. 
 
So, Madam Minister, can you identify for us where the extra 
monies came into play? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — On page 92, the decrease of 300,000, 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

 

$300,000 was due to the consolidating of the IT systems. The 
corresponding increase on page 94 of 600,000 was due to 
moving the 300,000 over as well as the increase in salary costs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Madam Minister, if that is the changes 
that have been made, are you not, are you not indicating a 
double entry here? If you’ve got the increase in salary costs and 
the transfer of the IT costs from the post-secondary education 
over to the other section, are you not . . . are you not somehow 
misrepresenting the actual figures? 
 
The salary section of post-secondary shows a growth of 
$331,000. The operational support shows a reduction of 
$250,000. If you have that taken together, that doesn’t add up to 
an increase of $600,000 in the student support programs. It does 
quite the contrary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There are a couple more things in the 
budget that I could mention that would perhaps make you feel 
more comfortable with the increase. 
 
As well as the salary increase and the consolidation of the 
information technology there is also one . . . consolidation of 
the information technology into the integrated income support 
system, which is IISS, and then there was one-time funding for 
the IISS. And then there’s the transfer to K to 12 (kindergarten 
to grade 12) education of the career services hotline and the 
northern shared services branches. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, let’s talk about the salaries 
under post-secondary education, (LR11). Under expenditure by 
type it says salaries $2.573 million for 2003-2004. Now by my 
calculations that’s an increase of $331,000 and I’m sure that 
there must be some explanation that would satisfy me. 
 
When I look at the loss of dollars in the operational support and 
the increase in salaries and I extrapolate those to the other 
section as you indicated, those don’t add up to $600,000. We 
actually have a net of about $180,000. So I’m assuming that the 
other elements that you talked about in your previous answer 
will add up, make up the difference from about $180,000 to the 
$600,000. Can you verify that for us? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Then the next question, Madam Minister, 
would be, will you? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I have said that we can verify it, but if you 
want it in writing we’ll be happy to provide that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I will accept that offer and 
hope that that’s available as soon as possible. 
 
The other area that I’d like to return to right now is as a result of 
our discussions a couple of days ago. I asked the minister at that 
time, has the minister or her officials inquired of SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) to 
determine if the advisory committees have recommended 
reverting to classroom scheduled training for the various trades 
programs as opposed to the competency based approach 
encouraged and promoted by SIAST previously. 
 

I asked at that time for an explanation. I was wondering if the 
minister or her officials had contacted SIAST to determine what 
their response was to that particular issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — SIAST has about 50, over 50 discrete 
programs, each of which is serviced by an advisory board, some 
of which who have never had the competency based program 
approach. And we . . . SIAST itself is governed by a board that 
makes their own program decisions. So no, we have not 
contacted them. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, would it be your intention to 
contact them just to ask them about the justification for that 
decision, not in any attempt to sidetrack or derail their decision, 
but just to confirm why it is that the decision has been taken? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The SIAST board and the SIAST advisory 
committees are doing a very good job of responding to industry 
needs and they are doing a very good job of deciding their 
programs and their students’ needs. I wouldn’t presume to 
interfere with their process so I will not be asking them for any 
justification of their decisions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, would it not be in the 
interests of the province and the education providers as well as 
the students themselves to try and determine if there isn’t some 
measurable outcome that may have been determined, given the 
competency based approach that has been so successful versus 
classroom instruction regimented approaches to these same 
programs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Every program at SIAST is intended to 
build competencies and skills and I . . . they are doing a very 
good job of that. So I don’t intend to ask them any of this. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I think that, as a matter of 
public policy, it’s important that the Minister of Learning have 
a very clear understanding of which types of approaches work 
most effectively. And I would think that in your capacity as 
minister, that even out of pure simple curiosity, you might want 
to ask that type of question for the sake of maybe helping guide 
public policy decisions in the future by the government of the 
day. 
 
Madam Minister, I’ve got . . . I want to return to the, just 
briefly, to the issue of the salaries matter that I overlooked 
momentarily. There was an increase, as I mentioned, of 
$331,000. 
 
When I asked that question of you at the previous instance, you 
indicated that that represented a 2.5 per cent increase, that it 
was a negotiated increase for the department payroll. But if I do 
the arithmetic, that actually turns out to be a 14.76 per cent 
increase. And I’m wondering how you can explain the 
discrepancy. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. There’s two parts to the increase. One part is the 
2.5 collective bargaining increase, the general economic 
increase. Another part of it is, of that part that’s with the 
collective agreement, is increments which people move up on 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

the salary scale, as their years of service. Another one, the 
second one is the one-time adjustment to the department’s 
budget from the result of the Learning department 
amalgamating. 
 
And I just want to mention the first part of your question, your 
preamble about me . . . my curiosity of asking the SIAST board 
or the department heads for their evaluations. Our Department 
of Learning regularly corresponds with SIAST and has regular 
conversations and reports from them so I don’t need to satisfy 
my curiosity. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Madam Minister, I won’t ask you about 
your curiosity again. I just . . . I think that’s an important part of 
being an effective public servant, that you have some curiosity 
about the impact of the public policy decisions that are being 
made by the government and by agencies outside of 
government that are funded by the taxpayers’ dollars in this 
province. 
 
And I would, and I would recommend that, you know, that 
some curiosity be exhibited by your department, that it would 
indicate not just an interest in the department which you lead 
but would indicate a broader interest in terms of the public good 
in the province. 
 
Madam Minister, the June 23 Hansard has provided me with 
some additional questions that I would like to delve into right 
now. At the time of questioning we had talked about the various 
colleges, the affiliated colleges, universities, federated, and 
educational agencies. And you gave me a breakdown of the 
various amounts of money being spent this year compared to 
previous year allocations. 
 
And you mentioned affiliated colleges without distinguishing 
who they are. Would you give us a list of which colleges fall 
under the affiliated colleges category? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The affiliated colleges are Emanuel and St. 
Chad, Briercrest Bible College, Lutheran Theological 
Seminary, St. Andrew’s College, Canadian Theological 
Seminary, and Central Pentecostal. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Also at that time 
we talked about other educational requirements that were 
underwritten by the provincial government and I think that you 
indicated Aboriginal and northern education in 2003-04 would 
have $8.255 million directed to that sector. 
 
I notice also that we talked about Aboriginal and northern 
education initiatives, the Gabriel Dumont Institute with 
SUNTEP (Saskatchewan Urban Native Teacher Education 
Program), the urban native teacher education program, the 
Northern Teacher Education Program, and then also the First 
Nations University of Canada, the northern health access 
program, and NORTEP, which is the Northern Teacher 
Education Program student lease costs. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I’d like you to describe for us what the 
department’s role is in terms of funding Aboriginal and 
educational opportunities, whether it be First Nations 
specifically or maybe Métis opportunities because, as far as the 
First Nations requirements are concerned, it’s my understanding 

that by and large the federal government picks up those costs. 
So what does the province contribute and on what basis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Aboriginal institutions that I was 
speaking of are not First Nations for the most part; there’s only 
one. I’ll name them. The one, the one that is, is First Nations 
University which just changed its name last Saturday. And that 
we fund for the non-Aboriginal students that go there. 
 
The other ones that we fund under the Aboriginal category are 
Gabriel Dumont . . . Gabriel Dumont Institute, SUNTEP, the 
NORTEP program, a northern health access program, and 
NORTEP student lease costs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, would you be willing to 
explain for us how it is you make those funding arrangements? 
What consideration is given? Is it on a per student, a per pupil 
basis? Is there grants over and above that for administrative 
costs? Would you please detail those few items for us, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We have different arrangements with each 
of the institutions, contracts with each one of them based on 
several different things. But for each one of them they are 
different contracts. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, could you give us some 
details of what the contracts entail? Is there a specific dollar 
figure on a per student basis? Does that vary from contract to 
contract? We need some, just a little bit more information on 
that particular arrangement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’ll give you two different examples. I’ll 
talk about the SUNTEP, which is based on 180 students, 
roughly 10,000-plus dollars per student. Whereas Gabriel 
Dumont is a core funding, a block amount, so that they have a 
core capacity to function. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Can you give me a little detail of a similar 
variety on the NORTEP program and any other of those 
Aboriginal initiatives that the department supports? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Okay. For NORTEP it’s the same as 
SUNTEP — it’s per student. Whereas for FNUC, the First 
Nations University of Canada, it’s an estimated number of 
non-First Nations students, which will include Métis students as 
well, and we fund it that way, per student. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So if the estimate runs pretty close, do you just 
maintain a certain figure? And if the estimate is out, do you 
increase the funding? How flexible is the funding for the 
attendance of the students at the FNUC? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We don’t adjust our costs during the 
course of the year if the student enrolments go up or down. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, through the Chair, would you 
tell us what approximately it costs per student to fund attendees 
at the First Nations University of Canada? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Our expenditures per student at the U of R 
(University of Regina) and the First Nations University, which 
is affiliated with them, is approximately $10,000 a year per 
student. 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to move 
into another area just briefly. 
 
It arises out of a conversation we had on June 9 at which time I 
was asking you about the oversight of the student loans 
program and when adjustments might be made to the various 
funding levels for students from year to year because of the 
cost-of-living increases and so forth. And at that time you 
indicated that the student loan program is under continuous 
scrutiny and that there would be, this month, a meeting of the 
federal, provincial, and territorial committee that is struck or 
charged with the objectives of looking at the student loan 
program. 
 
And I would just like to know, Madam Minister, has that 
committee met yet and, if so, has there been any indication of a 
willingness to increase student loan levels to recognize the 
increasing costs of living and the higher tuitions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — That committee is meeting tomorrow and 
Friday. And a couple of items that are on the agenda are the 
levels of assistance. And they’re going to review several 
research projects that have come to their attention. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Through the 
Chair, to the minister, would the minister be able to provide 
some input to the official opposition as an indication of good 
faith, possibly? When the meeting has been finished and when 
the decisions have been taken, would we be privy to that 
information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This is not a committee of ministers. They 
do not issue a public report. They report back to their 
departments and then to their ministers and through them . . . to 
their deputy ministers and then to their ministers. There’s some 
items that are included on their agenda that are brought forward 
by the student associations of the country. So they do have 
input of students directly. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Through the 
Chair to the minister, there’s another area of growing concern 
within the animal science realm and that has to do with the 
College of Veterinary Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan and the extreme pressure that it has been put 
under because of a lack of financial resources. 
 
Now I understand that there has been some movement in that 
regard. The federal government allotted a certain amount of 
money unexpectedly to improving the operations at the 
veterinary school at Saskatoon at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), but that ongoing shortages of financing have 
really restricted their capabilities. And in view of the BSE scare 
and several other related types of issues, the importance of 
animal veterinary capabilities has increased significantly. 
 
I understand that we are experiencing a significant shortage of 
veterinarians in the province of Saskatchewan, if not the entire 
country. And as the pressure on that animal science grows there 
will be a significant need, from a public policy perspective, I 
assume, to meet those requirements with additional funding. 
 
Can the minister elaborate for us what her government’s plans 
are with regard to funding on an ongoing basis the school of 

veterinary medicine? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The new agreement that was signed last 
year between the four provinces that are partners in this college 
has allotted another $1 million to the college, which started this 
year and will continue. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, is that $1 million the share 
for the province of Saskatchewan, the Department of Learning, 
alone, or is that the total for all the partners in the veterinary 
college? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — One million dollars is the commitment 
shared by all four provinces. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — How far does that go, Madam Minister, to 
reaching the objectives or the requests of the school? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The four provinces, with the knowledge, 
consent, and agreement of the university and the college, agreed 
that this was the amount that was acceptable to all parties. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, we’re going to shift gears a 
little again, if we may. I recall in our discussions on the 
Department of Learning estimates — post-secondary 
specifically — some time ago, back in May, we got into quite a 
lengthy discussion about the accessibility of students . . . or for 
students to a university or a technical school education. 
 
We also talked about student funding and the pressure on 
post-secondary institutions to provide adequate space for 
students who wanted to come. And coincidentally after that 
discussion there was an article in the Maple Creek Advanced 
Times newspaper of May 26 this year where it was talking 
about Anadarko Canada, an important oil company and gas 
company player in the southwest part of the province 
specifically, but I think quite active in other areas around the 
province. 
 
And at that time, Anadarko had facilities in the community of 
Richmound and Maple Creek, both important communities in 
my constituency. But it appeared that because of the uncertainty 
of being able to attain the proper education for potential 
employees, the company relocated their Richmound office to 
the city of Medicine Hat. 
 
Now as you might appreciate, Madam Minister, losing an 
important employer from a small community like Richmound to 
the community of Medicine Hat was devastating to some great 
degree. 
 
But I just want to quote, if I may, from this particular article 
where it talks about the reaction of Anadarko’s area supervisor, 
Brent Beck. And he’s quoted as saying in this paper: 
 

We try to maximize local employment opportunities in 
Maple Creek and Richmound but these are dwindling and 
we’re being forced to rely more heavily on Medicine Hat. 
It’s becoming more difficult to find people with the 
necessary skills. Anadarko is seeking people with 
post-secondary education or trade skills to staff its 
Saskatchewan operation. 
 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

He said an engineering degree is becoming the entry level 
where previously a technologist diploma was accepted a few 
years ago. He said the industry is advancing quickly as newer 
technologies become available and the ability to use these 
technologies is placing greater demands on people. 

 
He goes on to talk about increased occupational health and 
safety requirements, worker compensation guidelines, and so 
forth, which all put pressure on their need for skilled labour. 
 
Madam Minister, I bring this to your attention just to underline, 
just to underscore, again, what I believe is the vital necessity of 
increased opportunities for post-secondary education in this 
province. 
 
And at the time of our previous discussion, I chided the minister 
and her government for not providing adequate support to the 
post-secondary sector to achieve the full potential of the young 
people of this province. 
 
And I understand that there are difficulties — budgetary 
difficulties — and tough decisions have to be made, but too 
often, Madam Minister, I find that we are prepared to make 
decisions that are in the current best interests of our society 
while we tend to ignore the future best interests of our society. 
 
As a comparison, we talked about the increases of spending by 
the Department of Health this year — a significant amount. But 
the increase alone in the Department of Health was more than 
the Department of Learning gives to the University of 
Saskatchewan. So what we have done is we have chosen to deal 
with an immediate issue but we have sacrificed to some extent 
our long-term potential, and we are borrowing from our 
children’s inheritance. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I want to read, as a final indication of 
what I believe is the reality for us today, I’d like to read this 
into the record. It’s not original. I borrowed it from the Regina 
Leader-Post editorial board. And this was taken from their 
paper of May 29. And it reads as follows: 
 

Tuition hikes running at three times the rate of inflation are 
providing an ugly annual lesson in economics for 
University of Regina . . . students. 
 
The latest 8.5-per-cent increase follows tuition hikes of 8.8 
per cent in 2002 and nine per cent in 2001. That’s more 
than 26 per cent in the past three years — with even higher 
increases at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Between 1993 and 2002, tuition fees for Saskatchewan 
undergraduate students increased by 75 per cent, according 
to Statistics Canada. If the current rate of increases 
continues, tuition fees will almost double over the next 
decade — a time when huge numbers of the baby boomer 
generation will retire and Saskatchewan . . . (will need) 
skilled workers. 
 
Scholarships and bursaries help some students, but the 
reality is that many children from less-well-off families 
won’t be able to afford university — and many of those 
who can will graduate with debts of $35,000 or more. 
 

Provincial government funding increases to the universities 
have been mired in the two- to three-per-cent range in 
recent years — barely enough to keep up with inflation, let 
alone the growth needed to keep the institutions 
competitive. 
 
. . . base funding for post-secondary education is inadequate 
. . . 
 
. . . the government has put post-secondary funding on the 
backburner, allowing the growing load to fall on students. 
This is not acceptable. The province’s “wide open future” 
must include viable universities accessible to all, regardless 
of financial means. 

 
Madam Minister, I couldn’t have said this better. 
 
And I guess I’m somewhat concerned by the government’s 
response to this issue in view of the fact that I asked some 
written questions a couple of days ago asking for the numbers 
of students that were turned away from universities and colleges 
in this province when they applied to the various programs. 
 
And instead of answering the question, the government chose to 
convert that written question. That means the government is 
ashamed of the answer. 
 
Madam Minister, this is an unacceptable situation. This is 
unacceptable in terms of our future as a province and we must 
do more in this regard. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m going to conclude my questions, and I 
turn it over to my colleague. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I have a couple of comments. The question 
you’re referring to I believe we’ll be doing on Friday, which we 
do have the answer for. And while we’re talking about reading 
into the record, I want to talk about funding for education. 
 
You, on May 8, the member from Cypress said that the Sask 
Party would have capped the rate of funding to education at the 
rate of inflation — nothing more, nothing less. I believe that’s 
in Hansard. 
 
So I just want to . . . It is in Hansard, May 8. It’s May 8 in 
Hansard; I even have the page. I just want to read for you, give 
you an example. In education in the . . . at the university level 
which is the affiliated colleges, universities, and the Aboriginal 
institutions, since 1999 this government has increased funding 
24.8 per cent. The rate of inflation, which is what you would 
propose to have funded these groups at, is 12.9 per cent, which 
would have made that group of institutions have $22 million 
shortfall. 
 
The funding to SIAST in the same period was 19.5 per cent 
increase. The rate of inflation was 12.9 per cent. That would 
have made a $4.6 million difference with your proposal. 
 
With the regional colleges we have increased their funding, 
since ’99, 36 per cent. Yours would have been at the cost of 
living which is 12.9 per cent. The difference there would have 
been $1.5 million. 
 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

 

I’m not even talking about K to 12 which is a $61 million 
difference between what we have increased the funding and 
what your proposal would have done. So I want that on the 
record. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Madam Minister, and to your officials, I also would like the . . . 
one last opportunity to ask a couple of questions. 
 
First of all, for the record I want to remind the minister that for 
K to 12 education, we actually have lost $380 million since 
1991 because your government didn’t freeze education levels at 
that ’99 rate, so I think that there is a considerable amount of 
savings that the Education department gained on the backs of 
property owners. 
 
And, Madam Minister, by the combining these two departments 
it’s easy to say we’re spending $1.2 billion on education when 
. . . The general public thinks that’s a whole lot of money. Of 
course it is, but obviously, as my colleague from Cypress Hills 
says, it’s not enough. We are borrowing for the future of our 
children. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Madam Minister, there’s no point in talking about the money 
issue of it any more because, as I said previously, you 
determine it. Your government decides. 
 
There’s a number of people on that side of the House make the 
decisions on what their government priority is and until we get 
the opportunity to have the books and know what’s going on, 
we’re not going to be able to tell you exactly what we’re going 
to do. But I can tell you that education is going to be a priority 
and more than just lip service. 
 
Madam Minister, my question to you is twofold. First of all, 
when it comes to the French program, there is $4.65 million. 
Can you tell me, does all that money come from the federal 
government, and how many employees are working in that 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Just before I answer the member’s 
question, I just wanted to point out to the member from Cypress 
that if he wanted to know what page in Hansard, it was page 
983 of May 8. 
 
The question about the French school is $4.65 million. Most of 
that money, $3 million of that, flows directly out to the school 
divisions and that is from the federal government. The rest of 
the money is to support the 22.5 employees. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is the amount of money that goes to French 
students the same amount as goes to students in our public and 
Catholic system? And is all the money that’s . . . Is there any of 
this money that goes to any other agency, or building, or group 
of people outside of the K to 12 education system when it 
comes to French programming? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The students are funded K to 12 the same 
as English students. Most of the money, on page 93, you’ll see 
that the support we give to French schools is under the FOG, 
under the foundation operating grant. And there’s other things 

that are funded with the 4.65 million is the university Language 
Institute. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, one of the big challenges and opportunities that we 
have in this province is dealing with our Aboriginal children 
because they’re going to be part of growing the province and 
having a future that’s bright for everyone. 
 
And I do know that the Department of Learning signed an 
MOU (memorandum of understanding) with the FSIN and we 
discussed it a time ago. But we’ve had an opportunity to meet 
with the FSIN treaty governance office to talk about some of 
the issues and talked about how to ensure that everyone buys 
into this MOU. 
 
It’s one thing to sign an agreement and another thing to make 
sure that everyone that’s involved in the education system is 
aware of it so that we all feel like we’re part of the system. We 
can’t just spring an issue . . . spring this order or the discussion 
that’s made up . . . Once everybody has talked about it, we can’t 
go to the general public and say, this is the way it is; I hope 
you’re happy with it. Because people have to, along the way, 
buy into it and feel like they’re part of it. 
 
I asked if there’s been an opportunity not just to communicate 
what’s happening to Aboriginal people but to non-Aboriginal 
people. And I don’t know if you’ve set up meetings with the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) or with the 
STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) or with the general 
public. I do know that the Aboriginal people are meeting with 
the bands and tribal councils across Saskatchewan to make sure 
they feel like they’re part of the issue. 
 
But in order for everyone to have a total buy in, we have to 
ensure that everybody’s voice is heard. We have the . . . If we 
don’t do that, we’re going to create a wide . . . a big divide 
within our province. 
 
Right now the issue is usually between Aboriginal and the 
federal government, but this is a tripartite agreement and 
something that we are all working on together. So my concern 
is that we make sure that through your department, the 
Department of Learning, that we have everyone in the province 
knowing what’s happening as we start building on this 
agreement and designing the agreement to ensure that our 
children — Aboriginal children, non-Aboriginal children — are 
going to be working together in the future. 
 
We have . . . The demographics show that we’re going to 
require everybody in this province to help grow together. And 
we know the alarming figures right now and the Aboriginal 
population doesn’t . . . It looks like we’re not going to have, if it 
doesn’t change, we don’t have the growing number of 
Aboriginal students that are going to have the education they 
need to help build this province. 
 
So I’m very concerned that your department take the lead and 
show that . . . and when it comes to the self-governance and it 
comes to dealing with the education issue, that your department 
ensures that everyone in this province knows what’s happening 
when it comes to this agreement. 
 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

So can you tell me, are you setting up meetings? Are you 
dealing with trustees and teachers and the general public to 
ensure that they know what we mean when we’re talking about 
memorandum of understanding for education, when we talk 
about self-government, when we talk about building the future 
together? What is your department doing to ensure that we are 
all going to be on the same page? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Just a couple of points. The agreement, the 
MOU is a bilateral agreement. It’s not a tri-partite agreement. 
The Department of Learning is not the lead department on 
governance issues. We’re not the lead department at the 
governance table. 
 
Last week the department met with the educational partners . . . 
or partners in the education sector, the learning sector, and had 
a range of items on the agenda, one of which was the MOU. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I do believe that this 
department, the Department of Learning is going to be . . . is 
holding the key to the future success of this province. And it 
doesn’t matter whether it’s Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal 
children, we have to make sure that this department takes the 
lead in so many different areas of government. 
 
I haven’t seen it happen, whether it’s initiatives of government 
or the monies to put into it. But I know that in the future we’re 
going to be seeing this department . . . or we’d better be seeing 
this department make a difference in the lives of everyone in 
this province. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I know that we won’t get a chance to 
discuss this issue or any issues in Learning again this year and 
so I’d like to take this opportunity to thank you and to thank 
your officials because I know they’re very dedicated. And I 
know that they know what’s going to be . . . what it’s going to 
take to build the future. So thank you to each one of them. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’d like to take this opportunity also to 
thank the members for their questions and to thank the 
department and all the officials for their valuable assistance and 
coming seven times to this Assembly to answer the questions 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, not eight. But thank you 
very much to everyone and thanks again for your questions. 
 
Subvote (LR01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (LR02), (LR11), (LR08), (LR03), (LR12), (LR13), 
(LR15), (LR04) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Learning 
Vote 169 

 
Subvote (SA01) agreed to. 
 
(20:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation 
Vote 170 

Subvote (ED01) — Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Learning 
Vote 5 

 
Subvote (LR03) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Learning 
Vote 169 

 
Vote 169 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Learning 
Vote 5 

 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvotes (AG01), (AG02), (AG05), (AG06), (AG07), (AG12), 
(AG04), (AG08), (AG03), (AG09), (AG10) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
Vote 146 

 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG07) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 147 

 
Subvote (AG01) — Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
Vote 1 

 
Subvotes (AG07), (AG09), (AG10) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 
 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
Vote 146 

 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
Vote 1 

 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Centenary Fund 

Vote 70 
 
Subvote (CF01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 70 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Community Resources and Employment 

Vote 36 
 

Subvote (RE01), (RE02), (RE04), (RE05), (RE07), (RE10), 
(RE03), (RE06), (RE09), (RE12) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Vote 143 

 
Subvote (SH01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Community Resources and Employment 

Vote 36 
 

Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 

Subvotes (CP01), (CP02), (CP04), (CP07), (CP06) agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Corrections and Public Safety 
Vote 73 

 
Subvotes (CP01), (CP02), (CP04), (CP07), (CP06) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Information Technology Office 

Vote 74 
 

Subvotes (IT01), (IT02), (IT03) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Vote 73 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Corrections and Public Safety 
Vote 73 

 
Vote 73 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Information Technology Office 

Vote 74 
 

Vote 74 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvotes (CR01),(CR02), (CR03), (CR09), (CR07), (CR05), 
(CR06), (CR08) agreed to. 
 
(20:15) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Vote 27 

 
Subvote (CR03) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Vote 27 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Vote 27 

 
Vote 27 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 
Subvotes (PS01), (PS02), (PS06), (PS04), (PS03), (PS07) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvotes (ER01), (ER02), (ER08), (ER09), (ER10), (ER03), 
(ER11), (ER16), (ER15), (ER05), (ER07), (ER04), (ER14) 
agreed to. 
 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Environment 
Vote 26 

 
Subvotes (ER10), (ER16), (ER07) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Vote 164 

 
Subvote (WA01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Northern Affairs 
Vote 163 

 
Subvote (NA01) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Northern Affairs 

Vote 75 
 
Subvotes (NA01), (NA02), (NA03), (NA04) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Northern Affairs 

Vote 75 
 
Vote 75 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Northern Affairs 
Vote 163 

 
Vote 163 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Environment 
Vote 26 

 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvotes (EX01), (EX02), (EX07), (EX04), (EX03), (EX08) 
agreed to. 
 
Subvote (EX06) — Statutory. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvotes (FI01), (FI02), (FI04), (FI03), (FI06), (FI05), (FI10), 
(FI08), (FI09) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance — Servicing Government Debt 

Vote 12 
 
Subvote (FD01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Votes 175, 176, 177 
 
Votes 175, 176, 177 — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund 

Vote 71 
 
Subvote (FS01) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 151 

 
Subvote (MF01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvotes (GR01), (GR02), (GR04), (GR05), (GR07), (GR08), 
(GR03), (GR06) agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 
Vote 30 

 
Subvote (GR05) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending And Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Vote 140 

 
Subvote (SW01) — Statutory. 
 
(20:30) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 



June 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

 

Vote 30 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 
Vote 30 

 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvotes (HE01), (HE02), (HE04), (HE06), (HE08), (HE10), 
(HE03) agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE08) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Health 
Vote 32 

 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvotes (IR01), (IR02), (IR07), (IR03), (IR04), (IR05), 
(IR16), (IR06), (IR08), (IR09), (IR10), (IR11) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Industry and Resources 
Vote 171 

 
Subvote (IR01) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 159 

 
Subvote (SL01) — Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 

Subvotes (IR07), (IR03), (IR11) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Industry and Resources 
Vote 171 

 
Vote 171 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Lending and Investing Activities 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 171 
 
Subvote (IR01) agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Lending and Investing Activities 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 171 
 
Vote 171 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvotes (JU01), (JU02), (JU04), (JU03), (JU05), (JU07), 
(JU08) agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvotes (JU04), (JU03) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Justice 
Vote 3 

 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2003 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Vote 154 

 
Subvote (SO01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 
Subvote (SR01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvotes (LA01), (LA02), (LA05), (LA03), (LA04), (LA07), 
(LA06), (LA08), (LA09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 165 

 
Subvote (CI01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
Vote 152 

 
Subvote (PW01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Vote 153 

 
Subvote (ST01) — Statutory. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That’s good. Mr. Chairman, I move 
the committee rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 20:48. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1921 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1922 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1922 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1922 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1922 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1922 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1922 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1923 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Work and the Family 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1923 
 Faces of Racism through the Eyes of a Child 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1923 
 Awards to Yorkton Community Groups 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1923 
 Telephone Charges in Rural Saskatchewan 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1924 
 Students Promote Energy Conservation 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1924 
 Nomination for International Poet of the Year 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1924 
 Queen’s Jubilee Award Recipient 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1925 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Provincial Population Decline 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1925 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1925 
 Advertising During By-election Campaign 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1926 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1927 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1928 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1928 
 Compensation Program for Beef Industry 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1928 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1928 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Health Care in Saskatchewan 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1929 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1930 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1931 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1931 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1931 
  Hermanson ....................................................................................................................................................................1931, 1936 
  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................1934 
  Hagel (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................................1934 



 

 

  Deputy Chair ...........................................................................................................................................................................1934 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1934 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1970 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1970 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1975 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Learning — Vote 169 ............................................................... 1976 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation — Vote 170....................................................................................................... 1976 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5.......................................................................1976 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1.................................................................... 1976 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan — Vote 147.................................................................................................. 1976 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 146.............................................................................................................. 1977 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund 
 Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1............................................................................................................1977 
 General Revenue Fund — Centenary Fund — Vote 70 ..........................................................................................................1977 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Saskatchewan Housing Corporation — Vote 143....................................................................................................................1977 
 General Revenue Fund — Community Resources and Employment — Vote 36 .................................................................1977 
 General Revenue Fund — Corrections and Public Safety — Vote 73 ...................................................................................1977 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Corrections and Public Safety — Vote 73..................................1977 
 General Revenue Fund — Information Technology Office — Vote 74 .................................................................................1977 
 General Revenue Fund — Culture, Youth and Recreation — Vote 27 .................................................................................1977 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund 
 Culture, Youth and Recreation — Vote 27 ..............................................................................................................................1977 
 General Revenue Fund — Public Service Commission — Vote 33........................................................................................1977 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Saskatchewan Watershed Authority — Vote 164..........1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 ...............................................................................................................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Northern Affairs — Vote 75 .........................................................................................................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Northern Affairs — Vote 163 .........................................1978 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 ..............................................................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 .......................................................................................................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Finance — Servicing Government Debt — Vote 12 ...................................................................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments — Votes 175, 176, 177.....................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Fiscal Stabilization Fund — Vote 71 ...........................................................................................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan — Vote 151 ..........................................................................................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Finance — Vote 18 ........................................................................................................................1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending And Investing Activities — Saskatchewan Water Corporation — Vote 140 ................. 1978 
 General Revenue Fund — Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs — Vote 30............................................................. 1979 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs — Vote 30........... 1979 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 ..........................................................................................................................1979 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 .........................................................................1979 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan — Vote 159 ..........................................................................................1979 
 General Revenue Fund — Industry and Resources — Vote 23 .............................................................................................1979 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Industry and Resources — Vote 171...............................1979 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Industry and Resources — Vote 23 ............................................1979 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Industry and Resources — Vote 171.........................................................................................................................................1979 
 General Revenue Fund — Justice — Vote 3 ............................................................................................................................1979 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Justice — Vote 3...........................................................................1980 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation — Vote 154 ..........................................................................................................1980 
 General Revenue Fund — Saskatchewan Research Council — Vote 35 ...............................................................................1980 
 General Revenue Fund — Labour — Vote 20 .................................................................................................................................1980 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan — Vote 165 ............................................................................................1980 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Saskatchewan Power Corporation — Vote 152 .............1980 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation — Vote 153 ................................................................................1980 


	General Revenue Fund
	General Revenue Fund
	Supplementary Estimates
	General Revenue Fund
	General Revenue Fund

