















































Hansard: June 02, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1371 
 June 2, 2003 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My officials that 
are with me tonight, seated next to me is Mr. Gordon Nystuen, 
who is the deputy minister. Next to him is Maryellen Carlson, 
who is the assistant deputy minister. Directly behind me is Mr. 
Hal Cushon, who is the assistant deputy minister. And behind 
my deputy minister is Karen Aulie, who is the director of 
corporate services branch. And next to Karen, to her right, is 
Ross Johnson, who is the manager of corporate services branch. 
And seated in the back wing is Stan Benjamin, executive 
manager of research and development; Greg Haase, the director 
of lands branch; and Merv Ross, who is the manager of 
financial services branch; and Laurier Donais who is the 
manager of corporate services branch. And that’s my officials 
that are with me tonight, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good evening 
to the minister and his officials. We are happy to have this time 
to undertake the Department of Agriculture estimates again. 
 
And when we last had an opportunity to speak, we were 
discussing the TLE (treaty land entitlement) land claims that 
were occurring in the region of Cypress Hills. Our last 
conversation, according to Hansard, on that particular issue I 
believe was April 30. And at the time the minister had made 
some reference to a number of areas that we weren’t able to 
elaborate on properly, and I promised him then that we would 
get a chance to do it one more time and here we are tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, as part of the TLE claim process, there are two 
current claims in abeyance. And I asked you at the last 
opportunity what legal framework you had used to put the 
claims, the two most recent claims, into abeyance. Now I think 
that as part of your answer at the time you just indicated that as 
long as there was uncertainty in that area the claims wouldn’t be 
going ahead. 
 
But my understanding of the treaty land entitlement legal 
framework is that there is no authority given to the government 
under that legislation to put a claim into abeyance. You have to 
decide one way or the other whether it will proceed or be 
denied. And so I’m asking again, Mr. Minister, under what 
legal framework, what authority, your government decided to 
put those claims into abeyance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I think in the last occasion that 
we had to talk about this issue — and the member reminds me 
it’s been a while since we’ve had a chance to talk about this 
particular issue — but there is a 90-day period of which we 
have the responsibility to respond. That of course is in the 
framework agreement in the guidelines. And of course there can 
be extra time that can be provided and that extra time would be 
discretional upon our department. 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, through the chairman to you on a 
supplementary question in that regard. If there is extra time 
required as a discretionary element, I don’t believe that I have 
ever seen that provision in the TLE. 
 
So I must assume from what you are saying is that you have 
taken that time on the basis of some other piece of legislative 
authority, or I think the only other conclusion that I could draw 
is that you have some agreement — either agreement in 
principle, an informal agreement, or a tacit understanding — 
with the First Nations involved with this particular claim that 
would allow you to have that extra time. Which is it, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, where you have 
a situation as I described the last time we were together where 
you have — and I expect that you’ll get to this next question — 
which is where you have willing seller, willing buyer to reach 
an agreement within that time frame, the guideline within the 
policy works. 
 
Where you have a situation where you have a dispute, which 
has been the case here in some fronts here because what the 
situation that we’re talking about really recognizes that people 
want to assume or should want to assume an entire parcel. 
 
Where you have here is you have a land base where what’s 
happened is that there’s being a selection made where they’re 
not selecting the entire parcel; they’re taking most of the entire 
parcel but are cherry-picking and leaving some of those quarter 
sections of land out of the selection. And where you have that, 
then we have a situation where the individual who is wanting to 
part with their particular piece of property wants to part with the 
entire piece as opposed to only sections of it. 
 
And so where you have a disagreement, where in this case we 
have a disagreement or we’ve had disagreements, we try to sort 
that out through a conciliatory process. And we’ve used that 
conciliatory process now on a couple of fronts. One probably 
best known is the Rosemount, I believe, the Rosemount pasture 
where you have a co-op. It’s through that co-op, of course, that 
we’ve tried to settle it and we’ve had for some months now a 
process where we’ve had a conciliator involved in that. 
 
On your side of the province we have a situation where there 
have been selections of land made, but in that selection there 
have been some omissions as opposed to taking the entire 
parcel. And it’s that piece that we’re working on and that’s 
where the extensions have been. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. From your response, 
can I assume that the First Nations then have given their tacit 
approval or their explicit approval to this extended process of 
negotiation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, it would be fair 
to say that about a month ago I had an opportunity to meet with 
First Nations bands along with the minister responsible for 
Intergovernmental Affairs and talked to them about the 
importance of trying to bring resolution to these. If the question 
is, has there been full tacit approval by the First Nations on the 
way in which we’ve extended the arrangement, the truth is that 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

there isn’t full appreciation for the fact that we’ve extended it. 
But we’ve extended the agreements to try and find a 
compromise or a solution amongst both parties and it’s from 
that framework that we’ve always taken the position that we 
want to settle these things that’s in the best interests of both 
parties and so have used that process in order to try to achieve 
that. 
 
But is there to date because there is not what we would call the 
willing buyer, willing seller arrangement fully endorsed by both 
parties who are using this method . . . And hopefully at the end 
of the day we’ll get some resolution — or get a resolution — 
which will satisfy both parties where at the end of the day 
they’ll say that, this is an arrangement that we both have respect 
for and are prepared to proceed. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, would it be proper to characterize 
the situation then as having a First Nation buyer that is not 
completely satisfied with the way the process is unfolding and a 
reluctant seller which in this case is the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think it would be fair to say that in the 
last six or eight months now it’s been that I’ve met with both 
parties. We’ve met with First Nations people around this issue 
and I’ve also met now on two occasions with the advisory 
committee that’s been established for the ranchers. 
 
And it would be fair to say that there has not been in my view 
the kind of arrangement that I’d like to see in place to protect 
the interests that the ranching community has had and that when 
we’re disposing of parcels of land we want to try to do that in a 
fashion that doesn’t disrupt the package of which is currently 
both owned and leased on the part of the ranchers. Because, as 
you know, when ranchers on that side of the province or when 
ranchers decide that they want to part with their operations they 
want to do so both with the land that they hold title to and with 
the land of which they currently lease. 
 
And that of course makes the entire package far more 
appropriate and far more saleable for the people who are 
wanting to move on. And so it’s from that perspective that 
we’re trying to satisfy the arrangement in so that those who are 
in fact making the choice about parting with their property that 
they can do so with the entire package as opposed to parts of it 
being negotiated out and then putting a great deal of stress or 
pressure on the current leaseholders and titleholders on trying to 
dispose of only parts of their property — which would make 
them far less valuable, as you and I both can appreciate. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Chair to 
the minister, one of the areas that we discussed was the lack of 
willingness or the unpreparedness of the provincial government 
to renew some of the leases that had been attached to the TLE 
claims. 
 
And our argument at the time — and I’ve made this argument 
both publicly and privately — is that by renewing the leases 
with the current leaseholders, the provincial government is 
really stabilizing or strengthening the hand of the negotiation 
position of the current leaseholder and in fact would enable the 
leaseholder to get closer to market value for the deeded land 
that they have as part of the overall productive package. 
 

And in making that argument, it occurred to me or it seemed to 
me, Mr. Minister, that the provincial government didn’t 
appreciate, you know, sort of the suggestion I was making. It 
was as though the government wasn’t really willing or prepared 
to give that kind of strength to the bargaining position of the 
leaseholder. 
 
And if I’m listening to what you’re saying tonight, you do seem 
to take into consideration or do seem to be expressing some 
willingness to work toward allowing a situation to develop 
where the leaseholder and the deeded owner would be able to 
get more value for his land. 
 
I’m wondering if it’s necessary under that circumstance for you 
to involve yourself to the extent that you are. Maybe the 
department should just take our suggestion and renew that lease 
and let the two parties negotiate freely between themselves. 
 
Now I understand the argument is that the current leaseholder is 
not in fact the seller, the willing seller. In legal fact, he is not 
the willing seller. But by giving him a position of strength from 
which to negotiate, it would allow him to realize the monies out 
of his operation that he needs to get in order for him to even 
entertain an offer that might be forthcoming from a First 
Nation. 
 
I guess I can’t understand, frankly, how involving the provincial 
government in the middle of this deal is going to benefit the 
willing seller, willing buyer scenario. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I appreciate that you’ve 
come back to this point again because we had a conversation 
about it, now that my memory . . . I recall from the meeting that 
we had in April where in fact you have a selection made on a 
piece of property by First Nations, then we are compelled then 
to examine the renewals. We’re compelled to examine them. 
 
And I appreciate your suggestion, and that is that . . . and shared 
with you why it won’t work over a longer run. And this is why, 
because . . . and we’re making renewals today. Where you have 
a satisfactory arrangement between the rancher and/or the 
respective new owner, we’ve made those kinds of renewals 
occur. And we’ve been renewing where there haven’t been 
selections right within your area. 
 
Where you have a selection, however, the renewals have not 
occurred, to try to resolve these kind of issues that we’ve been 
talking about. Now if you say to us that what you should do 
here is renew the packages first and then have the prospective 
new owner try to sort this out with the current leaseholder, in 
the case of First Nations people what will happen if you do that 
the very first time is that they will make selection on all the 
land. They’ll make the selection on every piece of property that 
makes itself available on the Crowns to protect themselves. And 
well they should because what will happen is that they won’t 
trust the process in the way in which they trust the process 
today. 
 
And so if you want to see all of the Crown land have a First 
Nations selection on it, your suggestion will make it happen. 
And that’s what I said to you the last time that we had this 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

 

conversation. And you should not be encouraging an 
administration or a government to go there. You should let the 
process continue to work in the way in which it has because it’s 
been successful on most fronts, except in those cases where 
there has been a selection made and we haven’t been able to 
resolve it fully. 
 
Do I think that at the end of the day we’ll resolve many of these 
issues? I think we will. Now in some cases I think we’ll find 
ourselves, as I said the last time we talked, we’ll find ourselves 
in the courts. And it was never any intent for the government to 
be in the centre of these kinds of disputes, and tried as hard as 
we could when we set up the framework agreement of which 
ranchers and First Nations and various other stakeholders were 
a part of those conversations, as the new group that’s been 
established to look at this whole piece, they too understand that 
we never wanted to see the government in this kind of a 
situation. 
 
But the reality is, is that when you make a selection of 
cherry-pick, which is what’s happened in some of these 
selections, it then makes it impossible to reach the compromise 
of a willing seller, buyer. And it’s on those bases of which 
we’ve been trying to sort some of these out. Now they’re not in 
large number today but I can tell you, if you ask us to exercise 
your suggestion, I can assure you that First Nations will make 
selections on all Crown land which is coming up for renewal. 
And they should and they would. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that your assertion 
that they would make selections on all Crown land is 
hypothetical. And I think that it’s a stretch to say that. 
 
I understand that the TLE agreement, as has been formally 
recognized by the provincial government, the federal 
government, and First Nations people in this province, has 
worked very effectively and has resulted in First Nations 
opportunities with Crown grazing lease and private deeded land 
in some situations that has worked out to everybody’s 
satisfaction. And there’s the normal give and take of the willing 
buyer, willing seller, and there’s the negotiations and the 
haggling that goes on with that kind of thing, but in the end 
everybody seems to part company in reasonably satisfied ways. 
 
Now if you’re saying that the only reason the provincial 
government has imposed itself on these most recent land claims 
is because of the cherry-picking of some of the claims, there’s 
got to be a better way around this than the method that we’re 
coming up with now because I think we’re going to find nobody 
happy. And that’s the worst-case scenario that we could 
possibly imagine. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess as a follow-up to this comment, I’m 
wondering whether your department, in its conversations with 
the First Nations applicants in the TLE process, whether your 
department has felt free or felt it had the opportunity to suggest 
some maybe new and creative and alternative measures that 
might help satisfy the First Nations people in meeting the 
mineral claims and the land claims that they have been seeking, 
that will not disrupt the ranching industry, and will not create 
the hard feelings and the ill will that seems to be generating 
from the current process. 
 

Is the department open to new and creative alternatives that 
might come from sources completely outside of government to 
help alleviate some of the stresses that are developing in this 
particular process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think the member asks an extremely 
important point. And I’m pleased to hear him say and will be 
looking for some response in terms of . . . along the way in what 
some of the new and creative ideas will be, and alternatives, in 
terms of providing First Nations people with greater access to 
their Saskatchewan resource base. 
 
And it will be an interesting debate for you to take on in your 
own constituency, I can appreciate, where you might pose with 
some of the ranchers in your area what their views might be if 
they were to ascertain, the First Nations people were to 
ascertain some of the properties that we’re talking about today 
and then have first right on some of the minerals and . . . on the 
minerals that are there — and maybe some of the gas reserves 
of which is an interesting place for you to take. 
 
Because if in fact you’re advocating that, then I expect what 
you’ll be saying to me next is that you think that the . . . In 
northern Saskatchewan today where we have a thriving mining 
community, First Nations people are of the view that they 
should have a larger chunk of the resource revenue in the North, 
given that the mines are located in some areas right within the 
communities of northern Saskatchewan which First Nations 
would argue, whom should in fact be the benefactors of the 
resource revenue. 
 
Where you have today pipelines or oil wells that are on First 
Nations land, you would be advocating, I expect here, that all of 
those resource revenues would make their way directly to First 
Nations people. And that will be an interesting debate for us to 
have along the way. 
 
But as it is today, those resource revenues make their way to the 
province and then we distribute them in the fashion that we 
think is appropriate for all people in Saskatchewan. Because I 
think that’s the way in which the future . . . That’s the way in 
which we’ve provided resource revenues in the past to this 
province and I expect under this administration into the future 
that will continue to be the case. 
 
But as it relates specifically to land claim, we’re of the view I 
think today . . . My officials tell me that we now have 157,000 
acres of Ag and Food Crown land that has been in fact passed to 
First Nations through a negotiated process. And so we have a 
history, and you’re right, where it can work. 
 
But we also have situations today where in fact, as I said to you, 
there are parcels of land within a lease, a leasehold that ranchers 
have today that First Nations people are not interested in. And 
they’re not interested in it from the perspective that it may not 
have the kinds of resource revenues of which they want to have 
access on. And that becomes a different debate. 
 
And it’s from that perspective that we say, under our policy, 
that in the past where you’ve had successful arrangements, there 
have been selections of entire parcels. And we’re trying to 
mediate that kind of a process today in a conciliatory fashion. 
And so far we’ve been successful in staying out of the courts, 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

been successful in making sure that the people who have that 
land base today are continuing to farm it, and we continue to 
provide assurances to those people that they will have some 
longevity in that arrangement. 
 
Now we can get into a expediated debate here without any 
question simply by doing one of two things: not renewing or in 
fact allowing the selection to take place. We could do one or the 
other. Or allow the selection to take place or to allow a renewal 
to take place. 
 
And I can tell you in those arrangements where there is dispute 
today, we’ll be in the courts. And we’re trying to avoid that 
because in those cases there are no winners at all and we’re 
looking today for situations where it will be a win-win for both 
the people who are currently ranching it, and for First Nations 
who in fact are interested in acquiring that land. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, a good answer in some ways but I’d appreciate it if 
you wouldn’t put words into my mouth. We’re not proposing 
anything. What I’m asking is, are you prepared to listen to new 
ideas, and not necessarily from us but from people outside the 
political system? There are people that have some ideas about 
how this might be addressed so that the needs of the First 
Nations are met without forcing the current leaseholders off the 
land and out of their lease. 
 
And I guess the other question is, why is it that the provincial 
government would assume that by renewing these leases there 
will be no satisfactorily negotiated settlement? Why is that 
assumption the first one that the government arrives at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chair, if he assumed as 
though I was putting words in your mouth. I didn’t want to . . . 
I’m not implying that all. I just thought that what I was hearing 
is a host of new ideas that were coming your way and I was 
shocked by it, to say the least, and so was paying close attention 
to it. 
 
And so . . . And I thought there was some good ones. I thought 
there was some good ones coming so I was paying close 
attention to it and sort of rephrasing it to make sure that I was 
capturing the essence of your comments. But I was not for a 
minute offering any words of suggestion or advice from your 
part, and not intending at all to put any words in your mouth. 
 
And I want to conclude my comments by saying that where you 
have, where we have a willing seller or a willing arrangement, 
we will make those, we will provide the necessary 
documentation to allow a renewal to proceed. And we’ve had 
some of those right in the midst of us negotiating some of the 
difficult ones that are outstanding, and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Now is it the most satisfactory method today? Well this is the 
one we’re using today. If there are other methods of which you 
or members of your party think that we should engage in, I 
would be happy to entertain any ideas on that front because our 
whole idea is to try to find a solution between the people who 
are wanting to acquire the property or those who want to renew 
it, or for that matter those who want to move on and make that 
land available to others. We’d be happy to entertain any ideas 
you might have. 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Chair to 
the minister, I understand that there is a lease renewal process 
ongoing, that there are a number of Crown grazing leases being 
renewed on a daily basis. And I wonder if the minister can 
confirm for me the terms of those renewals. 
 
It seems to me, if I recall correctly — and you can correct me if 
I’m wrong, Mr. Minister — but at one time if a lease traded 
hands, if it had been a 33-year lease when it was originally 
signed, on the assumption of the lease by the new leaseholder 
the lease was automatically renewed to a full 33-year term. Is 
that what’s happening now with lease renewals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. Where there 
have been 33-year leases in the past, where in fact there is a 
renewal being requested, if there is no selection on any of those 
properties we’re simply renewing it again for that period of 
time of which the member makes note. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, is there any exception to that 
rule? Are you making any allowances for special 
circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There would only be where there is a 
question about the management of the lease. There would be 
some concern there. Or if there was. . . Where there would be 
new conditions that might be placed on a particular lease, those 
would be few and far between in my view. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, in the case of the land transaction 
that involves a Crown grazing lease, where there would be no 
experience on which the new leaseholder might have the merits 
of his husbandry questioned or understood, is there any 
situation that you know of where a full 33-year lease would not 
be available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, it’s possible but 
my officials tell me that they’re not aware of any. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’ve had brought to my 
attention a situation where an individual whose land is part of a 
transaction was not allowed to move to the new owner under 
the 33-year term agreement — that it was restricted to what was 
left, what was currently outstanding for the lease agreement. 
And I would be prepared to discuss this with the minister and 
his officials on a specific basis later, if that’s all right. 
 
Mr. Minister, we also heard from you that you had an 
interdepartmental group that was studying the issue of Crown 
grazing leases, and how they might be renewed and under what 
terms they might be restricted. Could you tell me what stage 
that review committee is at and have they reached any 
consensus? Where are they at in their deliberations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — First, Mr. Chair . . . or, Deputy Chair, to 
the member, we’d be happy to look at the case that you raised. 
And I know that we’ll find an opportunity to do that as quickly 
as you make it available to us. 
 
Secondly, on the committee, I think I mentioned the last time 
we were together, is that the committees are Justice, 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

 

Environment, Agriculture, and Intergovernmental Affairs. My 
committee, or this committee, continues to proceed with the 
examination of work that they’ve been doing. 
 
We had hoped or are hoping that we’ll have resolve and 
recommendation on the work of this committee this fall. So 
we’re not far from this period; we’re about three months away 
from having the recommendations from this joint working 
committee. And as soon as I have them, I’d be happy to share 
them with the member. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Would the minister be willing to indicate to the 
House whether or not very clear guidelines might be included in 
the review that would allow for the direct sale of Crown grazing 
land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Currently, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or, 
Chair, we had, and you’ve heard me on this case, or on this 
issue before, that there are three options that we thought we 
might have. 
 
One is the renewals, certainly the other is the selection, and the 
other is that there could be consideration here to actually part 
with some of the Crown land that we have today and make it 
available for sale. It’s certainly one of the pieces that would be 
part of the examination. 
 
We do not . . . We have not within our government a public 
policy to date to sell the Crown land. And I have not at this 
point in time prepared any paper for my colleagues to review 
within the cabinet. 
 
The committee continues its work. When the committee gets 
done its deliberations, it will provide me with some 
recommendation . . . or us with some recommendations. And 
then what we’ll do is bring that forward to my cabinet 
colleagues for an examination in caucus of which time we 
would then be examining whether or not, within the scope of 
this administration, we would be willing to place Crown land on 
an agenda for sale. But we are not at that point at this point. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Deputy 
Chair to the minister, under the current rules I understand that 
there is some conflict between the guidelines that the lands 
branch operates under vis-à-vis the sale of Crown land and the 
implications of ownership for non-residents who might want to 
buy land in Saskatchewan that has Crown grazing land attached 
to that package. Are the guidelines that are being developed by 
this interdepartmental committee going to try and address and 
resolve those potential conflicts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Part of, Mr. Deputy Chair, the work of the 
committee that we talked about a minute ago is not looking at 
the particular piece as it relates to the sale of Crown land to 
individuals outside of Saskatchewan. And now my memory 
doesn’t serve me well on this piece when the all-party 
committee was examining the farm ownership in Saskatchewan 
as to whether or not we in fact made any recommendations as it 
relates to what we do with Crown lands into the future. I expect 
we didn’t. 
 
And so at this point what’s in place is the current policy that 
we’ve had for some time now and that is that if you want to be 

an owner . . . or a lessee of Crown land in this province that in 
fact you’d have to be a resident of the province. This is 
currently a position that I’ve taken. Clearly we would be open 
to suggestion or recommendation on this front. But at this point 
in time it seems to me that this is our provincial Crown land that 
people . . . We have a number of applicants on a regular basis 
that want to access Crown land in our province. 
 
And so it’s my view that if we’re going to be transferring leases 
in Saskatchewan that it’s most appropriate that we do that with 
our own Saskatchewan residents who should have first option 
on Saskatchewan farm land. And it’s a position that I continue 
to hold and have not yet been convinced by anyone that we 
should be changing that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, have you any indication 
statistically how many applications might have come to the 
province, to the department, to obtain land that would involve 
Crown land from out-of-province purchasers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, we 
don’t have that record of the out-of-province requests that we 
have for the leasing of the land. We simply don’t have that 
record. Even if we could go back to it and examine it, my 
officials tell me that we don’t have that record in place. So I 
have no method of being able to provide that information to 
you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — There’s one other area I want to touch on as 
part of our consideration tonight, Mr. Minister. We have 
referred to the legal opinion that your department has as it 
regards the treaty land entitlement issue. You have alluded to it 
on a couple of occasions in the House and during estimates and 
even in our private conversations. I think that you feel that that 
legal opinion has really kind of narrowed the scope of latitude 
that the government has to operate on the resolution of TLE 
claims. I would ask the minister: is that purely and simply an 
in-house legal opinion or is it an opinion that the department 
sought from outside of their own staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I don’t believe, Mr. Deputy Chair, that we 
have had a legal opinion outside of the Department of Justice. 
But it’s my view and understanding that because we have such 
an absolutely outstanding and efficient Department of Justice 
who do good work for the people of the province, and I know 
that when we talked about this issue previously with the 
minister of Justice prior to the current Minister of Justice being 
here, it was his opinion — and I expect that is the opinion of the 
current Minister of Justice whom I have not had an opportunity 
to discuss this issue with any detail — that it is the only legal 
opinion that we’ve had to date. And it’s one that we have been 
formulating our positions and taking our direction currently on. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, and through you to the 
minister, I trust my own personal physician implicitly, but if he 
recommends a line of surgery that I’m going to find rather 
painful or disagreeable, I’m apt to get a second opinion. And 
I’m wondering if the department, with the minister, with the 
provincial government, would consider looking at a second and 
third opinion. It’s not uncommon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think that when we come to making a 
recommendation of this magnitude, or for that matter other 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

decisions, we have a battery of people who work within the 
Justice department. So there would be a number of legal minds 
that would be putting their head around what an opinion would, 
at the end of the day, be made. And so it’s on that basis that we 
take the position that we take today. 
 
Clearly when this agreement was consummated, the framework 
agreement, I expect that there are still people there today who 
were there when the agreement was first crafted, so certainly 
the history remains solid and we continue to be guided by the 
direction of the Justice department. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I wish I would have had the 
benefit of hearing your whole answer but there was too much 
discourse behind me and I was unable to pick it all up, but I’ll 
read Hansard for the full explanation that you gave in this 
particular case. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you are well aware, the issue of treaty land 
entitlement has . . . I use the word provoked hesitantly, but it 
has resulted in the creation of the landowners/lessee rights 
group, the Saskatchewan landowners/lessee rights group. And I 
know that they’ve made many representations to you 
personally, to the government generally. I’ve had lots of 
correspondence in my office, many opportunities to talk to 
those individuals personally and in public venues as well. And 
of course we stood in this House and repeatedly presented 
petitions on their behalf. 
 
They feel like their livelihood and their future is threatened, and 
they feel like their history is being ignored in this whole 
process. Now I’m not here to make any accusations in that 
regard, but I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you are in a regular mode 
of contact with that group. Do you have a regular opportunity to 
speak with them? Is somebody in your department in contact 
with them? If nothing else, Mr. Minister, to provide a form of 
reassurance for these people because, as you understand, that 
community has been hit with a whole series of different issues. 
We’ve had drought for two or three years; we’ve got the land 
claim; now we’ve got the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) scare. 
 
That community, that agricultural component, the cattle 
component of the agricultural community, has been whipsawed 
badly in the last several years. And I think they . . . Not only do 
they need, they deserve your attention to their concerns and I’m 
wondering if you can give us that assurance today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I want to 
say to the member that we have a number of things that are 
occurring to make sure that the landowner, lessee owner group 
sort of remain in the loop, which I think is the point you make. 
And I know that there’s a variety of different mechanisms of 
which that’s been happening. 
 
It’s been happening through my office and certainly through the 
work of my department. We have the intergovernmental 
committee that’s actually going to be meeting with them next 
week to ensure that we have a fair and full appreciation of their 
issues and concerns. Likely we’ll go over some of the 
legislative requirements that . . . or the legislative opinions that 
we’ve received. And we have the Crown land stakeholders 
group which is meeting at the end of June which, in fact, we’ve 

invited the committee to make a presentation to. 
 
And I know that through our dialogue here, that the dialogue 
that you and I’ve had, that you have done a remarkable job in 
making sure that that group of men and women have a full 
understanding and appreciation of the way in which this is 
moving forward. And I might say, which I think is an important 
statement here as it relates to the fact that we’re looking for 
solutions so that we can have, at the end of the day, a win-win 
for all of the parties as best we can. 
 
And I know that it’s from that perspective that you’ve been 
looking at this issue as well and I very much appreciate that, 
that we’ve been able to have some dialogue around this outside 
of this Assembly in its sitting. We’ve been able to sit behind the 
bar and talk about these issues and I know that you’ve 
communicated a lot of that back to the folks who serve on this 
committee. 
 
So it’s through that process that I think that, at the end of the 
day, we’ll find solutions. And I appreciate the manner in which 
we’ve been able to deal with this issue. It’s a very sensitive one, 
a very difficult one, and I know the degree of importance that 
you attach to it and it’s through that kind of dialogue that I think 
we can make a difference on this file. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I have just a few more questions on this 
particular vein and I think the reality is, Mr. Minister, that as 
difficult as this particular issue is, not only in terms of 
resolution and equitable resolution, as difficult as it is for the 
leaseholders and landowners and operators in the Cypress Hills 
constituency and other areas of the province, I haven’t yet heard 
any of those individuals say that these treaty land entitlement 
settlements aren’t important. 
 
The assumption I would guess, on the part of a lot of people, is 
that we’ve got a group of people who are just bound and 
determined to protect their own rights and their own history and 
their own family traditions at the expense of the First Nations 
people. And I have not yet encountered one individual who has 
ever expressed that kind of a sentiment. 
 
There’s lots of realization among the ranching community that 
until the First Nations people of this province become full 
participants in the economy of the province, there isn’t much of 
a future for them or us as peoples, and there’s not a good future 
for the province as a whole. 
 
So with that spirit in mind and with that desire to see a decent 
and reasonable and fair settlement achieved, I think that I would 
like to have an assurance from the minister and from his 
government that they are going to look at these situations on a 
. . . almost a case-by-case basis because each one seems to be 
rather unique. And wherever — as we talked earlier — 
wherever there might be unique or special arrangements that 
can be made or provisions that might be agreed to by all the 
parties, that they be investigated and pursued as diligently as 
possible, not to overlook any decent or equitable arrangement 
that might be decided upon or proposed by any given party. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Minister, that as careful and thorough and 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

 

deliberate as the ranching community has been in their 
evaluation of this whole process and what it means to them 
personally and to the province as a whole, I also believe that 
many in the First Nations communities are equally determined 
to see the right thing done in fairness and in an equitable 
manner. Because they have certain benefits that might accrue to 
them through the treaty, they might have certain opportunities 
and obligations that might be realized through the treaty land 
entitlement process. But I really firmly believe that many of the 
First Nations people are looking for solutions that are 
satisfactory to all parties. 
 
And so I really would encourage the minister to work toward 
solutions that could be reached, satisfying and recognizing the 
roles both parties want to play in the settlement of treaty land 
entitlements. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me if treaty land entitlement claims 
are anticipated by your government, your department, in any 
other part of the province in the near future? And if so, will they 
be also placed in abeyance under the terms of your previous 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there are a number of 
them and they’re sitting in abeyance. So there’s a number of 
these requests and they’re sitting in abeyance. That’s the short 
answer to the question. 
 
I just want to make a short comment though about what you had 
indicated regarding the full participation of First Nations in the 
Saskatchewan economy. And I just want to draw your attention 
to the efforts that we’ve been trying to make and I’ll use the 
Rosemount pasture as probably the best example. Because as 
you know, the Mosquito Reserve is right along the community 
pasture and the community pasture has been . . . or the co-op 
pasture has been in the hands of many of those ranchers for now 
going on 50 years. 
 
And what the First Nations are asking here is that they would 
like to assume ownership of this pasture. And then what they 
say is that we’ll want to do one of two things. We’ll either want 
to ranch, use this land for ranch land for ourselves and grow the 
livestock industry, or we may in fact just lease it back in the 
same way that the government leases the land today to the 
ranchers. Why couldn’t we, the Mosquito Band, lease it to the 
ranchers in the same fashion? 
 
And all that would happen here in this case is that you’d have a 
change in owner. You may not have anything else other than a 
change of ownership. And we have not been able to resolve that 
for the better part now of I think going on three years . . . or two 
and a half years. 
 
And it has something to do with the simple term called trust. 
Why is it today that First Nations people couldn’t own the land 
and ranchers couldn’t lease it from them, if nothing else 
changed? If nothing else changed, why couldn’t that happen? 
 
By the same token, why is it that First Nations have made a 
selection of that particular piece of property where they have in 
fact have cohabited as neighbours for the better part now of 
those 50 years that I’m talking about, where in fact livestock 
has been pastured there; from time to time there has been 

arrangements where First Nations people have actually, I 
expect, may have worked on the pasture; where there has been 
that kind of arrangement? 
 
But when in fact First Nations make the selection of the pasture, 
we’re now into a dispute simply around the change of the 
ownership of the land. May have absolutely nothing to do with 
the fact that the same access would be allowed, the same 
operating privileges would be allowed, the fact that there would 
be a long-term lease agreement with people on the same basis. 
And yet we’re not able to find a solution here on this particular 
issue. 
 
And I guess it begs the question about, what stands in the way 
of that? What stands in the way of that kind of an arrangement? 
And it’s been the issue of trust. And I’ve raised it with the 
ranchers who currently have the agreement with the government 
on the co-op pasture and I’ve raised it with the First Nations 
people. And it’s through those efforts that we’re trying to reach 
resolution. And it’s from that perspective that we want to see a 
win-win for both parties. 
 
And that would apply, not only in Rosemount, but certainly 
apply in the part of the province of which we had the current 
discussion with you and I. And I think it needs to apply in all of 
those other selections which have been made today. And we 
need to try to find solutions on them because there are many of 
those selections that have now have been made. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. I 
think you’ve touched on a situation that is going to require a lot 
of development and attention on the part of all parties. 
 
And I can’t speak to the details of the Rosemount Grazing 
Co-op situation. I’m not as familiar with it as my colleague the 
member from Watrous is, and she may want to address that. But 
I think that that’s true. 
 
I mean there’s an element of trust that has to be developed. But 
you have to understand that people don’t move to a position of 
trust easily when they have had change thrust upon them 
rapidly. 
 
You know, trust is something that develops over a long period 
of time. It doesn’t happen just by happenstance or 
instantaneously. It’s a culmination of a significant period of 
time where dealings and business relationships and situations 
have been ongoing between the parties. And I think that there’s 
lots of room for development in that area. 
 
I don’t want to take up a lot more time on the issue of TLE. But 
I just was going through my papers here and realized that there 
was one specific case that I wanted to bring up tonight — that I 
promised I would — and I just about overlooked it. 
 
I am referring specifically to the Heck livestock association 
co-op which is in my constituency. It’s not far from the 
community of Fox Valley. And in early 2002 the gentleman 
who wrote me this letter, Stewart Bosch, said that he dropped 
off forms for his lease renewal with the Sask Ag and Food 
office in Swift Current and at that time he was assured that 
they’d have the new lease by mid or late summer. That was in 
19 . . . I’m sorry, in 2002. 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

And the last correspondence I had from him was in April and at 
that point they had not been given their lease renewal. 
Apparently somewhere along the line it got caught up in the 
TLE and the review and so forth. But the question that Mr. 
Bosch asks is this: the area in question is 17 per cent of the 
Heck grazing association co-op and a lease renewal — not 
simply a one-year permit which they have been granted already 
— on the affected areas is still being awaited from 
Saskatchewan Ag, Food and Rural Revitalization. 
 
He feels that this length of time is unreasonable and wants to 
know why it has taken so long, especially in view of the fact 
that this apparently is no longer a part of the TLE. May I have 
an answer to this particular, specific case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member is right that 
it is caught up in the review, given that there are . . . there has 
been a selection made on parts of the land. Now I don’t know 
whether or not the member can tell me about whether or not 
there’s been a communiqué with Mr. Bosch recently. If that has 
not been the case on the part of our department — although my 
officials are certainly just advised me about what I have just 
indicated to you — so I think that would indicate that we’re in 
contact with Mr. Bosch and providing him with some of the 
detail as to the reasons why there has been a delay here. 
 
But clearly what we’ll do is get back to Mr. Bosch and then I 
could copy you in on a correspondence just so that you’re fully 
apprised of the work that’s been done on the file. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that assurance. I 
appreciate your patience and the time you gave us tonight to 
discuss the issue of leasing and particularly as the treaty land 
entitlement is involved with the leases. Leasing is a very 
important element to the ag and especially the cattle industry in 
the Southwest, and my constituency is probably the benefactor 
of more leased land than just about any place else in the 
province. 
 
So as you can understand we’re very concerned about how that 
whole issue washes out, whether it involves treaty land 
entitlement or the potential to purchase lease land or how it’s 
managed and how the current leaseholders operate. So thank 
you for your time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. We’re going to take a shift from the TLEs to 
bovine spongiform encephalopathy and ask some questions 
there. I still challenge the minister to use the full name. 
 
Just to have the basic facts to date, can the minister tell us how 
many farms are still quarantined to date and in what provinces 
those quarantines are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there were 17 farms that were 
initially . . . And I took a minute here just to try to remember 
my answer earlier today. I think there were 17 farms that were 
initially quarantined. Three quarantines have now come off 
which means that we have left 14 farms that are currently under 
quarantine. 
 
In which provinces are they? The two farms in Saskatchewan 
are no longer . . . or still may be under quarantine, but on each 

of those farms the animals have since been depopulated so . . . 
There were three farms in British Columbia. The rest would 
have all been in Alberta. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank you, Minister. Then how many 
animals have been put down to date? And of those, how many 
have already been tested? And I realize all the test results have 
been negative so far, so how many are we waiting yet for test 
results? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there were right around 2,000 
animals that were under all of the quarantined farms. My 
officials advise me that there’re just over 1,000 animals that 
have in fact been put down. We have tests now, I believe about 
800, just over 800 that have been tested. Those would include 
the last series of animals that came in from the Alberta farms, 
the British Columbia farms, and also from the McCrea farm, the 
McCrea farm at Baldwinton. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. That would mean that 
there’s approximately 200 test results that we’re still waiting 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What’s happened is that we’re getting now 
since Sunday . . . I think Sunday . . . or Saturday, sorry, is when 
the animals from the Baldwinton farm were depopulated, and 
we’ve been getting some trickle effects from each of those. I 
think there were 200, just over 200 on that farm, or 250 from 
that farm. The results from those are trickling in with those 
from Alberta and from those from British Columbia. It’s my 
view, as was reported I think earlier today, that we hope to have 
the rapid tests completed on all of those animals within the next 
probably 30 hours. And so we’ll have then the full appreciation 
of all of the tests that were done on all of the animals, the 
thousand that I talked about. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — If all of the other tests come back negative, 
is there any indication that there will be requests to have any 
more animals put down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think that, Mr. Chair, that CFIA (Canada 
Food Inspection Agency), and if I had the benefit this evening 
of Dr. Greenberg, who had to be out of town this evening 
meeting with some people in rural Saskatchewan, I think what 
she would probably say is that there may be additional need to 
put down additional animals from some of the other farms. But 
that course of action would be directed by CFIA. 
 
Now within the initial 2,000 head that were initially 
quarantined, three of those farms have now been lifted. So that 
would mean that if we were to depopulate the other 14 farms 
we wouldn’t quite get to 2,000. I don’t know how many head 
specifically were in those farms that have now been . . . where 
the quarantines have been lifted, but if we were to proceed with 
the depopulation of all of the animals, that would leave 
whatever the difference would be from the 2,000 minus the 
quarantined farms. I don’t have that exact number here but we 
certainly could provide that for you tomorrow. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It’s my understanding that the minister . . . 
all the ministers of Agriculture along with the federal Minister 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

 

of Agriculture had a conference call this morning. So was it 
discussed in that call if all of these test results are indeed 
negative what will CFIA’s next move be? What will their next 
steps be at this point? Was that discussed? And further, was it 
discussed, is there any knowledge that you have of what it will 
take, what more will the US (United States) ask of our country 
in order for the borders to be opened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — These are two very, very good questions. 
We had the conversation today with the Ag ministers and, 
clearly, our view is that if there are no other farms that are . . . 
or no other animals, sorry, that are tested, that test positively, 
it’s our view that the scientific evidence that we’ve been 
practising under is the one of which the US is expected to 
adopt. 
 
That’s why we’ve been talking about the next 36 hours as being 
probably the most critical periods because we should have 
within the next 36 hours two things occur. We should have the 
results of the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) from the McCrea 
farm, and we should also have all of the testing that was done 
on the weekend from those animals that were put down. 
 
And that, in our understanding from CFIA, should be the signal 
that we can then approach the United States government and 
say that this looks like this is an isolated case, or a spontaneous 
case, and as a result of that we will be asking, through the 
federal government and the federal minister, to lift the ban on 
US exports. 
 
Now if the question is, what is our hope here, that the federal 
government in the United States will in fact honour that request, 
well up to date all they’ve ever said to us is that they will accept 
the findings of the CFIA, and will accept the scientific 
evidence. 
 
And so it will be imperative then to recognize what in fact the 
US government will say to us after the next 36 hours or 40 
hours in respect to the fact that we’ve completed our work, 
there are no other animals that in fact have been tested negative, 
and it would be our hope and our view that the borders would 
then be lifted. And then we could start to move back to the way 
in which we’ve been accustomed to doing work, or trade, with 
our American friends and get the industry back up and going 
again in the way in which it needs to occur. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member from 
Athabasca on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To you and through you, I’d like to ask the Assembly to 
welcome a new staff member that we have working here in the 
city. 
 
Often during our tenure as a minister, we look for young, 
aggressive Aboriginal people. And I’d like to introduce to the 

Assembly and ask the Assembly to give a very special welcome 
to a new member of our staff. His name is Tyrone Ratt and 
Tyrone is from my home community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
And Tyrone is said to be a basketball player, but I’ve gone 
through him a few times and a few fast breaks where he 
couldn’t catch me. But I’d like to ask all members to give a 
very special welcome to our new staff member, Tyrone Ratt. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The minister 
answered my next question in his last answer when I was going 
to ask him if he had the DNA or if he knew the DNA results, 
and he indicated that they did not have those results yet. 
 
Does the minister know, in the conference call discussions, 
what if the DNA test is non-conclusive, which possibly it could 
be? Because my understanding is they only had DNA samples 
from the bulls and not from the cows. So if those results are not 
conclusive, has there been any indication of further 
investigation that would be ongoing in trying to find the herd of 
origin, or has there been any discussion of what further needs to 
be done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, in the examination here, or the 
trace-back investigations, there were two sort of parallel tracks 
or trace-backs that were occurring. One of course was in the 
Saskatchewan herd; the other one was in the Alberta herd. And 
so there still may in fact be some opportunity here, or some 
expectation here is probably the better word, to then proceed 
more directly into an examination on an Alberta farm or farms. 
So the work could certainly continue in that area. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — There’s been indication to different 
members in our caucus that there is already possible 
negotiations going on with the US to at least have a lift of the 
borders, sort of a restrictive list or lift that would allow for 
young animals or certain cuts of meat. And we’ve heard that 
rumour. 
 
I was wondering if the minister had also had any indication that 
those negotiations were going on right now; if not a total lift, at 
least a partial lift of the ban. And I know during question period 
the minister said that he would support that. And has he heard 
that personally? Does he know of any negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, not much has changed from the 
question that was asked of me earlier today and the discussion 
that we had later this day from question period with the industry 
committee. 
 
There has been good work done at the round table that met on 
Wednesday, Thursday of last week in Ottawa of which industry 
representatives prepared a document of which within the 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

document they were recommending to the Minister of 
Agriculture, national Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Vanclief, that 
we entertain the notion of providing to the US the option of 
allowing them to accept animals under 25 months into their 
country. 
 
So that came out of the work of the round table last week. We 
talked a bit about that certainly in our press conferences today. 
The industry committee talked about it as well. Now this is a 
position that, one of the positions that we would entertain 
approaching the US government with, but our broader full 
intention is to have the US open up its border completely and 
allow our Canadian beef to start to make its way there in the 
way in which it has in the past. 
 
There is clearly an opinion here that we would accept that; we 
would support it in Saskatchewan if we were not able to 
negotiate a broader expectation and that is to open the border. 
 
We want to take that position lead, as I know Mr. Vanclief will, 
to the US government given that their position has been all 
along that if you show us the science and show us that the 
science works, as it has, that we’re prepared then to examine 
reopening of the border. 
 
And it’s our view to date, and if the test results in the next 36 
hours prove the way we think they will or hope they will, that 
we will then take that approach to the US government and say, 
we think now you should open our borders. Our science has 
worked. You’ve had a team of men and women here in Canada 
working alongside our scientists. You know what our system is 
like and you know what we’ve been testing, both the animals 
and the feed, so we think that you should be opening up the 
borders fully. 
 
If we can’t achieve that, then we’ll move to a couple of other 
options that you had mentioned to try and get the . . . 
particularly the feeder stock out of the feedlots and into the 
market. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I assure the minister that 
ideally we would all like to see the borders opened up entirely 
but this is what we’re hearing from Alberta, that there might be 
negotiations going on at least for a restricted opening of the 
borders. 
 
Has Alberta, to the minister’s knowledge, taken on negotiating 
directly with the US themselves that he’s heard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — No, Mr. Chair, the negotiations have been 
. . . or any discussions have really been through Minister 
Vanclief and Secretary Veneman. That’s really the channel for 
negotiations. 
 
Individual provinces are not in a position to do this. I mean, we 
may want to from time to time and/or suggest that we should be 
doing it, and I expect even from time to time make our way to 
Ottawa or to Washington and have conversations with trade 
ministers or trade officials to promote our own interests. 
 
I remember two years ago attending a conference in 
Washington and accompanied the minister of PEI (Prince 
Edward Island) when they were having some difficulties on the 

potato war. And we met with officials from Washington and 
talked about the importance of the industry at that time — the 
potato industry — how in fact the ban on the potato industry in 
PEI would have effect on the seed potato in Saskatchewan, but 
we were not in a . . . we certainly were not in a position of 
influence where in fact policy would be changed. 
 
That’s really done nation to nation and as provinces we depend 
on our federal government to do that on our behalf but there’s 
nothing that pre-empts us from being of assistance to the 
minister when he does his work. And certainly as provincial 
ministers, we would lobby hard on behalf of Canadians on this 
issue to our US colleagues to open up the borders as quickly as 
they can, particularly if the signs continues to be as conclusive 
as it has been of late. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would just like to ask a few questions on 
the activities of the industry advisory committee. How often has 
the committee met since it’s been put together? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the industry committee meets 
every day by telephone conference. They’ve been doing that 
since they were developed back about 10 or 12 days ago and I 
met with them face to face today for a meeting here in the 
building. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Is the advisory committee indicating to the 
minister what the impact is? Has that been part of the 
discussions? Have they been able to evaluate what that is at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There’s two or three pieces here that are 
important to recognize. One is that our own department and 
officials have been trying to examine, or are examining what 
the impact might be, both directly on parts of the industry, and 
some of our department officials are working on sort of the 
broader perspective about what are the impacts on some of the 
ancillary services. 
 
As you know, there are so many components of the livestock 
industry that are dependent upon the primary producer, from the 
chain into the feedlots, to those who provide feed for the 
industry, to those who provide the transportation, in this case to 
the rendering plants, and those who provide the feed for the 
industry. So there is a whole host of different characters here 
that are affected. 
 
Clearly the industry has said again today, not only in 
Saskatchewan but nationally, that the biggest impact today is on 
the feeding industry, on the feedlots and on the rendering 
plants. And so it’s those two perspectives of which there has 
been most of the discussion centred. 
 
And my officials have been working closely with the industry, 
not only in Saskatchewan but my officials have also been 
talking with the representatives of other provinces, because 
we’ve taken the position all along that’s been supported by, I 
know, yourself and that is that this is a national issue, that we 
need to try to find a solution to this on a national issue because 
animals move across the country. And so our solutions that 
we’re looking for are ones that reflect a Canadian issue as 
opposed to just one that’s regionally based. 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

 

And it’s from that point of view that the industry committee is 
working with a national committee. My officials are working 
with this committee in Saskatchewan. My officials are working 
with interdepartmental people across the country, and ministers 
are meeting and talking on a regular basis across the country 
about how we can, at the end of the day, find resolve to a whole 
broad band of issues that we’ll need to address. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Is the minister aware . . . I heard from a very 
reliable source that PEI supposedly cancelled some meat orders 
that they had with XL Foods. And is the minister aware of this 
and has he heard of any other, basically, such regionalized 
actions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I’m not aware of this 
cancellation of a shipment of meat into PEI. I have not heard 
this. This is the first time I’ve heard it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Has the committee made any 
recommendations concerning compensation? And in particular, 
as the minister pointed out, the sector of the industry that’s 
going to be most immediately impacted, of course, is the feedlot 
sector. They are quite honestly up against the ropes right now 
because a number of days have gone by. Has there been any 
recommendations concerning compensation? 
 
And the other thing that I’m hearing from the feedlot sector is 
that although they value the industry advisory committee, 
there’s no feedlot owner, to my knowledge, on that committee. 
So they are concerned that perhaps, you know, there needs to be 
a more immediate strategy put into place of what these feedlots 
can do four days from now; a week from now; ten days from 
now; because the timing is just that critical for the feeding 
industry. 
 
So I guess that’s sort of a number of questions rolled up into 
one. Has that been discussed with the industry advisory 
committee? Has the minister considered putting together a, you 
know, a group that could plan a strategy for the feedlots? And 
you know, has there been discussions concerning 
compensation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well in the establishment of the advisory 
committee in the province here, one of the first considerations 
was to make sure that we had people who are from the feedlot 
industry on the committee. And I believe that . . . And one of 
the questions that was asked me last week by one of the 
members from your party, I provided them with a list of the 
members who sit on the committee. Now if the member doesn’t 
have access to it I’d be happy to provide her with that list. 
 
But the Chair of my advisory committee is Mr. Bob Ivey. And 
Mr. Bob Ivey is in fact a feedlot operator in this province from 
Ituna, Saskatchewan. Mr. Brad Wildeman is on my advisory 
committee and he is from your riding. 
 
Mr. Wildeman today was named the individual who would 
represent Saskatchewan at the national table when we talk about 
compensation for Canada, and so Mr. Wildeman is likely on his 
way to an airport as we’re speaking right now, to Ottawa where 
he will be meeting with a variety of other players across Canada 
who will be examining this whole issue of compensation. 
 

What delights me about the fact that the national government is 
dealing with this from a national perspective is that we’ll have 
first-hand probably some of the best people at the table, and 
they’ll be coming from Saskatchewan to serve our population 
well and our industry well. So when the member asked me who 
it is that’s providing me consultation today, who’s sitting at the 
national table, I’m very, very confident, as I know you’ll be, to 
know that Mr. Brad Wildeman is our representative at the 
national table. 
 
And I couldn’t be more pleased than to have Mr. Bob Ivey as 
the Chair of my advisory committee. He, in my view, has done 
a top shelf job over the last couple of weeks of representing our 
Saskatchewan industry in terms of communicating to the public, 
in terms of the progress, in staying in contact with the national 
committee. We have also, as you know, Mr. Jahnke, who is the 
president of the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association. 
 
I talked to him this morning in Yorkton where the stock 
growers were holding their annual meeting. Mr. Jahnke is well 
versed in the livestock industry in this province, and it will be 
their guidance that will be guiding me, of which I’ll provide to 
my colleagues on this side of the House as we move down the 
path of compensation. And this will not be an easy exercise or 
an easy road, as you can appreciate, but this process is well 
engaged. It has been now for several weeks, or for the last 10 
days. And we have exceptional representation from our 
province, in my view, helping us with the decision making, not 
only in Saskatchewan but at the national table. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’d just like to reinforce with the minister, I 
think all the members that he has on his advisory committee are 
valuable members. Originally Mr. Brad Wildeman was not one 
of those, so it pleases me to hear that he has now been added as 
a voice for the feedlot industry, and definitely an excellent 
spokesperson on the national level — well known and 
recognized at that level. 
 
Has the committee . . . you said it’s been ongoing discussions, 
so has the committee made any specific recommendations to 
date on what direction they would like to see compensation 
looking like, or has the discussion even become that detailed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The most pressing area where the 
committee has concentrated its work is clearly on the feedlot 
side because you have livestock today that are ready to move 
onwards to the packing houses and then into the retail 
marketplace, and it’s the guidance that’s been provided by the 
executive committee that this is where the energy be placed 
initially . . . immediately. And so it is from that perspective that 
. . . it is within that purview that they’ll be doing their work. 
 
The other is in the rendering . . . I think in the rendering plants 
where there is a tremendous amount of work that will need to 
be done. 
 
And it’s those two channels, or those two fronts, sorry, where 
we’ve asked the advisory committee and the compensation 
committee to really concentrate its efforts. And we raised that 
today in our telephone conference as well with Mr. Vanclief 
and it’s there where the resources are going to be channelled 
over the next couple of days to see, you know, what the end 
result might be. 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

Now I said to the media tonight after our meeting with the 
advisory committee that there has been some good work done 
to date. There is some draft documentation that has been put 
together by the committee which has made its way . . . which 
will be making its way back to Ottawa for the compensation 
committee to review. It has I’m told . . . I don’t know this for a 
fact, but the industry tells me that it has the endorsement of 
most of the cattle industry in Canada. Who yet needs to look at 
it with some detail will be the officials from across the country 
and also an examination by the ministers, fully, as well as an 
examination by the federal bureaucracy who at the end of the 
day we’re hoping will be the people who will be making the 
compensation payouts. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Does the minister anticipate that the 
province will be participating in the compensation in any way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well my hope has been that provinces 
across the country will not have to participate, that in fact the 
federal government will assume the cost of compensation for 
Canadian producers . . . or for the feedlot operators. But I’m 
always skeptical when we get into negotiations with the federal 
government about who pays, that at the end of the day we have 
a history, as the member knows and has voiced over quietly 
here, that we have a history of every time we get into 
negotiations with the federal government that they revert very 
quickly to their 60/40 formula, that they’re of the view that 
agriculture is a joint arrangement with the federal-provincial 
government, and I expect that very quickly they’ll want to take 
us to that point. 
 
Now my effort will be to try and negotiate this. This is not a 
natural disaster that happens through . . . that we’re accustomed 
to dealing with. This is not about something similar to a 
hailstorm, or this is not like a drought or a flood. This is a 
health issue. This is a Canadian public health issue, and 
accordingly those kinds of decisions fall within the jurisdiction 
of the national government. And so ministers across the country 
will be making a case, I know, that the federal government 
should be providing the compensation package for the feedlots 
and renderers immediately. 
 
Now we’ll see what happens here in the next couple of days in 
relationship to the position that the federal government takes. 
And I expect however, as you can appreciate, that they’ll want 
to establish either the current working formula to address the 
cost, or they’ll want to try and negotiate a new formula that 
might fit a new situation. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer and wish 
him luck because he’s right, the federal government is 
particularly difficult when it comes to cost sharing. 
 
Does he feel that he has the support of the other provincial 
ministers on this issue? Will they be aggressively supportive 
that this is a national compensation issue or will they sit on the 
fence and basically not back us on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It would be fair to say that there will be 
some provinces, who have a very small livestock industry, will 
be less concerned about what, at the end of the day, occurs. 
 
Now clearly the big three — Alberta followed by Saskatchewan 

and Ontario — will have a very, very large interest in the 
compensation package that would be federally driven. And for 
sure Alberta, given the size of their industry, the impact on their 
industry, and on the impact on their economy. 
 
And then Saskatchewan of course would be affected in a similar 
fashion, given our proportion of populations. And so we have 
probably, the two provinces Saskatchewan and Alberta, the 
biggest chunk of concern here, or the biggest amount of concern 
as it relates to compensation. To date, we have had unanimity 
on who should pay the bill, whose issue this is and the fact that 
it is a national issue. We’ve had unanimity from the day we 
began talking about this. We’ve not had any demur from 
anybody, as I’ve pointed out on other occasions. And it’s my 
hope that we will remain with that kind of unanimity across the 
country. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Now it’s also been our view that there should be nobody 
stepping away on one-offs and currently there has been no one 
who suggested that they would. The fact remains that as the 
pressures mount for each of us, particularly in those three big 
provinces, we’ll be under a great deal of political pressure from 
the industry and our hope is that we remain in the way in which 
we have in the past, unanimous in our decision making and in 
our deliberations. And I anticipate that to be the case. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Going in a little bit different direction now, 
for the producers who have had their animals depopulated, they 
had a number of concerns and I know one of them was when 
they could restock, and the minister addressed that last week 
and he said, by all indication, they can restock immediately. So 
they were relieved to hear that. 
 
But the other area that they’re voicing concern is of the income 
tax implications. They will and are entitled to compensation — 
and if I’m understanding it correctly — to a maximum of 
$2,500 per animal. But if that comes as one compensation 
cheque, it’s going to be clawed back, quite frankly, through 
income tax unless they’re allowed to defer it over, you know, 
more than one year and sort of manage it that way, the way they 
could financially manage their livestock by selling the cattle 
over a period of time. So does the minister know any details on 
how that will be handled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the way in 
which the policy, the federal policy reads today — and the 
member’s right — that I believe there’s a two-year tax deferral 
period of which they have to work within, in terms of how they 
deal with their revenues from the revenue that they receive on 
the depopulation of their herds. And also, there is a maximum 
level of return on each animal and I believe it is $2,500. 
 
Now when I had a chance to review the policy and my officials 
provided the detail for me, this works to some degree. The tax 
deferral piece, we’re asking for some consideration here that 
there may be over a longer period of time. And I’ve since 
written the Minister of Agriculture and I expect others across 
the country have done the same because I’ve copied my 
colleagues in across the country to see whether or not we can 
get that tax deferral period stretched out. 
 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

 

But where there appears to be an even greater discrepancy is 
that where you have a farm like the one at Baldwinton where 
the animals are registered purebred animals, where you have 
herd sires that . . . and I have not had a conversation directly 
with the McCreas but I do know that I’ve heard that they’ve 
paid as much as $20,000 for a herd sire. And that’s not an 
unusual amount of money to pay for good breeding stock in the 
registered lines. 
 
Where this policy, the federal policy, really penalizes producers 
is if only they’re able to receive $2,500 for a herd sire where 
they’ve certainly paid out a far larger amount, it seems to me 
that there should be some adjustments made here to the formula 
to pay people appropriately for what the value of the animal is. 
And I have written the Minister of Agriculture, asked him to 
review that policy, and it’s my hope that I’ll hear very quickly 
here before in fact the federal government decides to make 
compensation payments to those producers. If they’re not 
prepared to change that, I’ll be lobbying in a far harder way to 
make some changes or see some changes on that front. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer, and he 
very nicely answered the next question that I had which had to 
deal with the purebred herd. If the federal government refuses 
to compensate this one herd, is that something that the 
provincial government might look at in basically topping up the 
compensation for that herd? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well we’ve had situations in the past 
where there has needed to be on a rare occasion the 
depopulation of a herd, where in fact the federal government 
has not provided the additional compensation outside of their 
existing mandate and the province hadn’t provided any 
additional resources either. 
 
Who has provided the additional compensation has been the 
registered associations. So if, in this case, if this was an Angus 
— an Angus bull — then the Angus Association may wish to 
provide some additional compensation to this particular 
individual. But we have not from a provincial perspective done 
this in the past. 
 
Clearly this is a federal responsibility and we’re asking that the 
federal government make their policies more reflective of what 
the realities are because there’s an element of fairness here. 
Clearly the McCreas would not have depopulated their herds. 
They would have not entertained from you or I if we showed up 
in their farm site and offered them $2,500 for their bull or for 
their herd sire. They would view that as an insult. So they’re 
having to deal with circumstances, in my view, that are outside 
of their purview and clearly we need to insist here that the 
federal government make appropriate allocations to the family. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. And I 
guess what I needed to add or would just like to add is to 
remind him that he is a citizen of Saskatchewan and we have to 
take that into consideration as well. 
 
I’m going to ask a question, and it’s just one question I think, in 
an absolutely totally different direction. And I have to refer to 
my notes on this one. But there’s been a number of producers 
who are asking for access to a chemical known as glyphosate. 
And it’s a similar product to Roundup, but it’s considerably 

cheaper and it has a 30-year-old patent. It has the backing of the 
science community and meets the requirements of the Pest 
Control Products Act. It has proven chemical equivalency to 
Roundup but is considerably cheaper — I think it’s around half 
price. And it is used extensively in other Commonwealth 
countries and the US. And yet PMRA, the Pest Management 
Regulatory Agency, will not approve it for use in Canada. 
 
Considering the negative impact that this is having on our 
producers who are struggling quite frankly with rising input 
costs, that input costs that are accelerating far more rapidly than 
the prices of the grain, is the minister aware that there is quite a 
number of producers who are interested in being able to access 
this product? And if so, has he spoken to the minister who is 
responsible for PMRA about this issue or has he spoken to 
PMRA himself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — You were fortunate, Madam Member, that 
you had a written question. I didn’t have a written answer, and 
so what we were doing here is deliberating about the history of 
this particular pesticide. And fortunate on this side of the 
House, Madam Member, we have people who are older in the 
Department of Agriculture than this pesticide has been around, 
and they are able to recall the history on this. 
 
And I want to thank my associate deputy minister for being able 
to provide this for me, because he has a long history here of 
course of being around this issue. And so the answer to this is 
that we have lobbied on many occasions to get the federal 
government to lift the restriction and to have the pesticide make 
its way into our province. The research of course continues to 
need to be done. That’s the question that gets asked. 
 
And we can continue to ask the question about getting this 
patent registered here in Canada; but as you rightfully point out, 
it has to meet the standard of PMRA, which is really federally 
regulated. And I’ll have my official yet one more time make 
this request, because he knows this path quite well. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Very good answer and I’m glad to hear that. 
 
We’re going to move from the TLE to the BSE now to the APF 
(agricultural policy framework) for the time that we have left so 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Exactly. 
 
A very bold and straightforward question: is the minister 
planning on signing the implementation agreement or the APF, 
and if so, when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well we meet next, Mr. Chair, to the 
member, in July and it is my view that from the discussions that 
I’ve had with my colleagues across the country that we are 
moving down that path, not only in Saskatchewan but across the 
country. 
 
My colleague in Alberta, I think, is preparing to sign the 
agricultural policy framework. My colleague from 
Newfoundland and Labrador has already signed the agreement. 
I’m told that Manitoba is in the midst of negotiating to sign the 
agreement, and for Saskatchewan, given this very important 
issue that we’re dealing with today — the BSE — where the 
chapter that is going to require some additional funding will be 
food safety. 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

And, clearly, my position has always been that we have been 
unsuccessful in moving the federal government at all in 
additional funding. And so in order for . . . And we’re currently 
today without a safety net in Canada and we’re without a safety 
net here in our province. And so in order for us to get the work 
and the money flowing into the chapters, it seems to me that 
we’ve exhausted our avenues of encouraging the federal 
government to provide additional resources. And I think the 
models are now well set. 
 
I know that as an agricultural producer, you probably got a mail 
out into your home from the federal minister — at least those of 
us that are farmers on this side of the House have received ours 
— of course which is the signal that I think what we have in 
Canada now is the consummation of the last piece of work that 
needed to be done. 
 
The review that was conducted for the federal government by 
the George Morris Centre, Larry Martin, who is in 
Saskatchewan by the way to speak to my Farm Support Review 
Committee. The reality is that the federal government has now 
gone to the bank with his wisdom and I don’t think there’s 
going to be any more changes to the farm safety net as it’s 
structured today, the business risk management APF. 
 
(20:45) 
 
And we need to see money flowing, in my view, to the other 
chapters. We need to see the federal money coming to 
Saskatchewan for renewal. We need to see money coming to 
Saskatchewan right now on the food safety piece. We need to 
see the federal share of the money coming on research and 
development, and we need to see the money coming on life 
sciences. And so without signing the agreement you don’t get 
any of that money making its way to our province. 
 
Now there are two or three things that we’re going to remain, 
for a better word, bullheaded about. We are going to continue to 
press for trade injury, that the $600 million that we got for the 
last two years, we’re going to be suggesting and lobbying with 
farm organizations and farm groups and ministers across the 
country to see an extension of the $600 million annually into 
the out years that correspond with the US farm Bill. Because 
it’s our view that that package of money that’s currently on the 
table today shouldn’t fall off, given the kinds of commitments 
that the US government has made to their producers and given 
the fact that the, that our Canadian producers are competing 
directly into the US marketplace, that that US farm Bill should 
be honoured by Canada, and accordingly the $600 million 
should continue to stay on. 
 
I’m going to be lobbying for an indexing of the APF on an 
annual basis. There should be some kind of recognition here for 
index. We should not be building a five-year program that 
doesn’t have any indexing in it at all, given the kinds of 
dilemmas that we’re going to face and what the value of the 
cost of production is going to be into the future. There should 
be those recognitions. 
 
So in a very long about way to a very short question that you 
asked me, it’s my interest here to proceed to signing the 
agreement in July when I come together with the rest of my 
colleagues. I’ve not made a definitive decision on that but 

clearly I am leaning in that direction, given that much of what 
we asked to get accomplished has now been accomplished, but 
there are two or three things that remain outstanding which I 
think we should put on an agenda for the out years, but trade 
injury being the biggest part of that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Due to time restraints I’m not going to go 
through all the detailed questions that I have on the risk 
management pillar of the APF because there are a number of 
questions. And if the minister is, you know, that close to 
signing it then he must have those answers. So I’m looking 
forward to having each of those questions answered. 
 
But in general, excuse me, are each of the different pillars, 
envelopes, or what you’d want to call them, are each of them 
requiring a separate signature? Say, the food safety program, for 
example, or that particular sector of the APF, is that requiring a 
signature? And then the science, innovation, or research, is that 
requiring a signature to agree to that? Are each of the envelopes 
requiring separate signatures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, this is a very 
good question. I wish they did, but they don’t. It’s one 
agreement and it encompasses all of the programs. And so that 
when you put your name to the bottom of the page, you get 
them all including the business risk management and the other 
four chapters. 
 
So it’s one agreement, one signature, and one bag of money that 
then breaks down into the various different sectors. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The minister is correct. It’s unfortunate that 
is what it is because we all agree that the food safety component 
is extremely important. 
 
However, it’s a consumer program so concerns, I’m sure, on 
that side of the House as well as this side of the House, is that 
it’s not downloaded on the producers to have to fund the lion’s 
share of that particular sector. 
 
Research is also extremely important and needs to be funded 
and there are concerns that are being expressed of the details of 
what’s in the environment package and who will be funding 
that. 
 
I want to question for a minute the area that the minister 
brought up concerning the 600 million. And it was with humour 
I heard him once again call it trade injury, when the federal 
government has fought viciously against it being called a trade 
injury, considered a trade injury. or thought of as a trade injury. 
They’re denying that it has anything to do with trade which of 
course then redeems them their sole responsibility of it, 
although I agree with the minister that we need to lobby for a 
specific trade injury and a trade injury payment is a federal 
government responsibility. 
 
Has he heard how this year’s 600 million will be paid out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the most recent update from my 
officials who have just come back from, by the way, from 
having a conversation around this and other pieces, is that it 
looks like Saskatchewan will get what we got last year which is 
about 183 million which is our 30 per cent which is an 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

 

important piece here when we go to have the debate or 
discussion about signing the agreement because we’re now off 
Fredericton. And if you remember Fredericton, we were at 22 
per cent. 
 
So with this new arrangement we’re now able to again see 30 
per cent or 183 million coming to Saskatchewan producers 
which is about — well it’s about 30 per cent — and that’s the 
important accomplishment that we’ve been able to achieve here. 
It looks like the money this year is going to get paid out not into 
NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) accounts like it was 
last year but it will go directly to producers this year and 
producers were asking for that to occur. 
 
There was some conversation that CFIA — not CFIA — CFA 
(Canadian Federation of Agriculture) should provide some 
guidance as to how it is that the federal government should 
make the payout. My officials tell me that CFA has run into a 
bit of a log-jam in terms of how you would make a 
recommendation and how this money should flow because 
different provinces, different farm organizations in different 
provinces would have different views. But it looks like now it 
will be paid out directly to producers and then we’ll take up the 
cause again, as we have been, to try and get that money 
extended for yet another three or four years. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could the minister tell us if it’s paid out 
directly to the producers it is going to be calculated how? It’ll 
be based on what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, it looks like it will be based on 
the eligible net sales. On the eligible net sales. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The minister brought up the Fredericton 
formula which was sadly unfair to Saskatchewan but I’m 
curious because when they used the Fredericton formula it was 
interesting that Saskatchewan and Manitoba got a separate 
program known as C-SAP (Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment 
Program) and CMAP (Canada—Manitoba Adjustment 
Program) respectively. Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The good work of Premier Doer and at 
that time Minister Romanow . . . Premier Romanow and the 
ministers of Agriculture in the two provinces, and also the 
support of various different leaders from political parties, we 
were able to accomplish two things: C-SAP I was to do with the 
transportation. This is the disappearance of the Crow rate and 
we made a strong case that the Canadian farmers, Western 
Canadian farmers were in fact at a disadvantage because of the 
disappearance of the Crow. The premiers of the day were able 
to make the case to the federal government and accordingly we 
saw a chunk of money flow to Western Canada. 
 
CSAPII (Canada-Saskatchewan Assistance Program II) was 
strictly trade. This was a recognition by the federal government. 
Again a debate that was led by this side of the House, clearly by 
the Premier and the Ag minister to paint the picture that in fact 
trade has been injurious to our Saskatchewan producers; 
convinced the federal government of that and accordingly were 
able to get a payout for our farmers. 
 
And I’m really pleased that you asked me that question because 
it really does recognize the good work that the government and 

the members of this side of the House have been able to do in 
order to get more money for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And the song just goes on and on if I were to sing it for a longer 
period because there are many other good things that have 
happened in Saskatchewan since those two in getting additional 
money for farmers. But I know that you’ll want to sing those 
praises with me too and I look forward to how we might 
harmonize on it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — You know, I must admit I always enjoy the 
jokes that the minister can tell at the end of estimates and we 
will definitely debate the different issues that he brought up at 
the end of estimates. 
 
However, our time has run out. I want to thank him for his 
answers and his patience. And I want to thank all his officials 
for coming here tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to take this 
occasion to thank my officials for being here this evening and 
thank the members of the opposition and my critic for the very 
important questions that we raised tonight as it relates to 
agriculture in the province. Thank you to members and to my 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I would move that the committee report progress on 
the Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization, 
and that we would bring in the officials and the minister from 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
introduce to you and members of the committee, five officials 
from Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation who are 
here with me today. 
 
And on my left is Ray Clayton, president; behind Ray is Garth 
Rusconi, who is the vice-president, accommodation services; 
Donald Koop, who’s the vice-president, commercial services; 
Debbie Koshman on my right, who’s the vice-president in 
corporate support services; and Paul Radigan, who’s the 
director of financial services. And I’m very appreciative and I 
want to thank them for being here with us tonight. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and your officials here this evening. I 
wonder if the minister could please give us an update as to any 
changes in directions or policies within SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) that you’ve implemented or 
. . . implemented in the past year or are looking to implement in 
this coming year? 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
respond to that question. I just want to point out that SPMC 
during this past year has reaffirmed its commitment to serving 
its clients, which also involves taking into consideration any 
and all service that is being provided. So in effect what that 
means is that we will continue, as stated in the 2002-2003 
annual report, to continue to build client relationships and 
improve the way we do business, in whatever area that there can 
be some fine tuning. 
 
And when that happens it means that you talk to the people that 
you provide a service for to determine whether or not it can be 
done better. You ask for advice from people, perhaps from 
outside the bubble looking in, with some perhaps suggestions 
and views of how business is carried out that may not have been 
considered. 
 
So to achieve some of these objectives, SPMC has in fact 
embarked on an internal review of its operations to ensure 
efficiency. The review recommendations, some of them that 
have already been made, are being considered. Once all the 
appropriate levels and approvals have been received, SPMC 
will begin the implementation. 
 
So we want to first and foremost continue to support the 
province’s economic development initiatives in any possible 
way it can. And if it means . . . And it should, I believe it should 
include our customers, our clients, people that we provide 
services for and welcome constructive criticism in order to 
improve on our delivery of vital services in the best interests of 
the people we serve and the people of this province who we 
ultimately serve. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’re always 
pleased to hear when a minister of the Crown is looking at 
putting efficiencies into government. I guess one of the 
questions that we have related to that is what efficiencies have 
you found and implemented within the department of SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the question, 
there has been . . . and I believe the member will recall there has 
been some restructuring at various levels of government. And 
as a result of the restructuring initiative of last year, the staff 
complement of SPMC was reduced by 35 FTEs (full-time 
equivalents). And 30 positions were reduced last spring through 
the elimination of 16 vacant positions and 14 persons receiving 
layoff notices. So during the year, five other positions were 
reduced through attrition as well. Overall there was a savings of 
approximately $2.1 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. That sounds very good, Mr. 
Minister. Certainly this government can utilize the $2.5 million 
with the Minister of Finance running a deficit. 
 
The 35 FTEs that you have eliminated, were those picked up 
someplace else within government because of the reshuffling 
that was done or were those completely eliminated and no one 
stepped forward to fill in a similar type position within another 
department or Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised these were net 
reductions and no transfers to any other departments. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As part of the 
new policy direction within SPMC you talk about servicing 
your customer in a more efficient manner, that customer being 
other branches within government. 
 
One of the concerns that has been raised to me by people in 
private industry that have also been servicing government 
departments in sales is the fact that SPMC has been moving into 
that area as well where they have been supplying. And let’s use 
as an example, electronics, business machines. Does SPMC 
now purchase and supply the electronics and business machines 
to all of government? Or are you tendering with the other 
departments to supply those kind of services through SPMC as 
well as having private sources tendering as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Through SPMC, Mr. Chairman, there are 
normal tendering policies that apply, that are applicable, and 
that are followed by SPMC. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I guess my question is really, in 
servicing the other departments of government and the Crowns, 
and I’m not sure whether you service the Crowns or not, that 
could be part of your answer, are you competing with private 
industry for supplying services to the departments or Crowns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, and I believe as I outlined earlier, 
does in fact supply some services to both the Crowns and to 
departments. 
 
As a Crown corporation in the purchase of a variety of office 
supplies that is warehoused, departments and Crowns have the 
option of either ordering at competitive prices from SPMC or in 
fact they can go out and order from whomever they wish. And 
once again, the departments rely on their own competitive 
nature of the locations that they may wish to be doing business 
with. 
 
But there is a centralized warehousing for office equipment and 
office supplies that departments and/or Crowns may avail 
themselves of if they so choose. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that in 
visiting with various private sector suppliers of office 
equipment, etc., at let’s say the chamber of commerce trade 
shows, they have raised complaints with me that SPMC is 
entering into competition in areas that SPMC had not 
previously been in supplying services to departments and 
Crowns. 
 
Now I don’t know if that’s the case or not but that’s certainly 
the message that I’ve been receiving at these trade shows. And 
they’re wondering why SPMC is doing that and felt that it was 
a threat to their businesses. That they had previously had a good 
relationship with the government in supplying those services. 
 
It was still a competitive nature because it was more than one 
supplier. It wasn’t a monopoly that was providing the service. 
There was still competition out there and that they were 
concerned that SPMC was moving in a new direction to 
establish a more competitive nature with those businesses and 
that SPMC somehow had an unfair advantage in supplying 
those services to the various departments of government. 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

 

So is SPMC moving into new areas that way, or is it just a 
perception that these businesses have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the member’s last 
statement is correct, that SPMC does not have any intention of 
entering into any competitive nature of business with the private 
sector. And the comments that perhaps the member has 
received from folks that are concerned about, whether real or 
perceived, we’d be very happy to have those people come to us 
and discuss the nature of their concerns because it is not the 
intention of SPMC to encroach upon the private sector and 
enter into competition with them. That’s not the intent. 
 
The intent of SPMC is to provide services for departments and 
Crowns and carry on the business of the day through proper 
tendering processes and not get into the business of competition 
with the private sector. And again, as I mentioned, if there are 
any public sector groups or businesses that feel this is 
happening, I would very much appreciate and I know that the 
officials at SPMC would appreciate and would be willing to 
discuss the nature of those concerns. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And 
when those concerns are raised, I will certainly pass them on 
and suggest that they contact you or the department for further 
information and for clarification and, perhaps and hopefully, for 
a resolution to their concerns. 
 
Along the same line of purchases, I’m interested in the CVA 
(Central Vehicle Agency) program and how it’s working and 
how it does work. 
 
How many vehicles would the government have currently in 
their CVA program and how does that compare with previous 
years? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I have the figures for the 
year ending March 2003. For the previous year, we’ll see . . . 
I’ll get that information for you. But as of March 31, 2003 there 
was a Central Vehicle Agency fleet of 4,547 vehicles. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. How 
long do these vehicles normally stay within the fleet? Is there an 
age limit as far as number of years, or is it limited by the 
number of kilometres that the vehicle is driven? And does the 
repair cost to any particular individual vehicle play a role in the 
time it spends in the fleet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the extent or the life 
expectation if you wish, if I can use that term, is a combination 
of both age and kilometres. As the vehicles get older there is 
less of a cost to a department for capital costs and therefore if 
the vehicles — and they are well maintained — if the 
department has indicated to them that the general guideline is 
an eight-year-old vehicle or 160,000 kilometres . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s one of the good ones. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Those are the good ones. However if the 
vehicles are maintained — and they are — they are well looked 
after and serviced. And as I mentioned, again, if the department 

. . . The department is notified that it’s reached its life 
expectancy, if you would, but there’s a reduced cost to the 
department. So if the vehicle is still in good shape, then it’s 
more economical for departments to say, well look we’re quite 
happy with this vehicle; it’s eight years old, has 150 or 160,000 
kilometres, and we’ll continue to use it. 
 
So there’s no hard and fast rule as long as a department wishes 
to maintain vehicles that they have from the Central Vehicle 
Agency. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, I think 
my local ag rep has one of those. He seems to have had that 
same vehicle for a long time but he’s happy with it, so. 
 
The other question, Mr. Minister, is if there’s a vehicle which is 
having an abnormally high rate of repair is it replaced sooner 
than the eight-year, 160,000 click limit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, yes. If there’s a vehicle that 
. . . And I don’t know whether you’d use the term, in that case, 
a lemon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, we’re on the 
same wavelength then, then yes. If it’s found to be more 
economical to perhaps dispose of that vehicle then by all means 
then it would be more economical for the department involved 
as well because those repairs are charged back. So yes, it would 
use some common sense and reason to determine whether or 
not you continue repairing a vehicle or retire it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When it 
comes to the process of purchasing new vehicles for CVA, how 
many dealerships would the government have contracts with or 
do you have one dealership with each type of . . . each 
manufacturer? So you’d have one GM (General Motors) dealer, 
one Chrysler dealer, one Ford dealer, or are there multiple 
dealers within the same manufacturer that have contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the vehicle purchasing 
process done through tender with some — not necessarily 
insistence — but some expectations that the vehicles would be 
supplied through local dealers, the tenders would go out to all 
the car manufacturers, the vehicle manufacturers, with the 
various specifications for mid-size vehicles, for trucks, or larger 
model vehicles. And those tenders, or the submission for the 
bids, would be received by each of those manufacturers; and 
then thereby, if the mid-size tenders from GM for example, 
were less than Chrysler, then that’s how the tender would be 
accepted and so on. 
 
It’s fairly straightforward and a way that affords each of the car 
manufacturers through its local dealers to have an opportunity 
to supply Central Vehicle Agency with the variety of type of 
vehicles that are required to meet the needs of departments — 
whether it be in Agriculture, whether it be in Power, or whether 
it be for Legislative Assembly. So it’s a wide open tendering 
process which is about as fair as you can get it, and everybody 
has the opportunity to compete against the different range of 
vehicles that SPMC . . . or Central Vehicle Agency would 
require. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So the government would put out a set 
of requirements to the manufacturers? Not through the local 
dealers but you would go directly to, let’s say, GM or Ford or 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

Chrysler or whoever? They would send back their tender and 
you would get the supply of vehicles from whatever company 
through the local dealership then. I notice your official nodding 
his head so I gather I’ve got that correct. 
 
Do the other manufacturers — the Asian manufacturers, as well 
as the European manufacturers — also participate in this or is 
this mainly a North American manufacturer that . . . the North 
American manufacturers that participate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the opportunity is given, 
it’s open to all the vehicle manufacturers. There are some that 
choose not to participate for whatever reason. And if in fact 
there was a manufacturer that felt they were not being given the 
opportunity, I’m sure we would hear about it, because there is 
quite a market and the competition in that market would trigger 
a concern not unlike, as a member mentioned earlier, if there 
was a business that felt they were not being treated properly by 
a government agency, they would certainly want someone to 
know about it. 
 
So in answer to that question — and I’m sorry I can’t be more 
specific on the dealerships or the manufacturers that you might 
be alluding to or referring to — nobody would be excluded 
from the opportunity to tender, to respond to a tender. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well the reason I asked the question, 
Mr. Minister, is that most of the government vehicles that I’ve 
seen have been from the three big North American 
manufacturers and I can’t think of another vehicle that would 
have come from another manufacturer. Now there may have 
been some, but I’m not, I’m just not familiar with it. That’s why 
I was asking. 
 
How much of a turnover would you have on an average year? 
How many new vehicles would you purchase? And I wonder if 
you could break that down just a little bit into automobiles, 
trucks, and large vehicles such as, you know, something more 
than a 1-ton truck? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, and with all due respect to 
the member, those details — specific details — we don’t have 
available but we can get them to you within 48 hours, within 48 
to 72 hours. And I will make that commitment. 
 
We may have some figures here with respect to numbers of 
vehicles purchased last year, but I believe you probably want a 
little broader . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. To make 
sure that it’s accurate I would very much appreciate and beg 
your indulgence in allowing us to supply you with that 
information over the next couple of days. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, that would be fine, Mr. Minister. 
I’m not sure if SPMC would play a role in this or whether this 
is done by each department, but I’m wondering about what the 
eligibility is to have access to a CVA vehicle? Does SPMC play 
a role in that in determining who within government has access 
to the CVA vehicles? And who would have a CVA vehicle 
assigned to them on a regular basis rather than on a permanent 
basis? As it was explained to me once no one is a permanent 
employee, but we have regular employees. So people who 
would normally have access to a CVA vehicle on an ongoing 
basis. 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that’s largely up to the 
departments to determine who would have access to those 
vehicles, not unlike the Legislative Assembly determines the 
eligibility for vehicles. 
 
So it’s the departments that would determine what types of 
vehicles that would be appropriate for the responsibility of the 
various levels of staff personnel carrying out a variety of 
responsibilities within that department. So it would be up to the 
individual departments. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. From your 
experience or the experience of your officials, would there seem 
to be a reasonably common eligibility requirement or a common 
practice within the various departments of government? Or is 
there quite a variance, would seemingly be quite a variance, 
within how the departments operate their CVA vehicles? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, there is . . . 
And for reasons that different departments have different needs, 
it would vary — the determination and economics — with 
respect to the people in departments that would require the 
usage of vehicles for the purpose of carrying out their 
responsibilities. 
 
And in the case of pool vehicles as well, where there are a 
number of employees or a number of staff that may on different 
occasions, or from time to time require vehicles to carry out 
business on behalf of the department or an agency, those 
vehicles would be available on a needs basis. 
 
And it’s difficult to say specifically that there’s across the board 
determination of who would have it. It’s, once again as I 
mentioned, economics and need — primarily need. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I 
understand that because it’s not . . . You can’t speak for every 
department. There is a variance there. 
 
What happens within SPMC? How was the determination made 
as to who has a vehicle assigned to them individually on a 
long-term basis as opposed to someone who has to go to the 
pool to access a vehicle for use for a particular day? How was 
that determination made? For either a person who might have a 
vehicle assigned on a long-term basis or an individual who may 
access a vehicle occasionally, are they allowed to use their own 
personal vehicles? Who makes that determination? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, once again SPMC, no 
different than other departments, based on economics and need. 
And preferably if an employee is travelling 30, 50 kilometres 
and beyond on an ongoing basis or a need to travel, it would be 
preferable to have a CVA, to use a CVA vehicle because it’s 
more economical. 
 
Throughout the province SPMC has 77 vehicles as of March 31 
of this year, and those vehicles that are assigned, are assigned to 
people who on a daily basis are responsible or involved in 
providing services to clients or customers on an ongoing . . . on 
a daily basis. They would be the ones that would have access to 
those permanently assigned vehicles. 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

 

And, once again, it’s based on economics and the need. The use 
of private vehicles, because it is a little more expensive is not 
the usual, is not the usual case. Preferably, if there’s CVA 
vehicles available then those are to be used before a private 
vehicle. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So the criteria then for access within 
SPMC to an assignment of a vehicle to an individual is 
somewheres between 30 to 50 kilometres a day of travel? Is that 
the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — No, I apologize. I think I probably 
confused the member. That would be for individual trips, like if 
just the one trip for 30 to 50 kilometres, you know, on one 
occasion. Still, if there was a CVA vehicle available, it would 
be preferable to use it. 
 
But once in a while, if it was 20 kilometres, 30 kilometres or 
less, and there was a need to travel that short distance, then 
there would be no grave objections for an employee to use their 
own vehicle. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — What is the criteria then, Mr. Minister, 
for the assignment of a vehicle to an individual on a long-term 
basis? 
 
An individual works in one of the offices some place and would 
have a vehicle assigned to them permanently — but let’s use the 
word permanently within a very advised condition — so that 
they would understand it as being at their disposal at all times 
for work purposes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, in response to that question, 
once again it’s based on program needs primarily. And the 
manager from any operational unit may apply for permanent 
status of a vehicle for an employee that’s engaged in ongoing 
program delivery. 
 
And I apologize that I can’t recite hard and fast rules because 
there aren’t those hard and fast rules to say well, we’re just 
going to assign you this vehicle under these terms and 
conditions. It would be based on the performance and the needs 
related to any specific program that a senior manager might see 
fit to apply for a permanent vehicle for an employee who on an 
ongoing basis, on a daily basis is involved in providing some 
service delivery to customers and a need for that vehicle to be at 
his or her disposal. 
 
So it’s again, not hard and fast rules, although having said there 
were no hard and fast rules for a determination there are still 
some guidelines with respect to vehicle usage and an 
appreciation that the . . . the economy of it as well. There’s a 
capital cost involved plus the cost for mileage. There’s a charge 
for the mileage on that vehicle and its use which is charged 
back to the department. 
 
So again it’s like being cautious with respect to costs and 
program delivery and in administration of a department, and 
being responsible for those costs and being able to answer for 
them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
assume when you use the term performance, you mean duties 

rather than how well the person performs or doesn’t perform 
within their duty. I see the minister is agreeing that it’s related 
to duties. 
 
The cost that SPMC may charge a department for the use of a 
CVA vehicle, how does that compare with the cost that the 
individual, if they utilized their own vehicle, would charge the 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the cost to departments will 
be dependent upon the size of the vehicle compared to the 
responsibilities that those vehicles are required for. 
 
Now I’m trying to think what the question was with respect to 
— what do you charge departments versus individuals? 
 
Well as you well know, Public Service Commission rates for 
individuals for private vehicles is considerably higher than what 
CVA would charge the departments for use of a CVA. And 
again, the charge would vary. There’s no, there’s no flat rate 
because it depends on whether it’s a truck, whether it’s a 
subcompact, whether it’s midsize, and so on. But one thing, the 
differentiation here is the private, private vehicle rate to pay an 
employee for use of his or her vehicle is considerably higher 
than it would be for using a CVA. And that’s why employees 
are encouraged to use CVA if they’re going to travel any 
distance, kilometres. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll 
move on to a different area but still dealing with vehicles. This 
time aircraft. 
 
I notice in the annual report that your net values for aircraft in 
2002 were 17 million, up from 11 million in 2001. What was 
the reasons for that change? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the difference that the 
member is asking about is the purchase of an air ambulance — 
King Air 200 — which was approximately $6 million. And that 
was an aircraft for air ambulance, and that would make up the 
difference from 11 to $17 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Did the 
department acquire access to any other aircraft besides the new 
air ambulance? Were there other new aircraft in the fleet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, yes, there was a King Air 200 
leased as well for executive air services, and that aircraft is in 
service and has been. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the aircraft 
owned by SPMC, how do you determine how long an aircraft 
would stay in the fleet? Is it based on the number of hours that 
the aircraft flies, is it based on the number of rotations, or is it 
based on the maintenance costs or advisories from air 
worthiness as related to that aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, and I’m sure the member 
will appreciate very much that one of the — and I think you 
alluded to it when you said something about the air safety 
record or whatever then — yes, that’s a very . . . that’s a major 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

component. The others, the maintenance and reliability as well. 
And as you will appreciate, executive air has excellent 
maintenance services. 
 
But all that being taken into account, after an excessive number 
of hours and excessive number of years, these factors play a 
major role in determining whether or not an aircraft should 
continue to provide the services, safe services for those that 
have access to it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Does the department have any aircraft, 
and if so what makes and models that would be nearing the end 
of their life expectancy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, we do have an aircraft, a 
Cheyenne aircraft, that has a number of years of service. 
However that aircraft has been fully refurbished; some of the 
avionics from the Cheyenne that was retired and that were still 
in very good condition have been used as well to ensure that the 
Cheyenne that’s still being used for fewer people and perhaps 
for shorter trips is still maintained in an excellent and safe 
condition. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to take 
a look at . . . One other question in that. Does SPMC have any 
involvement with the fleet of aircraft that are flown by SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) and 
their water bombers? Is SPMC involved with those at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the only involvement that 
SPMC has is assisting in the purchase of insurance for those 
aircraft. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
the minister could please give the House any information that 
you would have related to any new properties that SPMC may 
have come into, have acquired. And I’m thinking of buildings 
or land. 
 
I notice that you have an additional construction and capital 
purchase commitments of $13 million this year. I wonder, in the 
past year, what new properties you may have acquired for 
SPMC. And are you looking at new properties? I would 
understand that you wouldn’t want to specifically say you’re 
going to go and buy the old Bay building when there may be 
competition for it or something, but are you looking at 
acquiring any new properties in the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the monies that the 
member refers to, it was not necessarily for new acquisitions 
but for upgrading and updating facilities that are currently 
owned. Now we also have a number of lease/purchase 
arrangements that are in existence that have not yet come to 
fruition as far as having the first option to purchase, but there’s 
nothing in the last year that has been acquired under the 
question raised by the member. 
 
So the monies are there for upgrading and restructuring, if you 
wish, of current facilities that are already owned by SPMC. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. On page 
no. 16 of the annual report it lists investing activities. It shows 
in 2001 that there was investment activity in the purchase of 

real estate of $12.911 million. In 2002 it shows under purchases 
of real estate, 11.064 million. So did the department purchase 
an additional $11 million worth of properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the $11 
million acquisitions were . . . entailed numerous purchases of 
properties — a variety, not just any one purchase. 
 
And if I could, Mr. Chair, I beg the indulgence of the member 
once again to allow us the opportunity to detail specifically the 
costs incurred for the $11 million that the member’s referred to. 
And that can be done within the next couple of days if he’ll bear 
with us to supply you that exact detail in response to your 
question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, that would be acceptable, Mr. 
Minister, if you can provide us with a list of those. 
 
One of the areas that I’m interested in as far as capital 
reconstruction is concerned is the Legislative Building itself. I 
know we’ve had a $20 million project here to renew the 
Legislative Building but I believe that there’s been additional 
work done besides that. Looking at, I believe, it’s the elevator 
system coming in here near the front entrance, has that 
reconstruction, that renewal, does it take that elevator up to the 
fourth floor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I’m told that there’s no 
indication that there’s any work done to extend the elevator 
services to the fourth floor at this time. So that’s not anywhere 
in the mill, at least currently. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So there is no 
plans from SPMC then to do any work in upgrading the fourth 
floor at all in the coming budgetary year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, and the member will know, 
that there have been plans put forward — proposals, 
suggestions, and ideas, and some good ones — but there’s not 
been the financing put in place to proceed with that type of 
construction. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the 
same kind of issue of property, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
could tell us what kind of space SPMC has either owned or 
leased in the city of Prince Albert? 
 
(22:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I’m told that in Prince Albert 
we own the land titles building, the highways building and 
Saskatchewan Environment research management building, as 
well as lease space in the McIntosh Mall and the Federal 
Building. So those are the main ones. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Which ones 
were leased? I’m interested in the leased properties that you 
may have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, we have leased facilities in 
the McIntosh Mall, in the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) Academic Centre and we 
have some leased space in the Federal Building as well for 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

 

offices. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are those 
long-term leases? And are the leases, do they have a fixed-term 
contract involved in them that the department has to maintain 
the contract for a certain period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, we have a long-term lease 
in the McIntosh Mall; then within the Federal Building about a 
one-year lease; and in the Academic Centre — that’s one of the 
centres or one of the facilities that we have a lease/purchase 
arrangement — and that is for approximately 10 years. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The McIntosh centre, that particular 
lease, is there a fixed term to that that you have to maintain that 
lease for, or can it be rescinded with a particular amount of 
notice? And what would that notice be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it is in fact a long-term 
lease that cannot be rescinded. It’s been an arrangement since 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) was involved and 
it’s an ongoing long-term lease. And there are people moving in 
and out all the time, and any vacancies are . . . People are 
relocated as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
departments that are currently housed in P.A. (Prince Albert), 
are any of those particular departments requesting an expansion 
of their leases, the properties that they have available? Are any 
of them confined to too small a space and they’re asking for 
more space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Basically, Mr. Chair, there’s been nothing 
significant requested for, in response to your question. There’s 
been no significant requests for extended spaces; none at this 
point in time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — When we first started our estimates, Mr. 
Minister, you talked about the mandate of SPMC to be more 
efficient. Has SPMC looked at the operations of SPMC in 
Prince Albert? Are there any efficiencies to be gained within the 
current structure that you have there or is the department 
operating as efficiently as is reasonably possible within the city 
of Prince Albert, the properties that you have there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the SPMC is always 
conscientious about ensuring that spaces occupied by 
departments are economical and any spaces that are leased are 
adequately filled by tenants. So the efficiencies are always 
being looked at. And in trying to ensure that any movement that 
takes place is backfilled — and if necessary to backfill some of 
the spaces, that it’s done perhaps more economically, moving 
out of some facilities that may cost more than others that 
become available, as, you know, as things unfold — perhaps 
movements take place. 
 
So there’s a constant attempt to make sure that those kinds of 
efficiencies and economics play a role in the providing of space 
by Saskatchewan Property Management. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
within SPMC’s budget is SPMC looking to provide or to 
finance a new building downtown in Prince Albert? 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I understand they’re 
discussing a building that’s already been named, but SPMC is 
not involved in any new properties and any new buildings. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So you’re 
saying that the named building, which I believe has yet to be 
built, the forestry centre — not the forestry research centre but 
the forestry centre, no research allowed — SPMC is in no way, 
shape, or form involved in that, either the ownership, the 
construction, or the leasing of such a building if it ever should 
be built? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I guess the short answer, Mr. Chair, I’m 
told, is no. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s a good 
answer. It’s not often I agree with a no answer, but this was a 
good answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m interested in some of the properties that are in 
Regina. How much space does SPMC have, either both owned 
and leased, and if you can break it down into both categories, in 
the city of Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, once again I’m going to beg the 
indulgence of the member. Given the properties that I’m sure 
the member is aware in existence throughout the city in a 
variety of locations, and for my part wanting to be as accurate 
as possible to respond to his question, both leased and/or owned 
facilities, I would request if we’re able to provide that 
information once again within 48 to 72 hours. I’d very much 
appreciate that and I’ll make a commitment that that happens. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. That 
would be appreciated if you could. And I’m interested if the 
minister could include in that information what percentage of 
the space owned . . . let me back that up, operated by SPMC in 
Saskatchewan is actually leased space versus how much is 
owned, Mr. Minister. And if you could provide the same 
numbers in Regina, owned versus leased as well. 
 
And further to that, if you could indicate how much of the 
leased office space right now in Regina is vacant, that currently 
either owned or leased by SPMC does not have a tenant in it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll be pleased to supply 
that information. And again there could be quite a significant 
number of properties that need to be looked at specifically, both 
province-wide and from the city of Regina, if I understand 
correctly. So we will have that information, as I mentioned, 
within the next couple of days. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We go on to 
another one of SPMC’s many properties and that is dealing with 
the sound stage here in Regina. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
could tell us, if you would know — and perhaps your 
department would not be aware of this — but how many 
productions are currently using the sound stage for their 
projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to and with all 
due respect to the question, SaskFILM manages the 
programming and the programs that are involved at the sound 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

stage and would be better answered by the member for that 
particular area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess 
a straightforward question. I believe that the sound stage is 
owned by SPMC. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Another short answer, Mr. Chairman. Yes, 
it is. 
 
(22:15) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When it came 
to developing and building the sound stage, I’m told that the 
department did not put in place or did not do a feasibility study 
or a business plan on the sound stage, Mr. Minister. 
 
I wonder if you could indicate what were the reasons then for 
the construction of the sound stage if there was no business plan 
or feasibility study in place to determine the viability of that 
sound stage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there was in fact a 
feasibility and a viability study carried out with the Regina 
Regional Economic Development Authority. They 
commissioned the feasibility study that was in fact . . . in order 
to evaluate the potential for the development of a film and video 
production facility in Regina. 
 
So based on those results, the Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority submitted proposals to the Government 
of Saskatchewan and to the Government of Canada for the 
development of this more comprehensive study. So that’s how 
this all came about. So there were studies that were in fact 
carried out. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
assume that as part of the proposal presented to you by the 
regional economic development that they would have presented 
those reports and those studies as well. Could you please table 
those documents for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that the member 
will appreciate the fact, the confidentiality of these reports 
supplied in confidence by a third party and provided under 
those circumstances. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well again, Mr. Minister, you could 
have used one of your one-word answers. In that case, no, 
would have sufficed, but you would not supply it. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is one of the arguments that this government 
has presented too often when it comes to certain items such as 
the sound stage, hiding behind a third party requirement when 
the provincial government is putting up a large share of the cash 
to do this development in an area that, up until now, has seen 
very limited success. 
 
And I think that protection of the taxpayers’ money would be 
better served if the government was to provide those kind of 
evaluations to the public of Saskatchewan to determine whether 
or not the projects that, in this case SPMC is being involved 
with, have any viability and whether the success is there that the 

plan’s anticipated. 
 
It’s certainly easy to say that somebody else did the plan and we 
accepted it but we can’t tell you what it is. I don’t think that’s 
acceptable, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure that the voters of 
Saskatchewan will judge accordingly. 
 
Mr. Minister, on another issue, again for spending by SPMC, 
you bought 200,000 drink coasters — 200,000 drink coasters. 
And I’m not sure if the members on the other side can repeat 
that. But, Mr. Minister, what reasons — I understand that it was 
part of an anti-gambling program — but what methods did you 
use to determine that this was an appropriate expenditure and 
that anyone who sat their beer on a coaster actually looked to 
see what it said on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the SPMC under those 
circumstances provided the kind of service that we are expected 
to provide for departments when they ask for a particular type 
of specific items that they would like to have for promotional 
purposes. 
 
SPMC receives the request for specific items. They in turn put 
out tenders to the suppliers of such items and have those 
suppliers reply accordingly and issue the purchase of those 
items to the best bidder. And in turn the items are turned back 
to the department that’s requested that specific item without any 
review of what’s written on it or the purpose of it. It’s not for 
SPMC to question the department, the reasons, or the messages 
that are being sent on any particular items. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, which department then 
ordered these and did they pay for them and if so what was the 
amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, once again I beg the 
member’s indulgence in allowing us to determine specifically 
the costs, the department, and whatever other details may be . . . 
the member may feel he’d require in response to that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, after what can only 
be considered a great deal of progress I would move that the 
committee rise and report that progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:23. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1371 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1371 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1378 
 General Revenue Fund — Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — Vote 53 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1385 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1385 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1379 
 


