















































Hansard: June 06, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1479 
 June 6, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
speak about Highway No. 49 and its deplorable state. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding areas. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Lintlaw and 
Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
morning on behalf of citizens of the Moose Jaw area who are 
concerned about the lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

The signatures on this petition again this morning, Mr. Speaker, 
are from the city of Moose Jaw, and I’m pleased to present on 
their behalf. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
disgraceful condition of Highway No. 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg, St. Denis, Climax, Glenbain, 
Swift Current, Assiniboia, Limerick, and Regina, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Moose Jaw 
area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of Swift Current residents who have a 
constructive alternative for the government’s plan to put a used 
CT (computerized tomography) scanner into the regional 
hospital there. 
 
The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new scanner 
for the Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise again in the Assembly with a petition from citizens who are 
deeply concerned about the condition of Highway 43. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Vanguard and Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the fairness of Crown leases. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the crop insurance premiums. 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the new cellular telephone tower at 
Coleville; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 13, 18, 36, 41, 114, no. 120, and 124. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 58 ask government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the current funding for 
the methadone program; who administers this program; 
what locations is methadone available under this program; 
what are the criteria for receiving methadone under the 
program; what is the cost to the person receiving 
methadone under this program; and what portion of the cost 
is paid for by the Department of Health and/or other 
government departments? 
 

Ms. Draude: — To the Minister of Learning, I give notice I 
shall on day no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 

For the year 2002 what is the total amount of money 
collected in Saskatchewan through the education portion of 
property tax; of this, how much was collected for each of 
the commercial property, agricultural property, and 
residential property; are there any other classifications of 
property for taxation purposes; if so, how much is collected 
on each of these classifications; are rental properties such 
as apartment buildings classified as residential or 
commercial property; if such properties are classified as 
residential properties, how much of the total education tax 
collected on residential properties is collected on these 
types of rental properties and how much is collected from 
home owners living in their own homes; what are the 
projections for each of these classifications, commercial, 
agricultural, residential, and others as to how they are to be 
collected in 2003? 
 

I have the same question for the Minister of Government 
Relations and the Minister of Finance. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
this Assembly, 16 grade 10 to 12 students from the school in 
Maryfield. They’re accompanied today by their teacher, Dave 
Bircher, and bus driver, Harold Friesen. 
 
I know the students and everyone in the Maryfield area are 
certainly pleased to see construction moving forward now on 
Highway 48. 
 
And I would look forward to meeting with the students a little 
later on for photos and taking a moment just to answer some 
questions if they haven’t had them answered on the floor of the 
Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite the members of the Assembly to welcome 
the students from Maryfield today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery 
today I’d like to introduce Dr. Don King, who was the Chair of 
the Saskatchewan Provincial Advisory Committee on Older 
Persons. He has presented to me today the framework on an 
action plan for older persons. He’s accompanied by Laurie 
Weiman, who is from the Department of Health. And I’d like 
all members to welcome them here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the Minister of Health in welcoming Dr. King 
to the Assembly today and to acknowledge and thank him for 
all the work that he’s done in preparing this very important 
report. I’d ask all members to join in again welcoming Dr. 
King. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to welcome a group of grade 4 students from St. 
Josaphat School in my constituency. They are sitting in the 
gallery opposite. I’m looking forward to meeting with them a 
little later today after they’ve had a chance to tour and go to the 
legislature. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Pack 
and Ms. Moldovan. And I’m looking forward to talking with 
them a little later. 
 
And I’d like to ask you and all members to please welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly and ask you to welcome a long-time 
friend and this is — you make acquaintances and create bonds 
of association with people during your lifetime — as a former 
colleague with Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, a 
former mayor of the great city of Melville, my good friend, Jim 
Walters, who’s seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

 

I’d ask all members to please welcome him to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure at this time to 
welcome a group of parliamentarians from the United Kingdom 
who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. These parliamentarians 
are doing a tour across Canada. They started in British 
Columbia, have come to Saskatchewan, and they’re going to 
stop in at Winnipeg, and then on their way to Ottawa. And I 
would ask them to rise as I introduce them. 
 
They are led by the Rt. Hon. Lord Morris of Aberavon, who is 
the leader of the delegation and has had 44 years of service in 
the House of Commons before he became a peer. Also in the 
group is Baroness Hooper, who is a Member of the European 
Parliament, for the area, I believe, of Liverpool. The Lord 
Bhatia is a Member of the House of Lords, became a peer in 
2001; he is an independent member, or member of a minor 
party, and given the title, cross-bencher. Also we have as a 
guest is the member for Motherwell and Wishaw of Scotland, 
Mr. Frank Roy. And the member for Derby North, Mr. Robert 
Laxton. 
 
They are accompanied today by two Ottawa staff people, staff 
of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Ms. Carol 
Chafe and Karen Thriepland. Also seated with them is Monique 
Lovatt from the Clerk’s office. 
 
I would ask all members to extend a warm welcome to our 
special guests from the United Kingdom. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to, I’m sure on 
behalf of all members in the government caucus, to also 
welcome our visitors from Great Britain, the parliamentary 
visitors that we have with us today. And we sincerely hope that 
they enjoy their time in Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand from, Mr. Speaker, your introduction, that they 
began their tour in Canada in British Columbia, now 
Saskatchewan, then to Winnipeg, and then to Ottawa. Well 
clearly you will be . . . have seen the best now that you’ve been 
to Saskatchewan. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of 
the official opposition, I would also like to welcome the British 
parliamentarians to our Assembly here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I had the opportunity a little over a year ago of visiting 
Westminster; it was very hospitably welcome by members from 
both sides of the House. We hope you are receiving that same 
warm welcome here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We understand that you lost your luggage but it’s been found. 
We’re glad that Canadians have been able to work this out on 
your behalf. 
 
Welcome here and enjoy your stay in Saskatchewan. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, someone I’ve known throughout my career on 
city council and now into my duties as an MLA. 
 
Seated in the west gallery is Mr. Dale Wiesbrot. Dale is also the 
son-in-law of the Betteridge family. And Dorothy Betteridge 
and her family, I was privileged to be on their farm to celebrate 
the Century Family Farm Award. 
 
So it’s indeed a pleasure for me to introduce to all of you a very 
strong community activist and hard worker, Mr. Dale Wiesbrot. 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

D-Day Anniversary 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, 59 years ago today the great push 
to liberate northwestern Europe and put an end to the Nazi 
regime began on the beaches off the Normandy coast of France. 
The effort was many years in planning and was the turning 
point in the defeat of the Germans and the end of World War II. 
 
As morning broke on June 6, 1944, 9 battleships, 23 cruisers, 
104 destroyers, 71 large landing craft of various descriptions, as 
well as troop transport, minesweepers, and merchantmen, 
nearly 5,000 ships of every type, the largest armada ever 
assembled stood off the Normandy coast ready to begin the 
final assault. Allied air forces carrying three airborne divisions 
into battle protected the forces that crossed the English 
Channel. 
 
Naval bombardment began at 5:50 that morning, detonating 
large minefields along the shoreline and destroying a number of 
the enemy’s defensive positions. In the hours following the 
bombardment, more than 100,000 fighting men swept ashore to 
begin the largest epic assaults in history. President Franklin D. 
Roosevelt described it as a mighty endeavour to preserve our 
civilization to set free a suffering humanity. 
 
As a daughter of a veteran, my childhood years were spent in 
the company of people I consider heroes. Some of those men 
were on Normandy beach on June 6. People like my dad came a 
few weeks later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have our freedom today because of the 
sacrifices of the Allied armed forces who went into battle 
knowing that casualties would be high. Many near disasters 
were averted by the courage of unsung sailors, solders, and air 
force men. The only way we can repay our debt to these 
individuals is to strive to maintain the continued freedom of our 
country. 
 
I ask this Assembly to join me in remembering and thanking 
these individuals for their sacrifices which ensured our freedom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today is the 59th anniversary of D-Day, the longest day, and 
the day when Allied troops hit the beaches of Normandy to 
begin the final push towards the liberation of Europe and the 
end of World War II. 
 
One of those beaches was Juno, the responsibility of Canadian 
troops, including the Regina Rifles. Fourteen thousand 
Canadian soldiers landed on that day; 340 died and 574 were 
injured. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, three separate but connected events are taking 
place today to remember that day and I want to mention quickly 
each one. 
 
First, today in Yorkton I have the opportunity, as I have done 
on several years, to join the veterans and friends of veterans on 
this annual Decoration Day service. We will gather at the 
Fairview school and march to the city cemetery for a brief 
ceremony of remembrance, not just for D-Day soldiers but for 
all who have and still serve in the preservation of peace and 
order around the world. 
 
This ceremony will also be taking place in other parts of our 
country. As we speak, on this same Juno Beach, halfway across 
the world, the Juno Beach Centre is being dedicated by the 
Prime Minister and many of the veterans who particularly as 
children brought honour to Canada and freedom to Europe. Mr. 
Speaker, many individuals, groups, governments, and 
businesses contributed to this lasting memorial. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, while the memorial in the town of 
Courseulles-sur-Mer is taking place, a simultaneous ceremony 
took place downtown at the Cornwall Centre, hosted by the 
Cadillac Fairview, one of the memorial’s sponsors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a proud but sober day and sombre day in 
our history, and I know that all members of the Assembly want 
to join me in honouring all of those who fought and the many 
men and women who lost their lives on this important date. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Juno Beach Centre 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
just a short while ago the Leader of the Opposition and a few 
members of this Assembly had the privilege of attending the 
ceremonies at the Cornwall Centre here in Regina, 
commemorating the official opening of the Juno Beach Centre 
in Normandy, France. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have indicated, today marks the 
59th anniversary of D-Day and we must never forget the 
important role our country played in this strategic manoeuvre of 
World War II. 
 
It’s been a long time in coming, Mr. Speaker, but for nearly 
1,000 men and women, or men that were killed or injured that 

stormy day 59 years ago on the beaches of Normandy, the Juno 
Beach Centre will serve as a national tribute to their strength, 
their courage, and their ultimate sacrifice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Juno Beach Centre officially opens to the 
world, we must remember the efforts of Mr. Garth Webb, 
president of the Juno Beach Association. Mr. Webb 
campaigned tirelessly on behalf of his organization to secure 
funding for the memorial and to raise awareness of the 
important role the Canadian army, navy, and air force has 
played. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this $8 million memorial would not have been 
possible without funding from all sectors — private, public, 
national, and international. The French and Canadian 
governments contributed more than $2 million, while the 
provinces of Ontario and BC (British Columbia) each 
contributed 1 million. Canadian Wal-Mart stores also raised 
more than $2 million toward the building of this national 
memorial and information centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan also contributed to the building of 
the Juno Beach Centre, although it was only after public outcry 
over an initial request that had been turned down. It’s a small 
price to pay for victory, Mr. Speaker, and we owe those who 
fought for our freedom so much more. 
 
I ask all members of the House to recognize the official opening 
of the Canadian Juno Beach Centre in France. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Job Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next Friday is Friday, 
June 13, but today is the 13th consecutive month on which we 
can happily report to the Assembly that once again jobs in 
Saskatchewan are up. Jobs up, Mr. Speaker. Doom and gloom 
are on the way down. 
 
In May, say our good friends at StatsCanada, 7,600 more people 
were working than a year ago, and there were more than 800 
people employed than the previous month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More jobs, Mr. Speaker, in a number of sectors — 
manufacturing, transportation, finance, and service. Overall, 
non-agricultural jobs are up by over 10,000 from a year ago. 
 
Our unemployment rate is the second lowest in the country. 
Regina’s was the second lowest among Canadian cities; 
Saskatoon, fourth. 
 
And here you are. The Leader of the Opposition says that kids 
cannot be employed in our province — 1,700 more of them 
than a year ago are working today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some more good news, along with the rain, to take 
us into a fine summer’s weekend. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

 

2003 Training for Excellence Award Winners 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday my colleague the member from Cypress Hills and 
myself attended the ninth annual Training for Excellence 
Awards luncheon in Saskatoon at the Delta Bessborough Hotel. 
 
The Training for Excellence Awards was developed in 1995 to 
recognize organizations that contribute to the economic and 
social prosperity of Saskatchewan. It was an opportunity to 
network, build partnerships, and discover new and innovative 
training programs across our province. 
 
The keynote speaker for the luncheon was Shirley Seward, 
CEO (chief executive officer) of Canadian Labour and Business 
Centre. The centre’s mission, Mr. Speaker, is to improve 
business and labour practices in Canada and to provide public 
policy advice on labour markets, skills, and training issues. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, for the 2003 Training for Excellence 
Awards winners, and they are: for promotion of Aboriginal 
participation, Treaty Four Education Centre; for educational 
partnerships, SaskTel and Scott Collegiate; for human resource 
planning and career enhancement, SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), Weyerhaeuser 
Hudson Bay & Carrot River Operations, and Industrial Wood 
and Allied Workers Local 1-184. For human resources 
planning/succession planning, the winner was SaskTel; for 
recognition of prior learning, it was SIAST. And last but not 
least, workplace essential skills development, AIMS, which is 
Agriculture Institute of Management in Saskatchewan. 
 
We applaud the organizations for their outstanding 
achievements. I would ask all members of the Assembly to help 
me congratulate all the nominees and the winners in the ninth 
annual Training for Excellence Awards. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Scleroderma Luncheon 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is 
Scleroderma month and tomorrow I’ll be speaking at the 
scleroderma luncheon at the Copper Kettle Restaurant here in 
Regina, who is supporting this event. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, scleroderma is a chronic and sometimes fatal 
disease, as I can attest by the recent loss of a friend to this 
disease. The word itself means hard skin but it can affect the 
skin, joints, blood vessels, and internal organs. It’s relatively 
rare but it affects women three to five times more often than 
men. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lunch will be informative but fun. A silent 
auction fundraiser and entertainment by Jack and Tara Semple; 
the recent award winning Bob Evans; and Roberta Nichol, who 
has been Pemmican Pearl before, who will also give a short talk 
on scleroderma. And after lunch Dr. Todd Sojonky will speak. 
 
So I want to take this opportunity to thank everyone involved in 
organizing the event, raising the profile of this disease. And I’m 

looking forward to attending and sure it will be a huge success. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Response to Distress in Beef Industry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — My question is for the Premier. Earlier 
this week the Premier indicated that he had followed up his 
initial contact with the federal government with a letter to the 
Prime Minister, once again asking the federal government to 
waive the two-week waiting period for Unemployment 
Insurance applications for workers affected by the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that the Premier has not yet 
had a response. I would suggest that the time for waiting for the 
response is over. Mr. Speaker, workers at XL Foods who were 
on vacation time have now officially been laid off. The cattle 
trucking industry is at a virtual standstill. This is having a 
tremendous impact on our economy and there appears to be no 
quick resolution on the horizon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the Premier intend to do now to secure 
a commitment for help for workers in the beef industry from the 
federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will be, a little later this 
morning, making quite a public statement about my intention to 
make this the first priority of Saskatchewan’s position going 
into the Western Premiers’ Conference which begins Monday 
. . . Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday in Kelowna. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition unfortunately is correct. We have 
not had a response from Ottawa in terms of our request for the 
waiving of the two-week period for Employment Insurance. 
The Premier of Alberta and the Government of Alberta have felt 
the same disappointment and I’m . . . After having 
conversations with the Premier of Alberta we both intend to 
make this our number one priority — not simply the matter of 
the two-week waiving period for EI (Employment Insurance), 
but the much broader picture of the national government’s 
responsibility for compensation to an industry in Western 
Canada, across Canada, that has been significantly hurt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
Premier’s comments lead me quite nicely to my next question, 
because earlier this week the Minister of Agriculture said that 
the beef industry had indicated that about June 4 would be a 
benchmark date, especially for feedlots in the province. That 
day of course has come and gone and we know that some 
feedlot operators in Saskatchewan are now in a full-blown cash 
crunch. They have cattle that they can’t market and their feed 
costs are breaking the bank. 
 
We know that industry people are in Ottawa working with the 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

federal government on assistance to help them weather this 
difficult situation. But there is still no indication that any help is 
coming and what that amount of help might be — and more 
importantly, when that help might be delivered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, based on what he’s hearing from the federal 
government — and I hope that he’s communicating with the 
federal government prior to his ministers’ meeting next week — 
when does the Premier expect a meaningful compensation 
package will be in place to help feedlot operators and others in 
the beef industry who are now in a severely difficult time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no 
debate in this House or across Western Canada or Canada 
generally. I think that the livestock industry has been severely 
impacted and we are seeing the outcome of that. We’re seeing 
the pressures as predicted in the feedlot. We’re hearing today 
about trucking firms that are having to lay off some of their 
staff where . . . We’ve known the circumstance with XL in 
Moose Jaw, and we’ve seen the circumstance in the processing 
and packing industries in Alberta. 
 
I wish, Mr. Speaker, I could be more definitive for the Leader 
of the Opposition and for the people of Saskatchewan on just 
precisely what is the federal government’s response. I tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, the response I am not going to, I am not going to 
tolerate, is a response which says — and it was hinted at 
yesterday — that we may use, quote “existing programs” to try 
and support this industry. This is, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Not on. Not on, as the Minister of 
Agriculture says. 
 
We have existing programs to support the food producing and 
agricultural industries across Canada. This is a unique, rare 
circumstance of particular need. And when these rare 
circumstances come along, whether it be a SARS (severe acute 
respiratory syndrome) in Toronto or an ice storm in Quebec, it 
is precisely the role of a strong national government to reach 
out and assist — not with existing programs but with special 
measures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was appalled 
when I heard our federal Agriculture minister, Lyle Vanclief, 
suggest that by somehow signing on to the agriculture policy 
framework agreement that this would resolve our problems for 
a cash crunch in the cattle industry and related industries around 
the beef industry. Mr. Vanclief obviously was misleading the 
people of Canada because these programs will not come into 
effect for many, many months, if in fact all the provinces sign 
on. 
 
Given this very negative message coming out of Ottawa 
yesterday, has the Premier in fact been on the phone talking to 
Mr. Vanclief and his people since those comments were made, 
and can he assure us that Mr. Vanclief has changed his position 
and will not be counting on the APF (agricultural policy 

framework) to resolve the funding crisis in the beef industry in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, not only have I been on the 
phone speaking with my colleagues across the country, Mr. 
Speaker, but I have also written to Mr. Vanclief and copied all 
of my colleagues in this week, indicating to the federal 
government that the agricultural policy framework and the 
business risk management file is not sufficient, Mr. Speaker, 
funded today in order to support this individual one-off issue 
that we have in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a disaster to the industry. The industry should be 
supported in a different way, Mr. Speaker, not within the $1.1 
billion which we’ve always said, Mr. Speaker, is underfunded. 
This package is underfunded by the national government first of 
all, and we should not be expecting the safety net today, Mr. 
Speaker, to pick up the difficulties on that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say that this can be helpful on the part of the opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, as well. We’ve talked to the federal national party, 
the NDP (New Democratic Party), and asked them to raise it in 
the House. I think that the opposition can raise it with their 
colleagues in the House as well, with the Canadian Alliance and 
with the Conservative Party. They should be raising it in the 
parliament in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine 
Spongiform Encephalopathy 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Agriculture. Throughout the search for the herd 
of origin for the cow found to have BSE, two Saskatchewan 
farms were named, quarantined, and depopulated by the CFIA 
(Canadian Food Inspection Agency). Tests for BSE in all of 
those animals have come back negative, yet the CFIA is also 
searching out all animals that were sold off those two farms, 
and they are also killing those animals. In fact we assume they 
are both doing trace-outs from all herds on both sides of the 
lines of inquiry in both Alberta and Saskatchewan and 
destroying all of those animals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how many Saskatchewan 
farms have lost animals related to trace-outs from this BSE case 
and how many animals have been put down as a result of this 
trace-out investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the very last part of 
the member’s question and will try to address it from what I 
heard, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that the minister asked me 
. . . or the member asked me how many animals in Canada or in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have been put down from the 
Saskatchewan farms. I can report, Mr. Speaker, that all of the 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

 

animals from the Saskatchewan farms have been put down and 
been tested. 
 
When the net was first cast across the Saskatchewan, Alberta, 
and British Columbia farms, it included about 2,000 head. To 
date, Mr. Speaker, or by the end of the weekend, there will be 
from those three provinces approximately 1,600 of those 
animals will have been put down. And all of them will be tested 
by the end of the, we anticipate will all be tested by the end of 
Sunday, Mr. Speaker, the end of the weekend. And our 
anticipation is that all of those reports will come back, Mr. 
Speaker, as continuing to be negative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, all during this investigation the 
CFIA has said they are either looking for a genetic link as a 
source of the BSE case or a possible feed contamination. One 
can reasonably presume there can be no maternal genetic link 
between all of those trace-out animals and the one infected cow. 
But at no time has the CFIA indicated that they found a 
problem with feed at one or more of these farms, meaning that 
all of these animals that may have had access to that feed 
should be destroyed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain what science is 
behind the CFIA’s decision to destroy all of these trace-out 
animals when there’s no genetic link or no apparent feed source 
of concern? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the CFIA, when they 
began their work early at three weeks ago, made it very clear 
that the most scientific way of determining whether or not any 
of the animals had any of the disease, BSE, would be to put 
them down and check the animals and examine the animals, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s what the CFIA said initially and they proceeded down 
two tracks. One track was to examine the animals after they 
slaughtered them, Mr. Speaker. And secondly was to examine 
the feedstock from the ruminant. And CFIA has done, in my 
view, an outstanding job of doing that examination in three 
Prairie provinces. We’ve had people here for a three-week 
period. We’ve had resource people from the US (United States) 
doing that work. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I’m not about to call 
into question the work of CFIA. They’ve been in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, for the better part of three years now. They’ve 
been working on the . . . For three years, Mr. Speaker, because 
they were here working with the elk industry. We put down a 
number of animals, Mr. Speaker, from the elk industry. So the 
CFIA’s guidance will be taken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 
Saskatchewan cattle producers who have had a great number of 
cow-calf pairs or individual animals recently taken by the CFIA 
in relation to this BSE case and one Alberta cow. They don’t 
understand why these animals have had to be removed and 

tested when they apparently have no genetic connection to the 
infected cow, they weren’t from either of the two suspected 
source herds, and there has been no finding of a possible feed 
source connection reported by the CFIA. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the CFIA has even taken down animals 
that only went through one of the quarantined farms this spring. 
If the feed ban placed in 1997 is working and no animal 
renderings are being fed to ruminants, why are animals going 
through straight cattle yards — not mixed livestock farms but 
strictly straight cattle yards for a short time this spring — being 
destroyed in this investigation? 
 
Can the minister explain how destroying all of these animals 
will help this investigation to progress? And how many animals 
this will ultimately mean the CFIA is going to put down to 
ensure all connections to any of these farms are completely 
wiped out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m actually shocked by the 
question that the member asks me, Mr. Speaker. I’m shocked by 
the question because for the better part, Mr. Speaker, of three 
weeks now we’ve been doing press conferences to our 
Saskatchewan meat industry and Saskatchewan people. 
 
The CFIA every day, Mr. Speaker, are on the airwaves across 
Canada with Mr. Evans leading the information, Mr. Speaker, 
from CFIA. And he has been very clear in saying why it is that 
we’re putting the animals down at the end of the day. Because 
the most scientific way of assuring Canadians and the 
international marketplace of which we do huge trade, Mr. 
Speaker, is to put the animals down and determine whether or 
not they have the BSE. That is the final and best and most 
accurate fashion of being able to show that. 
 
And as they proceed through the track, Mr. Speaker, of 
examining the animals and examining the feed where’s there’s 
been exposure to the feed, those animals to date, Mr. Speaker, 
in majority have been put down. And I say to the member 
opposite we need to be guided by the work of CFIA and the 
science, and today is not the day to be questioning the work of 
the CFIA, particularly in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some of the 
producers who have had animals taken by the CFIA as a result 
of the trace-out investigation are frustrated by the lack of 
information they are getting about the compensation they will 
receive for the loss of these animals. Especially, purebred 
breeders are questioning what level of compensation they will 
be able to expect for the animals the CFIA has selectively 
removed from their herds this week. 
 
The minister had indicated earlier that he would support 
reviewing compensation rates, specifically for purebred 
livestock destroyed in connection with this investigation. Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister indicate today whether a new level of 
compensation for purebred animals has been agreed to by the 
federal government and what level of compensation that is? 
 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have not yet received a 
response to my correspondence to Mr. Vanclief regarding the 
different kind of compensation that I think, Mr. Speaker, that 
needs to be provided to animals that are coming from purebred 
herds. 
 
The federal government has had a history, Mr. Speaker, of how 
much money should be paid to individual producers when 
animals are having to be put down and I said, and we’ve said on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that that compensation is 
unfair. 
 
And so I’ve written the federal government, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
asked them to examine that formula today and provide a greater 
compensation for those producers, Mr. Speaker, where in fact 
there have been purebred animals that have been put down, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Conditions 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise and ask questions, not only for my constituents but 
for people right across this province who are concerned about 
one big issue in this province, and that’s the state of highways. 
 
We’ve been receiving many letters from people who want to 
bring this to the attention of the minister. One of the highways 
that is of great concern is in my constituency and that’s 
Highway No. 23, that’s east of Weekes to the junction of 
Highway No. 9. 
 
I’ve received letters from both the RM (rural municipality) of 
Hudson Bay and the RM of Porcupine Plain that have raised 
concerns about the state of this highway. Many of these 
highways have actually been turned back to gravel. So much for 
wide open Saskatchewan — you can’t see it for dust. Mr. 
Speaker, the RM of Hudson Bay described it as rough and full 
of large potholes, making driving conditions dangerous to the 
public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when does the NDP government plan to fix 
Highway 23? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very glad to see that the puppet master on this side of the 
House was able to get the leader to encourage that member to 
get up and speak today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have informed the public very clearly about 
what is going on with the roads in rural Saskatchewan. We have 
a lot of thin membrane surface highways, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I was saying, we have done a diligent job in informing the 
public of this province about what the situation is with our thin 

membrane surface highways. 
 
We’ve been doing a lot of work on converting those highways 
over the years. With our $300 million a year budget we are 
making a difference in rural Saskatchewan highways. 
 
In the process of fixing those highways, Mr. Speaker, there are 
times when we do temporary — and I emphasize temporary — 
reversions to gravel to dry out that highway and then go back 
and surface. 
 
We are working with the area transportation planning 
committees to set the proper priorities in each region. Those 
priorities are being set by people who live in the region and 
we’re following up on that in our repairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s received a letter 
from one of my constituents who drives over 50,000 kilometres 
a year in his job. He says the NDP has promised to fix Highway 
15 from Raymore to Nokomis for five years, but has done 
nothing. 
 
On May 6 he struck a piece of broken asphalt laying in the 
middle of the highway and took out his oil pan, which cost him 
about $1,500 to repair. He has now sent the bill to the Minister 
of Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister plan to pay this repair bill, and, 
more importantly, when can we expect him to fix Highway 15? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are more thin 
membranes than just on the highway. I think there’s a lot of thin 
membranes on the other side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a very good process within the 
Department of Highways, where there is damage done where 
Highways is responsible, that we have a process where people 
can put those claims forward and we follow up on those claims 
very responsibly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also in process of fixing the . . . some 
7,000 kilometres of thin membrane surface highways across this 
province. This is the time of year, of course, with all the 
wonderful moisture that we’re getting . . . It’s got its plus and 
its minus, but when the moisture is there, the highways do get a 
little mushier and softer and break down. But our crews are out 
there fixing them. Those roads are getting better. And, Mr. 
Speaker, with regard to the particular roads that they’re 
speaking of, there is work being done on those roads and we 
will make sure that we have the best, safest highways that we 
can possibly have. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Sound Stage 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday, notice was taken on a question and I wish to provide 
the answer to that question today. And I’ll proceed. 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

 

The question raised by the opposition yesterday was a question 
regarding the financing of the Canada-Saskatchewan Sound 
Stage. And I just want to clarify at the outset that this facility 
was built in response to the Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority identifying film and new media as one 
of their clusters for development in the city. 
 
As a result of that, the Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage was 
built with the involvement of three levels of government — the 
federal government, the province, and the city of Regina — 
contributing to the construction. The total cost of the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage was 11.9 million, with the 
province providing 3 million, the federal government 3 million 
through Western Economic Diversification, and the city of 
Regina a seven-year tax abatement. 
 
Sask Property Management borrowed 5.5 million which is 
going to be recovered through the tax abatement. And I can sit 
down and if there’s a supplementary question, answer the 
balance there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Conditions 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s an obvious tactic to get away from the tough questions 
that are being asked of the Minister of Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve received numerous letters about Highway 13, 
running both directions from Ponteix. The town of Ponteix 
wrote to me on May 14. They say, and I quote: 
 

Thirty-four kilometres of Highway 13 has reached the point 
of hazardous travel and the council is concerned. If some 
immediate action is not taken, serious accidents will occur. 

 
I also have a letter from a constituent who says the highway is 
full of potholes and breaks, which often cause vehicles to drive 
on the wrong side of the road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this highway is a mess and it is dangerous. 
 
To the Minister of Highways: when can we expect Highway 13 
in the Ponteix area to be fixed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been doing a lot 
of work on Highway 13, recognizing the importance of that 
trade corridor. And we are doing that phased in as we’re able to. 
In particular in that area, Mr. Speaker, we did think that we had 
an agreement for a heavy-haul alternative route which would 
have taken the heavy haul off of the thin membrane surface 
road. But however, the RMs in that area chose not to go along 
with the heavy-haul agreement and therefore that road continues 
to break down. 
 
(10:45) 
 
We will do maintenance, we’ll do the appropriate maintenance, 
and as we get there in our schedule — which we are advised by 
the area transportation planning committee on — we will get 
those roads fixed, Mr. Speaker. Where we recognize the need, 
we are out there, we’re working, we’re maintaining. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the RM of 
Wolseley has written to the Minister of Highways to express 
what they call an enormous amount of frustration regarding the 
disrepair of Highway 47. They say that they have had numerous 
meetings with the Highways department over the last few years, 
but those meetings have proven to be fruitless as no progress 
has been made in repaying . . . repairing Highway 47. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Highway 47, between Highway 48 and Highway 
No. 1, is in terrible shape. Mr. Speaker, the RM of Wolseley is 
asking the Department of Highways to report to them what the 
department’s plans for rebuilding the highway. Can the minister 
give them an answer? When can we expect to see Highway 47 
rebuilt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we have been in 
correspondence with the RMs in the area and they do have a 
fairly good sense of the timing on our repairs on these roads. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that more money has been 
spent in the rural municipalities, the rural areas, the rural 
constituencies of this province, than anywhere else in the last 
three years. We have record budgets for three years. 
 
We have been making progress in repairing those highways. 
We have been making progress in getting rid of the thin 
membrane surface highways by moving to granular pavement 
and AC (asphalt concrete) pavement; 1,000 kilometres has been 
improved and rebuilt, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue to do 
that, and we’ll do it in a timely manner, and we’ll do it in 
relationship and discussion with the RMs in those areas. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s sad to have to listen . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, members. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s sad to have to listen to the laughter from the six dumped 
ministers and the nine backbench wannabes when we’re raising 
serious issues, Mr. Speaker, about the safety of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I have a letter here from a 
constituent that was addressed to the Premier. And I quote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Perhaps 
we could attend to the . . . Order. Order. I would ask members 
particularly to refrain from the personal remarks that I have 
heard tossed across the floor here today. It doesn’t serve the 
parliament well at all. 
 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
she writes to the Premier, and I quote: 
 

I am writing to let you know the disgraceful and dangerous, 
horrendous state of No. 8 Highway from the US border to 
Redvers and beyond to Moosomin. This road is our sole 
means of going to Redvers for medical care. I have just 
completed a week’s treatment for a medical condition, 
driving 20 miles daily, and I felt worse mentally, 
physically, stressed out by the damage to my car from this 
disgusting road. 
 
Our daughter-in-law has to travel this road daily, with its 
multitude of large bomb-like craters, with her three 
children in the car. This road is worse than some I have 
travelled in Third World countries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when can we expect No. 8 Highway to be fixed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite spent much time in the constituency over there, he 
would know that we have made tremendous progress on No. 8 
in the last two years. We have been upgrading that road, and the 
particular stretch that is referred to here is being maintained. 
 
We’ve got crews out there working on this, Mr. Speaker, and I 
can say this very, very clearly that we are upgrading those thin 
membrane surface highways. Where they are warranted, we are 
moving them up to granular pavement so they can handle the 
heavier loads. We are moving them up to AC pavements. And if 
the member travelled those roads in his constituency, he would 
know that they are being upgraded. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Provincial Policy Framework and Action 
Plan for Older Persons 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Minister 
Responsible for Seniors, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to 
present the Provincial Policy Framework and Action Plan for 
Older Persons. This is an important document that identifies 
steps to improve the well-being of older persons in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we recognize the important place 
seniors hold not only in our history but also in our present and 
our future. We are fortunate to have a vital and active seniors 
population. The contributions that older persons make every 
day and everywhere to the quality of life we enjoy in our 
province is valued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has one of the largest senior 
populations in Canada. One in seven people is 65 years of age 
or older. Demographic projections show this number is 
increasing rapidly. By 2020, one in six people will be 65 years 
of age or older. 

The Provincial Policy Framework and Action Plan for Older 
Persons was developed by the Saskatchewan Provincial 
Advisory Committee of Older Persons, a committee, Mr. 
Speaker, that was established three years ago to advise the 
Minister Responsible for Seniors on policies, programs, and 
priorities aimed at meeting the needs of our seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time, I would like to take an opportunity to 
acknowledge Dr. Don King, chairman of the advisory 
committee who was in the gallery today and to thank him and 
the rest of the committee for this document and the hard work 
and commitment that has been displayed over these past three 
years. Thank you, Dr. King. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government shares the 
goals of the Provincial Advisory Committee of Older Persons. 
The document that is being released today makes 31 
recommendations focusing on six goals. These goals are as 
follows: improving seniors’ access to housing, improving 
transportation, ensuring access to appropriate health care 
services, promoting active living and lifelong learning, 
recognizing the contribution of older persons, and ensuring safe 
communities for seniors. 
 
Having a report like this, Mr. Speaker, is very important, 
especially as the government continues moving forward on the 
initiatives in the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care 
which we released in December 2001. As is evident in the 
strategies outlined in our action plan, this government’s top 
priority is improving the quality of health care services and 
access to care for all our citizens while ensuring our health 
system is sustainable into the future. 
 
We intend to work with seniors’ groups, Mr. Speaker, to 
determine which recommendations are at the top of the priority 
list and how we can work together to continue improving the 
quality of life for Saskatchewan seniors. Government has 
already begun implementing some of the recommendations 
contained in the report. 
 
First, there’s increased funding for health services. This year’s 
health budget received an increase of $184 million over last 
year or almost 8 per cent. This brings the total health budget to 
$2.53 billion. Of this money, nearly half will directly benefit 
seniors through programs such as home care, long-term care, 
hospital care, and physician services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased drug plan spending in this year’s 
budget to $156 million, an increase of 28.4 per cent from last 
year. This directly benefits seniors in our province. 
 
We have also expanded the coverage of items under the drug 
plan to include diabetic supplies. As well we are covering 
specialized nutritional products for persons with complex 
medical conditions. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government has also 
recently invested in a number of affordable housing projects for 
seniors in Saskatoon, Shaunavon, Yorkton, and Regina. In 
partnership with the federal government the province has 
developed the $46 million centenary affordable housing 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

 

program. This program will deliver more than 1,400 units over 
the next four years. 
 
In addition we have released the report, Fall Injuries Among 
Saskatchewan Seniors. This report, Mr. Speaker, focuses on the 
prevention of falls which is a leading cause of disability and 
death among seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is this government’s plan to maintain quality 
programs and services to continue to meet the needs of our 
older citizens and our seniors of the future. Together we will 
develop solutions to help meet the needs of the seniors of this 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In replying to the 
minister’s statement, I would like to join in expressing the 
official opposition’s gratitude to Dr. Don King and his advisory 
committee for his very important work over these past three 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is not insignificant that this report is 
being released today which is the 59th anniversary of the 
D-Day invasion because I think it’s a fitting example of the 
great debt we owe to the people who participated as young 
people 59 years ago, and who are now part of the group of 
people we call our senior citizens. 
 
It’s an example of the great debt that we owe our seniors, not 
only in this very time of war but in . . . over the ensuing years 
that they have contributed so much to build up our province. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we acknowledge the 
special requirements and needs of our seniors and this 
provincial advisory committee, I feel, has done a very good job 
of articulating those needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition very much supports the six 
goals that are outlined in this report and we look forward to 
receiving the report and reviewing all of the 31 
recommendations in detail. And we are very confident that they 
will be thoughtful and important recommendations to improve 
the lives of our seniors both today and into the future. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in recognizing this very important work, 
we certainly support and thank the advisory committee and we 
look forward to working and encouraging the government to 
make sure that these recommendations are implemented in as 
timely a way as possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table written responses to questions no. 701 through 708 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 701 to 708 have been 
submitted. 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 39 — The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter the debate this morning on Bill No. 39, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation is 
arguably one of the more substantive pieces of legislation that 
have come before the Assembly this sitting. It’s not to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s a welcomed piece of legislation. It’s not to say 
that it’s popular. It’s not to say that this particular piece of 
legislation seems to point to a government that understands or 
has its priorities in the right place. 
 
But it is significant because it really implements the funding 
measures announced in the 2003-2004 budget for urban 
municipalities, for all municipalities in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It does represent a small increase 
in some of the segments of municipal funding, Mr. Speaker. It 
does do that. 
 
But it doesn’t come anywhere near, it doesn’t come anywhere 
near addressing the needs of municipalities. It doesn’t come 
anywhere near addressing the fact that for 10 years or longer of 
this government, since 1991, the socialist government of this 
province has systematically eroded municipal funding in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s what’s happened in this 
province. 
 
In my own community in Swift Current, the municipal funding 
there has suffered mightily under this government. The reason 
that the socialist government gave, Mr. Speaker, for the changes 
that it was going to be making early on in the decade was, we’re 
fiscal; it was a matter of fiscal probity; cuts had to come from 
somewhere. Although if you take a look back at the truth of the 
matter for the last decade in this province, whatever fiscal 
probity the government has stumbled upon, they’ve done so on 
the basis of the revenue side of the books, of the taxation side of 
the books, not on the expenditure side. 
 
(11:00) 
 
But that being said, there is some areas that they have cut. Even 
though overall they’ve relied more on revenues than 
expenditures to balance the books, one of the areas that they’ve 
cut, maybe most severely of all, is funding to municipalities in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The reason, Mr. Speaker, that the socialist government gave for 
decreasing the funding was this matter of fiscal probity. But 
they left a clear impression with mayors of towns and villages 
and cities that there would come a day in the province when 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

things turned around, when the fiscal situation was improved, 
and then the cities and the towns and the villages should expect 
from this government some fairness. They would expect from 
this government some recognition of the fact that they have 
paid . . . the municipalities have paid their dues. They have 
done their part in balancing the budget of the province, and 
when that balancing had taken place they could expect some 
measure of reinstitution of the funding that they once received 
— that they once received actually, Mr. Speaker, from the 
government in this province previously in the ’70s and even the 
government in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what did, then, the municipalities say when they knew what 
the government actually had in mind, what the Minister of 
Finance actually had in mind for them in terms of municipal 
funding as represented here in Bill 39? Well they used words 
like, it’s insulting; it’s unfair. They were angry; they were 
disappointed. But other than that, it went over fairly well I 
guess, Mr. Speaker. Other than that, it went over fairly well. 
 
I think they were very disappointed in both the Minister of 
Government Relations and they were very disappointed with 
the Minister of Finance, which is an interesting situation, Mr. 
Speaker. Because it is those very members over there, the 
member of government for . . . minister for Government 
Relations and Minister of Finance, those are the two members 
who have propped up this socialist government, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s these two members of the Legislative Assembly who 
the municipalities are most disappointed with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member says, from Melville, that he would do it again. 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, he would sign the same deal again. 
He would prop up this NDP government again, would he have 
the chance. The good news, Mr. Speaker, is that the member for 
Melville will not have a chance after the next election to prop 
up this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — He won’t be here, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll wish 
him well and we’ll wish him all the best in whatever he chooses 
to do after the fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 39 represents something very significant in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Bill 39 represents the 
opportunity for the government to keep its promise to 
municipalities. It represents an opportunity for the NDP, for the 
socialist government we’ve had here for nigh on to a decade in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, to do the right thing and keep its 
word with respect to funding for municipalities. But Bill 39 lets 
the municipalities down. 
 
And so the municipalities must be asking themselves, even 
today, even today, Mr. Speaker, should we have expected that 
maybe we didn’t have the right to expect to have our funding 
increased, our municipal funding increased. Maybe the fiscal 
situation for the province is that bad. Maybe the government’s 
got its priorities right. Maybe it’s trying to do all the right 
things, Mr. Speaker. And so maybe some municipal leaders are 
saying, well maybe their reasons are good. 
 
But then, Mr. Speaker, they pick up the newspaper, and they 
turn on the television news and, Mr. Speaker, they listen to the 

radio news and any, any, any opportunity they might have taken 
to think they were being too hard on the government on the 
issue of municipal funding will disappear. And it would 
disappear because on the news, on the radio, and on television, 
in newspapers, they read day after day — especially in this 
session — what is the government doing with their money, Mr. 
Speaker? What is the government doing with the taxpayers’ 
money, Mr. Speaker? They’re wasting it in Australia, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re losing it in Georgia. They’re losing it in 
Tennessee, Mr. Speaker. They’re investing $60 million in Nova 
Scotia. 
 
They tell the city of Swift Current we’ve got nothing for you; 
we will not restore the funding that once was yours; we can’t 
keep our promise but we’ve got 60 million for the province of 
Nova Scotia; we’ve got $107 million on a land titles system that 
doesn’t work; we’ve got $80 million for Newcastle, Australia. 
Thank goodness they’ve backed away from that because there 
was no private sector partner interested in that particular 
scheme of the government. 
 
They’ve got $24 million for a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia, Mr. 
Speaker, if you can believe it. They got $12 million or their 
share of $12 million for a sound stage, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
being underutilized, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got $28 million to 
lose in SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), Mr. Speaker. They’ve got $3 million to lose in 
Nashville, Tennessee, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got millions more 
lost in Chile and Mexico on the part of SaskEnergy. 
 
And so municipalities, Mr. Speaker, to come back to this Bill 
39, so municipalities aren’t asking themselves whether or . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would ask the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana to please allow the debate to take place 
and not to keep continuously hollering across the floor. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well all members of 
this Assembly, on the government side and on our side, 
including the member for Nutana, should be very . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member not to 
comment on any ruling of the Speaker. The member may 
proceed with the debate on Bill 39. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so 
municipalities who might be questioning whether or not they 
were a little too harsh on the government when they called 
what’s in Bill 39 insulting, unfair, angry, and disappointed are 
not feeling that way any more. And they ought not to feel that 
way because those sentiments are rightly and properly directed 
at a government that tells the city of Swift Current, that tells the 
town of Herbert, that tells the city of Humboldt, that tells the 
city of Regina and Saskatoon, that they have no more money to 
do the absolute basic role of government, which is to help 
provide infrastructure in cities, towns, and villages around the 
province. 
 
They’ve got no money for them, Mr. Speaker, but they’ve got 
money for each and every hare-brained Crown corporation 
scheme that comes before them, each one losing more 
taxpayers’ dollars than the one before — taxpayers’ dollars. 
 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

 

And so now, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen with this 
Bill, is this Bill will eventually move into Committee of the 
Whole. And this Bill will be passed and municipalities will be 
underfunded again by a government that has lost its way, that 
has its priorities so obviously wrong that it would be more 
interested in a municipality in Georgia than it would be in a 
municipality in its own province. This is an NDP, socialist 
government that is so committed to the expansion of 
government-owned business and its Crown corporation sector 
that they would rather invest in a municipality of Newcastle, 
Australia, Mr. Speaker, than the town of Chaplin on Highway 
No. 1 in this province. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why the people of this province, that’s 
why they just simply cannot wait — they cannot wait — to send 
a message to this government, to pass judgment on this 
government’s priorities that place international investments 
ahead of their own municipalities. They just can’t wait for an 
election. 
 
They want to send them a message and say, this is not 
acceptable in the province of Saskatchewan in 2003 and we are 
going to change the government. And we’re going to elect a 
government — the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 
Speaker — that understands the importance that the . . . 
understands the concept that municipalities in our province, 
municipalities in our province are more important than their 
international investment schemes. 
 
And the member from Nutana still chirps from her seat, Mr. 
Speaker. And let me just say this, that yesterday in Crown 
Corporation, at every turn a seemingly grumpy member from 
Nutana was trying to defend what is an indefensible record in 
the Crown sector, what is an indefensible NDP record with 
respect to investments. 
 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, the spectre of a veteran minister — 
perhaps dropped from cabinet, but still a veteran minister and a 
veteran member of this Assembly — defending the 
indefensible, defending the indefensible. 
 
The whole province understands that we ought to be investing 
in municipalities here in the province, and not in Georgia and 
not in Tennessee — except for the member for Nutana, except 
for that member and others across the way. And so they are the 
authors of Bill 39. But, Mr. Speaker, because of the misplaced 
priorities that Bill 39 represents, they’re also the authors of their 
own defeat in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member for Nutana should arguably be doing less 
chirping and less defending the indefensible than she should be 
explaining to taxpayers, explaining to the mayors of 
Saskatchewan, why it is that they come second to her friends in 
the Crown corporations’ international spending schemes. That’s 
what she should be doing, Mr. Speaker, with her time, and we 
would encourage her to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if members opposite have had a 
chance to really look at the heart of Bill 39 and understand how 
badly it . . . how clearly it demonstrates that the government has 
lost its way. But they, Mr. Speaker — they, like members on 
this side of the House — may have specific questions for the 
minister when this Bill goes to committee. 

And so with those brief remarks, and those concerns stated on 
behalf of my constituents and the people of the province and the 
Saskatchewan Party, we are prepared to see this Bill move at 
this point to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 30 — The Pawned 
Property (Recording) Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join into the debate on The Pawned Property 
(Recording) Act, Bill No. 30. It’s been before the House a 
couple of times and it’s the first time I’ve, chance I’ve had to 
speak on it. 
 
The aim of the Bill of course is to enhance crime prevention 
and detection by improving the speed and accuracy with which 
pawnbrokers provide police services with information. When I 
read that statement, and that really is the direction of the Bill, 
the way the Bill want . . . The reason for the Bill is to improve 
the information the police receive through pawnbrokers once 
the theft has taken place. It really is a reactive piece of 
legislation. 
 
We’ve seen crime happen in our province — and I can speak 
from personal experience, from my farm which has been broke 
into two or three times in the last four or five years — and it’s 
always, well give us all the articles and specify because we’re 
going to try and see if they’re being pawned through the brokers 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And not yet have I ever received a phone call back from any of 
the police services that it’s gone through the pawnbrokers. 
Usually probably what happens with most of this equipment is 
it gets shipped out of the province immediately, probably within 
a day or two, and it’s far removed from the province of 
Saskatchewan, and we never have seen any of it come back 
into, through the pawnbroker system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But it’s interesting to talk about this Bill because it is aimed 
towards prevention of crime, but it’s prevention of crime on the 
back side. You’re talking to pawnbrokers so that once people 
have stolen other people’s goods, then it’s through the 
pawnbroker situation that they’re trying to recover it. 
 
I remember back in 1999 one of the main campaigns that the 
NDP had in 1999, if any of you can recall, but it was going to 
hire 200 new police officers. Now I would say those 200 new 
police officers would be at the front end of the crime trying to 
prevent the crime in the first place, as opposed to a piece of 
legislation like this that is trying to recover stolen goods quicker 
through the pawnbroker system. 
 
And it’s interesting that the NDP government hasn’t come close 
to matching yet another promise that it made in the 1999 
election. We could list a whole number of promises that the 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

government has made — whether it’s health care workers or 
whether it’s the police officers — a number of issues that this 
government has promised in the ’99 election that hasn’t come 
anywhere close to meeting those promises. 
 
When I think of what the speaker before me had to say about 
. . . the member from Swift Current, who was talking about a 
government that’s lost its way — it would far rather put money 
into Palm Springs Internet service or mobility service as 
opposed to police officers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s simply an area of priority. Does the Government of 
Saskatchewan, after making a promise and getting elected as 
government of this province, follow up on its promises by 
putting more money into the policing of the province to try and 
prevent crime? Or does it put money into a myriad of 
investments throughout the United States and into other 
provinces, and not put money into Saskatchewan where that 
money is needed through policing? 
 
Instead what the government does is come in with a piece of 
legislation such as this and says, perhaps if we can get the 
pawnbrokers to notify the police quicker; instead of using a 
paper system that is in place now, going to an electronic system 
so that the pawnbrokers can notify the police immediately when 
they receive some goods so the police can check to see if 
they’re stolen . . . That seems to be the area that this NDP 
government uses to fight crime — a reaction. It’s after the fact 
as opposed to what was, I’m sure, a very great idea, one 
promise of increasing, hiring 200 more police officers which 
would have gone a long ways to preventing the crime in the 
first place. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Instead, this government reacts to a promise that was broken, it 
reacts to a promise that was broken by trying to put legislation 
in here so that now that the articles are stolen, it’s in the 
pawnbrokers’ system. Now let’s try and catch the . . . well not 
necessarily the people that stole the goods, but at least recover 
the goods so that they can be sent back to the person that it was 
stolen from. 
 
So it’s a real shame that this is how the government, this is the 
NDP’s government method of fighting crime, is a piece of 
legislation like this as opposed to living up to the promises that 
they made in the 1999 election of hiring 200 more police 
officers. I can legitimately say in the area where I farm and in 
our area, it is rare that we ever see any police officers in that 
area. 
 
When we see people here in Regina, and one of the things that I 
get asked about and talked to often is the crime rate in Regina. 
We just have to look at the stolen cars issue in Regina. We lead 
the country in stolen cars in Regina, and it’s quite a issue, quite 
a thing to be known as, as the car theft capital of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, had the NDP followed a promise . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Now the member from Regina South 
is saying, you’re misleading the public. How could he ever sit 
in his seat — and I wish he’d join into the debate instead of 
sitting in his seat — how can he sit in his seat and say I’m 
misleading the public when they promised for 28 days of hiring 

200 more police officers, 200 more police officers in this 
province, and haven’t come anywhere close to it, anywhere 
close to it? 
 
You want to talk about misleading the public? They misled the 
public for 28 days, got elected, they misled the public for six 
years if you want to talk about a SPUDCO issue, and finally the 
Premier had to apologize and so did the member from P.A. 
(Prince Albert) Northcote because they know they misled the 
public. The member from Regina South is in no position to talk 
about misleading the public. He got elected on a campaign that 
they haven’t followed through pure deception and misleading. 
So it’s interesting that he would stand there and call about 
misleading the public. 
 
The province . . . The city of Regina was known as the car 
capital, car theft capital of the province. And I would say that if 
this government would have looked at hiring more police 
officers . . . We’ve talked about it over the last week or two how 
hiring more police officers would go a long ways to alleviating 
some of those problems, as opposed to introducing a piece of 
legislation like this which is calling on the pawnbrokers to get 
the information to the police quicker so that they can react 
faster. Perhaps the problem is that there isn’t enough police 
officers in the first place. 
 
It talks about . . . The pawnbrokers association has some very 
serious concerns regarding the implication of this Bill and part 
of it is how they have to transfer the information to the police, 
to the different police services. And it’s through Business 
Watch International, which is really quite interesting. Business 
Watch International is a SaskTel company and that is the 
avenue that these pawnbrokers are going to have to forward this 
information to the police services. They’re going to be forced to 
use SaskTel, a Crown corporation, to transfer this information 
and they have some grave concerns regarding that. 
 
There’s also a cost to this. There will be a cost to this, and then 
who ends up paying the cost, the cost of crime? It is the people 
that are pawning it or it would be the pawnbrokers that are 
paying for the cost of crime, as opposed to this government 
living up to some of its promises that it has, I’ve already talked 
about and increasing the number of police officers in the 
province. 
 
There’s also a concern through the pawnbrokers association 
with privacy. And heaven knows we’ve had enough issues 
come before us in the last couple of years concerning privacy, 
and the information that this government has collected and 
hasn’t secured over and over again. And some of the issues that 
have come forward as far as secure information, what we 
thought would be secure information, hasn’t been secure 
information. 
 
I remember the minister a couple of, a year and a half ago, 
having to stand and apologize on some information — the 
minister of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) — on 
some . . .Was it last year that . . . on some information that was 
let out that shouldn’t have been. 
 
So the whole issue of privacy is a major issue and it comes to 
this. Here we are giving this NDP government more 
information electronically. And will it be secured? Will it be 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

 

secured? And I think people all over this province, and 
especially the pawnbrokers in this province, have a real concern 
with the fact that secure information. 
 
Another, as I mentioned, another concern of the pawnbrokers is 
the cost of implementation of the software, and who is that 
passed on to. And definitely it depends on the size of the 
pawnbroker. Some will be able to absorb this and maybe pass it 
on to the consumer eventually. Others will find this as a major 
cost to doing business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again I think there are a number of questions that we 
have on this Bill, but one of the questions as I said is the fact 
that this government is reacting to crime instead of trying to be 
proactive with crime. They’ll campaign on being proactive. 
They’ll pass legislation to be reactive, and that is a government 
that truly has lost it’s way. 
 
We’ll be glad to ask more questions on this Bill in Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To 
my immediate right is Ron Styles, the deputy minister of 
Finance. To his right is Kirk McGregor, assistant deputy 
minister, taxation, intergovernmental affairs. 
 
Behind Kirk is Terry Paton, Provincial Comptroller. Directly 
behind Ron is Joanne Brockman, executive director, economic 
and fiscal policy. Directly behind myself is Glen Veikle, 
assistant deputy minister, treasury board branch. To my 
immediate left is Len Rog, assistant deputy minister, revenue 
division. 
 
And seated at the back of the room is Dennis Polowyck, 
assistant deputy minister, treasury and debt management 
division; Janine Reed, executive director, personnel policy 
secretariat; Bill Van Sickle, executive director, corporate 
services division; and Brian Smith, the executive director of the 
Public Employees Benefits Agency. 
 
And these are the officials here today, Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
discuss the estimates for the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you to 
the minister, and thank you to his officials for being present 
with us today in these proceedings. 
 
The first question that I have for the minister is with regards to 
the growth rate for the projections from Sask Finance. In 

Hansard on April 2, 2003, this . . . the minister stated that it was 
our prediction from Sask Finance the economy would grow 
from 30.5 billion to 32.5 billion. 
 
My question is specifically this: could you give us a breakdown 
of the calculation of the initial number where the economy’s 
being measured at $30.5 billion, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
The number referred to for 2002 is a real GDP (gross domestic 
product) of 30.5 billion. The basis of developing that real GDP 
number is an econometric model. So what I’ll do is cover off 
the highlights of that particular model. 
 
The econometric model that’s utilized uses a consumption 
factor which in 2002 would equate to 17.7 billion, an 
investment factor which would be in the 6.7 billion range. 
There’s inventory change in agriculture which showed a minus 
seven nineteen for 2002, an inventory change non-agriculture of 
80, exports of 20 billion, imports of 19.8 billion, government 
current expenditures of 6.3 billion in 2002, and a residual error, 
rounding error of 80. 
 
So that is the econometric model based on consumption, 
investment, inventory change, exports, imports, government 
current expenditures, and residual error. 
 
In terms of how these numbers are developed, it’s an 
econometric model. It’s the model that’s utilized by 
StatsCanada, for example, in a similar fashion as well, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This econometric 
model, would this be a similar model used by, say, the Royal 
Bank of Canada in their estimations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the Royal Bank 
model is basically the same but not as sophisticated as the 
model that’s employed by the Department of Finance. 
 
The Saskatchewan economic forecasting model, which is 
known by the acronym ERNIE, was developed by Global 
Insight, formerly known as DRI-WEFA. And of course this is 
an independent consulting agency and is owned by the 
Saskatchewan Department of Finance and the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. 
 
Global Insight has also built models for Alberta, 
Newfoundland, and for several states and cities in the United 
States, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With regards to 
the ERNIE model, would this be a similar model that would be 
used by the Bank of Montreal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The answer would be the same. They 
use an econometric model, the Royal Bank, the Bank of 
Montreal. Their econometric model is more designed for 
national basis and obviously the model used in Saskatchewan is 
more specific for the Saskatchewan experience. So that is why 
our model is more precise and has been designed exclusively 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

for the Saskatchewan environment, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
on a historical basis the precision of the ERNIE model, to what 
percentage would it be accurate relative to the predictions of the 
large corporate banks in this country and their predictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, all of the 
forecasters use similar econometric models. 
 
What we find is that the numbers produced, for example, in this 
most recent budget of 6.8 per cent growth was seen as the best 
accurate assessment we could provide at that time. We tend to 
be ahead of the other forecasters in terms of timing. And to give 
an example of that, since our numbers came out, Global Insight 
has since adjusted its forecast for Saskatchewan to 5.8 per cent 
and Laurentian, just in the past several days, has come out and 
revised its forecast for Saskatchewan for 2003, up to 6 per cent. 
 
So the issue more is around timing. We tend to be a little more 
in depth a little earlier. We have information that’s available a 
little quicker. And the other forecasters then look at Global 
Insight, for example, and what our Department of Finance has 
produced and make their adjustments a little later in the year, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And to the 
. . . Mr. Minister, on April 2 of this year in Saskatchewan 
Hansard, page 329, the minister’s quoted as I may follow, and 
this is in context of billions of dollars: 
 

Mr. Speaker, when we looked at the projections from the 
Royal Bank for a gross domestic product, a real GDP in 
2002 with 31.6 (billion), they are predicting for 2003, 32.6 
(billion) — 31.6 (billion) to 32.6 (billion; for the) Bank of 
Montreal, 31.5 (billion) to 32.4 (billion; for) Scotiabank, 
31.6 (billion) to 32.4 billion real GDP. 
 
And what is our projection from Sask Finance — 30.5 
(billion) to 32.5 (billion). 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, and then to the minister, the problem 
that I have with this is that the ERNIE forecast here that you put 
loses at some point $900 million in some cases and $1 billion in 
others. And that’s the question that I would like answered, is 
where did that money go, and why is it included in the banks’ 
predictions? Who . . . I think that they understand money fairly 
well. And why is your department out 900 million to $1 billion 
on their predictions for the starting GDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, this 
question has been asked previously by the Finance critic. And 
as indicated, we were the first off the mark in predicting that the 
growth in 2002, or the real GDP in 2002 for the province of 
Saskatchewan, would decline 1.4 — a negative 1.4 — so we 
had two years of decline. None of the other forecasters had 
incorporated that. 
 
Since that time StatsCanada has also indicated that 
Saskatchewan was a minus 1.4 in its real GDP in 2002. So we 
have factored in a 6.8 per cent to get to that number of 32.5, 
whereas the other private forecasters had not included the minus 
1.4 when they put out their real GDP numbers in that 31.5 to 

31.6 range. 
 
But I think the important point to see here is that using the 
models and the adaptations that are developed, the two-year 
average for our forecasters, for the private forecasters, amounts 
to the same, and that’s in that 5.4 per cent rate over ’02 and ’03. 
So we’re really not out of sync with the private forecasters. The 
private forecasters have since made their adjustments to the 
2002 year and that is reflected in their new growth predictions 
for 2003, in that 5.8 and 6 per cent range, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Deputy Chair, would the minister be so 
kind then to update us on the projections provided now by the 
initial sources that he quoted — the Royal Bank, the Bank of 
Montreal, and the Scotiabank? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To you with 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To you and 
through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly I’d like to 
take this opportunity to introduce 23 grade 4 students from 
Kelvington School, along with their teacher, Tracy Ziola. And 
there’s also nine parents with them today as well. 
 
I’m very pleased they have an opportunity to come to the 
Assembly. Right now we’re in estimates. We’re talking to the 
government about how they’re spending dollars and the 
minister is answering questions for our members. 
 
So I’m . . . have the opportunity to watch this for a while and 
then we’ll have a chance to speak later and answer any 
questions you have. 
 
So thank you very much for coming and I hope you enjoy your 
day here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would join with 
the member opposite in welcoming the school group here. 
 
And with regard to the question from the member from 
Kindersley, as indicated the recent revision and forecast from 
Global Insight was 5.8 per cent growth for Saskatchewan. 
Laurentian has come out with 6.0 per cent. I don’t have the 
actual figures — the adjusted figures — for Royal Bank, Scotia 
Bank, for Bank of Montreal with me here today, but I’d be 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

 

more than willing to provide that information to him in a 
written context within the next 24 hours or so. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The question 
I would have would come secondary with regards to the 
econometric model. What of those about eight variables that 
you name, Mr. Minister, allowed your department to so aptly, 
as you say, predict the loss of gross domestic product relative to 
the banks’ prediction? Would it be the consumption factor, the 
investment factor, the inventory? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the 
simple answer is that the Department of Finance gets the 
information first. We get the information, for example, with 
regard to 2002, the final numbers in advance of the banks or 
even StatsCanada. So the agricultural numbers, the oil and gas 
numbers are all factored into our econometric model in advance 
of the other institutions. 
 
Also, it’s important to note that the prediction for our growth of 
6.8 per cent is based on a normal crop year. Some of the other 
private forecasters have still not incorporated a normal crop 
year; some are talking about a recovery. We are quite confident 
with the moisture levels that we will experience a normal crop 
year. And with that, we fully expect to meet our targets in the 
budget address of March 28, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Could the 
minister please outline in percentage what the ag sector makes 
up of the GDP of the province? 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think it’s 
important to point out that the categorization used by 
StatsCanada is for ag, forestry, fishing, and hunting. That 
number for Saskatchewan in 1996 was 11 per cent of GDP — 
’97, 9.1; ’98, 9.7; ’99, 10.4; 2000, 9.8; a drop to 2001 of 7.8; 
and 2002, a drop to 6.2 per cent. And we’re expecting a 
recovery in 2003 where those numbers will get more into a 
traditional context, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m surprised that 
we wouldn’t have the exact figures just on agriculture alone, 
having 47 per cent of the arable land in Saskatchewan, knowing 
the importance of agriculture. But it still seems to me that to 
have this kind of growth rate from one tiny sector is not 
necessarily all that reasonable. 
 
I am surprised with the — they’re not adequate, but there are 
social safety nets in place — that the gross revenues would have 
dropped to such an extent that it’s going to allow for so great a 
rebound. 
 
I find I would really . . . I would be welcome to some 
explanation on that, on how a sector, at a little over 6 per cent 
going to 10 per cent, is going to make up this large jump to 6.8 
per cent in the economy, as it is a small factor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d refer the 
member from Kindersley to the budget summary documents, on 
page 19 for crop production. The millions of tonnes of crop 
production in 2000 for Saskatchewan, 28.1; 2001, 19.8; 2002, a 

significant drop to 14.1; and our prediction for 2003 is a 
recovery to 25.6. 
 
So there’s nothing hidden. It’s produced in our budget 
summary. It indicates that the volumes of production in the 
province of Saskatchewan in 2002 were greatly diminished. 
This was following another diminishment that occurred in 2001 
from the averages, more in the 23 to 28 million tonne range, 
and we’re predicting a recovery in 2003 to the 25 million range. 
 
So when you look at the volume of crop production, you factor 
that in, and we factor in the recovery anticipated for 2003, that’s 
the impact that we’re seeing on our real GDP numbers, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Deputy Chair, if I understand what the 
minister is saying here, is he’s saying that there’s going to a 
massive recovery in a sector, that obviously the banking 
industry deals with the agricultural sector. And if the minister 
wouldn’t mind, from the numbers that he’s spoken of, give 
what kind of a growth within just the ag sector — you said on 
an average year, and the way that your StatsCan figures come 
out you’ve got fishery and forestry, which is a bit disappointing 
that you don’t have ag alone — but what kind of growth in the 
ag industry individually you’re expecting to see. 
 
Because if that growth rate is, as I think I’ve calculated it, well 
exceeding 15 per cent, I would say to the minister there’s not a 
bank in town or in this province that’s going to lend money on 
those . . . on that aspect. And most of the questions that I’ve had 
today have been relative to the disparity between your 
department’s projections and the projections of the private 
sector and the banking institutions. 
 
So again, for the minister, if you could answer for me, in a 
percentage term what percentage of growth does the minister 
predict for the ag sector in Saskatchewan in this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, with reference to 
the grain sector in terms of crop production, again in 2003, crop 
production is expected to grow to 25.6 million tonnes. This is 
an average production based on fair to average soil moisture 
conditions in most of the province and a real expectation of 
increased spring seeding. 
 
We have the numbers out. We know that spring seeding has 
increased. We’ve got the moisture levels from Sask Water that 
indicates average or above average moisture levels throughout 
the grain belt. So the average, with an average production — 
and that’s all we’re saying, is we’re looking for an average 
production — that would be an increase of 11.5 million tonnes, 
which is an 81.9 per cent increase. 
 
And this is not unusual for Saskatchewan. We’ve had two 
previous experiences in the past 20 years where we’ve had two 
consecutive years of drought followed by a significant rebound. 
And in both those cases the real GDP grew in that 6 per cent or 
higher range. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Chair, this is a prediction. So far with moisture 
conditions as they are, with the seeding almost completed, 
we’re confident that we will be getting more into the traditional 
averages in that 25 million tonne range for grains production, 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair. 
Would the minister be as kind as to outline which of the private 
banking institutions have at all acknowledged an 81 per cent 
growth in the ag sector this year; and further to that, are acting 
accordingly in their business applications because of those 
predictions? Or is he aware of anything even remotely close to 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think, Mr. Chair, that when we look 
at the banks and how they’re looking at this, they’re just . . . 
they’re not looking this as an expansion of Saskatchewan’s crop 
production. They are just looking at this as a return to normal 
crop production. 
 
So the ingredients are there; the conditions are there. And I 
would refer to a few quotes here that were following shortly 
after the March 28 budget. David Madani, the provincial 
economist with the Conference Board of Canada, is quoted in 
the March 29, 2003 Leader-Post, as stating: 
 

I don’t think (6.8 per cent . . . growth) is overly optimistic. 
It’s just based on the assumption of a normal crop. 

 
And Mary Webb, an economist at Scotia Economics notes: 

 
. . . the government’s forecast is entirely possible, 
especially in the agriculture sector. 

 
And CIBC World Markets notes: 

 
. . . the associated level of real output falls within the band 
foreseen by all economic forecasters. 

 
And BMO Nesbitt Burns simply notes that the volume of 
economic output 2003 is based on: 
 

. . . a return to normal crop levels after two years of severe 
drought. 

 
So this is just a return to normal. This isn’t a massive expansion 
of crop production; it’s just a return to normal crop production, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Could the 
minister please outline the PROs (pool return outlook) his 
department used for tonnage on . . . for the upcoming crop year 
on durum wheat, spring wheat, barley, canola, and peas? Thank 
you. Field peas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the numbers that are 
produced from Ag and Food for projections in thousands of 
tonnes for 2003 for wheat would be 7.3 . . . seven thousand 
three hundred and seventy-seven thousand tonnes. For durum, it 
would be three thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine 
thousand tonnes. For barley, it would be five thousand six 
hundred and fifty-nine thousand tonnes. And for peas, it would 
be two thousand and eleven thousand tonnes. And those are the 
numbers that are projections produced by the Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization. 
 
With the specifics on how they arrived at those numbers would 

be better put to that department when they are here in estimates. 
We have the gross projections as applied and provided by Ag 
and Food to us, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, my question was regarding the 
price, not the production. It’s with regards to the PROs and I 
see that . . . What I’m interested in is where did your 
department use its PROs for the price of wheat per tonne? 
Where did it take its PROs from? And how are these consistent 
with other measuring devices used throughout the country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. When we 
look at the PROs that were provided to us by Ag and Food in 
the lead up to the March budget, the price is indicated for the 
projection for 2003 for wheat, all grades, was 169.84. For 
durum, all grades, and this is tonnage at the farm gate, 173.22. 
Barley, all grades, per tonne at the farm gate, 147.29. And peas 
at one fifty. Those were the projections provided by Ag and 
Food in the lead up to the budget, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would just 
ask the minister, I understand that this wheat projection would 
encompass probably most of the board grains but is he aware of 
today’s current pit price on no. 1 Canadian red spring wheat and 
if he is aware of that, how this would affect these projections? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. When 
we look at the projections that are provided to us by Ag and 
Food in the lead up to the budget, that we incorporate those 
numbers in our projections but these numbers are adjusted in an 
ongoing basis as we get new commodity prices provided to us. 
 
At this point in time I can indicate that the wheat projection, 
which is the Canadian Wheat Board pool return outlook, the 
current is 157.77 — this is the May period — for wheat; for 
barley it’s 113.95. These adjustments will be incorporated on an 
average basis into our quarterly report, our mid-term report, and 
of course our quarterly reports right till the next budget year. 
 
There’s adjustments made on all of these factors on an ongoing 
basis, whether it’s oil and gas projections, whether it’s revenue 
projections related to corporate or personal income tax, so these 
are just one of the factors that we look at. We make the 
adjustments; we provide that information. And we make these 
adjustments on an ongoing basis, on a quarterly basis, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s kind of 
alarming just with regards to the split in the PROs there. As I 
read it, that’s 6 or 7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the last question that I would have has to do 
again with the budget and the growth prediction. We have a 
growth prediction from the banks for the final end of the gross 
domestic product ranging anywhere from 32.6 billion, 32.4 
billion, and our own province predicts is 32.5 billion. So it’s 
very much on target there. 
 
I take it that this is also an econometric model used to measure 
the end production. And my question to the minister is, why are 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

 

the private forecasters so dead on, relative to your department, 
in this one? And we’re aware that when you move the bottom 
number down, where you start from, your growth rate would be 
higher. Again, it just seems dubious to me that the private sector 
can forecast so accurately the top end number and yet be out by 
$1 billion to $900 million at the starting number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Again, Mr. Deputy Chair, it amounts 
to the timing. If you look at the timing of getting the actual 
2002 numbers, the Department of Finance had that information 
ahead of the private forecasters, ahead of StatsCanada, ahead of 
all of them. They have now incorporated the 2002 numbers to a 
large part into their projections. And StatsCanada, just in the 
past month, indicated that they had now incorporated minus 1.4 
per cent. 
 
So it really is a timing issue and as indicated, really for real 
GDP, all of the private forecasters as well as the Department of 
Finance economists agree that the real GDP number for 2003 is 
likely going to be 32.5 billion. We’ll know the actual number 
obviously next year but that is the forecast. 
 
And we’re really on the same page but I think it’s interesting to 
note that when we made our projections based on 2002 and we 
announced our 6.8 per cent, it was pooh-poohed. Now everyone 
is saying, well guess what; those numbers are likely correct. 
They were based on an accurate econometric model and 
everyone is talking about growth in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re talking about Alberta and Saskatchewan leading the 
nation in growth in 2003, and in 2004 again at the top of the 
pack. So I think we should all, and certainly the people of 
Saskatchewan, should recognize that our economy is growing, 
that we have rebounded from two years of drought, that we are 
very positive about our outlook. We are seeing increased 
manufacturing. We’re seeing increased retail sales. We’re 
seeing increased tourism. All of these things are tied in and look 
for a very positive outlook for the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’m going to turn the focus of my questions for the 
balance of the time that we have allotted this afternoon to 
pension liabilities and the pension plans that currently exist in 
the province, as well as the national and international 
implications of some of the things that are happening. 
 
We see, Mr. Minister, across the country where many 
corporations are . . . have responded, I guess, to the pension 
fund declines because of the diminishing return on investments. 
And we see many plans who of course now are no longer 
reporting surpluses. They are in fact reporting deficits for the 
last year. 
 
I look at a report, Mr. Minister, done not too long ago where a 
series of companies were . . . They gave their reports based on 
the previous year. And out of 104 companies that were 
surveyed, only 23 showed a surplus for that year. All the rest 
were in a deficit position. 
 
Mr. Minister, the auditor has for years been talking about an 
unfunded pension liability. And we see in his reports that the 
unfunded pension liability, and I am referring, Mr. Minister, to 

the Report of the Provincial Auditor 2002 Fall Report on page 
no. 34 where that graph indicates that the pension liability in the 
year 1991 was about 2.7 billion. And the report as of March 31, 
2002 is 4 billion. So we’ve seen significant increase in the 
unfunded pension liability. 
 
I know that the Public Accounts Committee and a number of 
your officials were present for discussion around public . . . the 
pension, the unfunded liability of the pension plans. 
 
My questions, Mr. Minister, in this area: could you inform the 
people of Saskatchewan what pension plans are involved in this 
sum of money that as of March 31, 2002 was $4 billion? What 
pension plans contribute to those numbers? 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, March 31, 2003 has come and 
gone and I’m sure your officials have an estimate of what the 
unfunded pension liability is as of a couple of months ago. 
Could you indicate what that number is? And secondly what 
does your government plan to do about this ever-growing 
unfunded pension liability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, several questions. 
I think it’s important to note that the pension liability of the 
province, 98 per cent of that liability, is carried within two plans 
— which is the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan and the Public 
Service Superannuation Plan, which are two of the old plans. 
These are the big two. These are the ones that were closed to 
new members in 1977. 
 
The 2002 public accounts numbers indicate that pension 
liability at $4 billion. We have not yet released the 2003 public 
accounts, but we have committed to release those by August 1. I 
would suspect that the numbers will be in a similar range when 
the public accounts are released prior to August 1. 
 
And what do we plan to do? Well our plan has been to pay our 
obligations. We have met our obligations in the past since these 
plans were closed to new members. And we’ll continue to meet 
our obligations to pay these plans in the future, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Mr. Minister, if I look at the last . . . the trend that is indicated 
in the Provincial Auditor’s report, we see the unfunded pension 
liability for the last four years going from 3.7 billion to 3.8 to 
3.9 to $4 billion. And you’ve agreed with those numbers. 
 
And you’ve said that you see similar numbers. Are you seeing 
4.1 billion as the number that we can assume will be there for 
March 31, 2003? Or in light of the loss of revenue in pension 
plans, from investments from the previous year, do you expect 
that number will be significantly larger than 4.1 billion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think that when 
we look at the global value of pension plans and the actuarial 
analysis that is provided to these plans, that when there was 
rapid growth in the plans several years ago in terms of the 
aggregate value of these plans, the number that was 
incorporated into the actuarial analysis smoothed out the benefit 
of the growth in those plans over some five years. 
 
It’s an expectation as well that when the aggregate value of a 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

plan has dropped due to declining market conditions that there 
would also be an actuarial smoothing over several forecast 
years. That’s the first part of the question. 
 
The second part of the question with regard to pension 
obligations, what we have found is that if you look at the 
nominal dollars — and I know the member opposite is very 
familiar with this topic — and then the, say the fixed 2000 or 
actual dollars, if you look at the growth of revenues of the 
province of Saskatchewan and you look at the growth in the 
pension liabilities, that really they are covered off. And if we 
project into the out years what are the demands on the GRF 
(General Revenue Fund) related to the pension liability, we see 
that there is a smoothing effect based on inflation and that the 
actual demands to the plan, even though the nominal dollar may 
be higher, the actual, the real dollars are consistent with actual, 
the payments that we’re making today. 
 
So as stated in Public Accounts several years ago, and our 
response to the Provincial Auditor is that we believe that our 
pension liabilities are manageable, and we believe that we’re 
more than capable of meeting our obligations to these plans, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
In that report given to Public Accounts, the Public Accounts 
Committee in 2000, the Public Service Superannuation Plan — 
which you’ve indicated that that plan plus the TSP, the 
Teachers’ Superannuation Plan, are responsible for 98 per cent 
of that unfunded pension liability — numbers were given at that 
time, Mr. Minister, that the PSSP (Public Service 
Superannuation Plan) plan, that as you’ve indicated, had been 
closed in 1997, had about 2,294 members — 2,294 members. 
Do your officials have an update on the current active members 
that are enrolled in the PSSP plan? 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would refer the 
member opposite to Public Accounts Volume 1, main financial 
statements 2001-2002, page 20. And the active members 
identified in the top column for the PSSP is 2,069 active 
members in 2002, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that number, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, very recently the Public Service Superannuation Plan, 
through a class action lawsuit, has launched, through that 
lawsuit has launched a complaint of course against government 
that indeed the unfunded liability is not allowing for 
improvements, is not allowing for changes, is not allowing for 
indexing, and a number of concerns. 
 
I believe, Mr. Minister, and I’m referring to an article in the 
Leader-Post dated April 28, 2003 which indicates that the 
lawsuit has been launched. Mr. Minister, do you have an update 
as to where the lawsuit currently sits and how will government 
be able to match the dollars requested, if indeed this lawsuit is 
successful? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, when we look at 
— and we’ve talked about this topic before — certainly there 

has been a lawsuit launched on behalf of superannuates. The 
response of government is that of course we’ve been meeting 
all our obligations and we believe the legal framework is 
absolutely sound for us meeting these obligations. 
 
The member opposite asks specifically about, have we got any 
further details. We have asked for further details with regard to 
the nature of the lawsuit. We have not yet received any updated 
information from the original filing. So until we get the actual 
updated information it’s not, it certainly wouldn’t be proper for 
me to comment any further on this topic other than to say that 
we fully believe that we are meeting all of our obligations to the 
PSSP, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
article that I referred to makes reference to the fact that the 
lawsuit contends that it was an obligation of government to 
make matching contributions to the plan. Is there reason for 
taxpayers to be concerned that the government did not actually 
make matching contributions to the plan? Or are you at liberty 
to make a comment like that to that question if this is before the 
courts? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To you and 
through you to all the members in the House, it’s a privilege for 
me to introduce another school group today. 
 
We have 10 students from Annaheim School, grade 9 and 10 
students. Their teachers, Mr. Block and Mrs. Doepker, are here 
with them. I know when most people think of Annaheim they 
think of Doepker Industries but we also have a really great 
grade 9 and 10 class that we should be thinking about today as 
well. 
 
We had an opportunity to speak for a couple of minutes, and I 
explained to the students that there’s estimates going on and the 
Minister of Finance is speaking with our critic for Finance 
discussing how the province’s money is being spent. 
 
And I hope you enjoy your time in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Department of Finance 

Vote 18 
 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I too would join 
with the member opposite in welcoming the school group here 
today. 
 



June 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

 

And to answer the question put forward by the Finance critic 
from the Saskatchewan Party, I think it’s important to note out 
that we believe and are solid in our belief that we have been 
fully compliant with the statute and every retired teacher and 
every retired public servant in these plans is receiving 100 per 
cent of their entitlement as defined by statute, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And I 
expect that pensioners will be, will be encouraged by that 
comment that they will continue to receive their entitlement. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government is moving towards summary 
financial budgeting for next year. And obviously the reporting 
of all agencies, departments, Crown corporations will become 
part of that. And the allegation, of course, or suggestion by the 
Provincial Auditor is that the unfunded pension liability is a 
debt of taxpayers; it is a liability of the taxpayers and of the 
province of Saskatchewan through the government. 
 
Have your officials recommended to you how we will 
incorporate the pension plans that are currently responsible for 
98 per cent of a $4 billion unfunded pension liability as a debt 
when we start to move towards summary financial budgeting? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, with leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, seated in the Speaker’s gallery is a person well 
known here in the city of Regina and well known in the 
education circles. And as we’re talking about the Teachers’ 
Superannuation Plan today, I’m sure that Mr. Gerry Kleisinger, 
who is currently a member of the Regina Catholic board and 
has been a member for many years, and I had the opportunity to 
serve on the Canora school division board at the same time as 
Mr. Kleisinger was involved with the Regina Catholic board. 
 
And I’d like all members to welcome Mr. Kleisinger to the 
Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Also to ask for leave to introduce 
visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just want to join with my colleague 
who introduced Mr. Kleisinger, to also draw attention to Mr. 
Kleisinger and to say how pleased we are to see that he’s here 
today to visit the Legislative Assembly. I had the pleasure of 
serving with Gerry on Regina City Council for a number of 
years, way back when. And we’re very pleased to see him here 
today. 

And again I would ask my colleagues to extend him a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think that it’s 
important to note that we will be going to summary financial 
budgeting in the ’04-05 budget; that we will be fully 
incorporating in our budget estimates our requirements to meet 
the obligations of our pension plans; and we will also be 
incorporating, as we have done in the past, the liability as 
indicated in our summary financial statements. 
 
So if you look at the overall package that we’ll be moving 
forward within ’04-05, with a summary financial plan, with the 
performance plans as outlined by departments, with the 
budgeting that will be voted off before the House with regard to 
the GRF, that the pension liabilities, that the commitments that 
we have, will continue to be voted before the Assembly. And 
the overall liabilities as outlined by actuarial analysis will be 
covered off in terms of what that might be in our summary 
financial statements, as we currently do, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, let’s turn to the second plan of those two, that you’ve 
identified as the contributors to 98 per cent of that unfunded 
liability. 
 
And probably the more significant amount is from the 
Teachers’ Superannuation Plan. I understand that probably the 
Teachers’ Superannuation Plan would be double the amount of 
unfunded liability in comparison to the Public Service 
Superannuation Plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you update the Assembly . . . or could your 
officials provide you with the numbers that would update us in 
terms of the number of active members in the plan, in the TSP 
plan currently, and the number of superannuates and surviving 
spouses that would be drawing benefits from the TSP plan, as 
of . . . probably your numbers would be current up to March 31, 
2002? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And 
I’ll reference to the same page as previous with regard to the 
PSSP and page 20 of Public Accounts 2001-2002, that the 
number of active members in the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Plan is 5,269 at that time. 
 
And I think, as we are getting close to the allotted time, I would 
just like to thank the members opposite, the member from 
Kindersley and the member from Canora-Pelly, for their fine 
questions today. And I would like to thank my officials who 
have been with us this morning and this early part of this 
afternoon to answer the questions of the members opposite. 
And I would wish everyone a very relaxing weekend. Thank 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2003 

 

you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I appreciate your comments and your answers this 
morning. And I do want to indicate that the questions on 
pensions, I have a significant number of questions, and we 
didn’t have that opportunity to deal with. So I hope that the next 
time we have the opportunity to have Finance estimates in the 
House that indeed your pension officials will be present as well 
so we can continue this discussion. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before moving an 
adjournment motion I would like to wish all of my colleagues a 
good, restful weekend. Enjoy the spring, all the spring weather, 
and have a little bit of time with your families. 
 
And I now move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:32. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1479 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1480 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1480 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1481 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1481 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1481 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1481 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1494, 1498 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1499 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1499 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 D-Day Anniversary 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1481 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1482 
 Juno Beach Centre 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1482 
 Saskatchewan Job Statistics 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1482 
 2003 Training for Excellence Award Winners 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1483 
 Scleroderma Luncheon 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1483 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Federal Response to Distress in Beef Industry 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1483 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1483 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1484 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1484 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1484 
 Highway Conditions 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1486 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1486 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1486 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1487 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1487 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1487 
 Regina Sound Stage 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1486 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Provincial Policy Framework and Action Plan for Older Persons 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1488 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1489 
 
 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1489 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1489 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1489 
 Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1491 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Finance — Vote 18 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1493 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1497 
 


