















































Hansard: April 30, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 791 
 April 30, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens in the province of Saskatchewan regarding 
the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation’s announcement 
that the 2003 premiums charged to farmers will increase by up 
to 52 per cent and further. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse 
the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Beechy, 
Birsay, Lucky Lake, Vanguard, and Elbow, Saskatchewan. I 
am pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw concerned about 
the lack of hemodialysis services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the great city of Moose Jaw and I’m proud to present on 
their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I’m 
standing in the House to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
of the Cypress Hills constituency. The issue at stake here, Mr. 
Speaker, is the renewal of Crown grazing leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
community of Lancer and Rosetown. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise again with a petition from the citizens of 
Rockglen and area who are very concerned about the lack of 
health care services. And it’s quite a huge area that they 
provide services to. And the prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed, naturally, by people from 
Rockglen, but also from Willow Bunch, Wood Mountain, and 
as far away from Alberta and BC (British Columbia) who are 
looking to migrate to this province but require good health 
services. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine that are 
concerned with the alarming increases in the crop insurance 
premiums. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by my neighbours from 
Laporte, Mantario, and Eatonia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present yet another petition on behalf of constituents 
concerned with the condition of Highway 22, particularly that 
portion between Junction 6 and Junction 20. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Earl Grey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Mr. Speaker, I present to you a petition on the 
saving of the twin bridges between the Battlefords in 
relationship to the economic development and recreational 
opportunities. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all possible action to preserve the historic original twin 
bridges between Battleford and North Battleford. 
 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed from people of the Battleford and 
North Battleford community. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the government’s 
handling of the Crown land leases. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Glenbush, Medstead, Leoville, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the continuation of services, current 
level services available at Kindersley Hospital; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 13, 18, 27, 35, 36, 40, 42, and 90. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: can the minister please provide a 
copy of the cumulative investment of SaskTel International 
portfolio presentation currently being made by SaskTel 
CEO Don Ching and other senior SaskTel officials to 
various Saskatchewan groups including this morning’s 
presentation to the Regina Chamber of Commerce? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: 
currently how many employees and full-time equivalents 
are found in each of the following branches and/or division 
of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming? And all the 
departments are listed. 

 
I will also ask a similar question for the fiscal year 2002-2003, 
2001-2002, 2000-2001. 
 
I so present. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the House, a regular visitor to this Assembly, Ms. 
Karen Jackson. She’s a teacher at Balfour Collegiate and she’s 
here with three of her students, grade 12 students, that are 
seated in your gallery. 
 
And I would ask all the members to join me in extending a very 
warm welcome to Ms. Jackson and her students. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
an honour today to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, 33 students in the east gallery from 
grade 7, 8, and 9 and the great community of Colonsay. 
 
And it’s great to see them here today. Their teacher that 
accompanied them is Nadia Breckner and the chaperones are 
Judy Kalinocha, Cathy Weir, and Darla Rourke. And I hope 
they enjoy the proceedings today and I am looking forward to 
meeting with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the member from Watrous in welcoming the students 
from Colonsay. 
 
And you might wonder why am I welcoming the students from 
Colonsay. And that is because my grandfather was the 
implement dealer in Colonsay and when I grew up I was taught 
that Colonsay is the centre of the universe. Except my dad, who 
was from Zelma, which is down the road, said that Zelma was 
the centre of the universe. 
 
And I also want to welcome the teacher who’s a personal friend 
of mine, so I also would like to join in welcoming the students 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, two young ladies sitting in 
your gallery — Karen Vanderloos and Carla Moreau. They are 
two University of Saskatchewan students who I understand left 
yesterday to visit Regina, and I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, when they 
left Saskatoon yesterday they had no idea that they would end 
up in your gallery. 
 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, they lost their wallet last evening 
when they were out with friends and they needed their uncle, 
the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, to bail them out. 
So as part of their education, continuing education, they are 
visiting with us here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’m happy to introduce my friend seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Michael Wright. Mr. Michael Wright is from 
Saskatoon. He has just graduated from the University of 
Saskatchewan law school. It is because of Michael that I am 
now married to my dear wife — he was the man that 
introduced us. 
 
And I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming to the 
proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Bicycle Safety Video 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a new 
bicycle safety video produced by two Weyburn policemen and 
using local talent premiered at St. Dominic Savio School in 
Weyburn on Thursday, April 17. 
 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) wanted the film so 
Constables Marcel Roy and Garth Oberkirsch produced the 
15-minute video last fall. Roy and Oberkirsch are coordinators 
of the police department’s annual bike rodeo in Weyburn. 
 
A light punk rock group formerly known as Happy Camper 
wrote and played the music for the video. Members of the band 
are Preston Roy, Michael Froh, Vaughn Hortness, and Kalen 
Swedburg, all of Weyburn. The band is now known as Away 
From Here and has been joined recently by Ryan Robillard. 
 
Grade 5 and 6 students from Weyburn were used in the video. 
Logan Chinski appears as the professor and Richard Roy is the 
police chief. Scripting and directing by Nathan Binns; filming 
and editing by Rob Hillstead. Hillstead is a student in media 
arts at the U of R (University of Regina) and Binns has training 
in computer graphics from the U of R. 
 
The video will be shown in schools in Estevan later this month. 
Copies of the video are being sent out to police departments in 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, and the video will be distributed 
throughout Western Canada. 
 
I’d like all members of the Assembly to help me congratulate 
the policemen and students from Weyburn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment Equity at  
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fundamental to this 
government’s vision for Saskatchewan is our commitment to 
fostering an expanding economy from which no one is 
excluded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation is proud 
of its partnership with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations in the operation of the Regina and Moose Jaw casinos, 
and is committed to fulfilling the agreement that at least 50 per 
cent of the workforce at SGC (Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation) be Aboriginal. 
 
At last count the combined workforce of Casino Regina and 
Casino Moose Jaw was 768 employees. Of these, almost 53 per 
cent were women, almost 52 per cent were Aboriginal, visible 
minorities accounted for just over 6 per cent, and persons with 
disabilities comprised just under 5 per cent of casino 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SGC stresses training and development 
opportunities for employees and has won numerous awards for 
its human resource policies. But perhaps the best indicator that 
the SGC is, quote, “an employer of choice” is that last year the 
casinos experienced an employee turnover rate of less than 15 
per cent, as compared with an average of 30 per cent in the 
gaming industry and 200 per cent in the hospitality industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes that the future of this 
province can’t be wide open for anyone unless it is wide open 
for everyone. And that is why this government welcomes 
diversity and practises the politics of inclusion. An expanding 
economy from which no one is excluded is part of our plan, 
Mr. Speaker, and that plan is working. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Midwest Female Lazers Win Provincial Hockey Title 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we have another hockey championship team. The 
Midwest Female Lazers finished this season on a high note by 
clinching the female midget A provincial hockey title. The girls 
had some very tough series to play to get there and they played 
some excellent and exciting hockey. 
 
In the first round they defeated the North Battleford team 4 to 3 
in overtime. Next they played Saskatoon and came out on top, 
7-5 in an overtime win to win the northern title. They then met 
Estevan in the provincial final. The girls played some awesome 
hockey in the first game, dominating the play and defeating 
Estevan 6 to 0. They travelled to Estevan for the second game 
of this series and tied 2-all. The total points were 8 to 2 for the 
Midwest team to clinch the provincial title. 
 
Please join me in thanking the coaches: Angus Phillips, 
assistant coach; Huntz Klachn, trainer; and Dale Robertson, 
coach. The girls were from the communities of Unity, Wilkie, 
Kerrobert, Denzil, Major, Maidstone, Neilburg, Biggar, and 
Meadow Lake. Congratulations, girls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
Arbos Award Recipients 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House today to congratulate 
Sharon Armstrong and Doug Willard, the two most recent 
recipients of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Arbos 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

awards for outstanding contributions to that professional 
organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sharon Armstrong’s teaching career took her to a 
number of rural schools including Spring Valley, Kindersley, 
Ituna, Wadena, and Wynyard, where she taught for 16 years. 
Ms. Armstrong was an STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) councillor for 22 years and served on a host of 
provincial committees prior to retirement in 1993. 
 
Along with her work in the STF, Ms. Armstrong was also 
elected mayor of Wynyard six times and has been a board 
member for Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 
She has chaired the Wynyard district community health clinic 
and sat on the provincial Police Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Doug Willard is currently president of the 
Canadian Teachers’ Federation but served on the STF 
executive for eight terms, including two as vice-president and 
two as president of the STF. As provincial president, he was 
instrumental in organizing the Saskatchewan task force on the 
role of schools. He also sits on the boards of such organizations 
as the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives and the 
Canadian Education Association and the Media Awareness 
Network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me 
in congratulating these two fine members of the teaching 
profession. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Deregulation of Electrical Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in this 
legislature we had a very interesting debate about deregulation 
of the electrical industry. We were debating how it is indeed 
that the NDP government has taken the first . . . taken 
Saskatchewan down the first steps towards deregulation of the 
electrical industry here in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
also how they’ve increasingly allowed the private generation of 
power, of electricity here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And there was time afterwards for questions and answers, Mr. 
Speaker. And some members opposite asked some questions 
that I have been able to look at in Hansard and determine that 
the answers provided in Hansard by myself weren’t as direct as 
they could have been, because all of the questions had been 
answered before right in this Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, not more than a year ago in March 2002. 
 
The specific question was — and it violated parliamentary 
process, Mr. Speaker — it said: 
 

Will you, sir —will you, sir — guarantee to the people that 
you will never, never sell off any of the assets of 
SaskPower? 

 
The answer to the question, Mr. Speaker, is this: the answer is 
no. We know, Mr. Speaker, that this government, this 
government with all of its hare-brained schemes in the 
international sides of SaskPower — and we detailed them in 
SaskTel — will present many opportunities for the people of 

the province to review the Crowns and decide to get rid of 
those hare-brained schemes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in the interest, in the interest of direct answers in this 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker, we’re proud to stand up and make that 
happen today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Curling Association Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 
privilege last Saturday to attend the Saskatchewan Curling 
Association awards reception on behalf of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a great year for Saskatchewan curlers. Not 
only did Saskatchewan have four teams win Canadian 
championships this past year, we had three teams win world 
championships — the Steve Laycock and Marliese Miller 
teams from Saskatoon, and the Nancy Kerr team from Regina. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there was another national award winner 
from Saskatchewan curling and that was on Saturday night. 
Bernadette McIntyre of Regina won the prestigious CCA 
(Canadian Curling Association) Ray Kingsmith award as the 
Canadian Curling Association’s Executive of the Year. The 
award is presented to the volunteer who best exhibits a 
dedication to curling and Ms. McIntyre is the first 
Saskatchewan winner of this award. 
 
Among her other curling accomplishments Ms. McIntyre is the 
first female president of the SCA (Saskatchewan Curling 
Association), chair of the SGI CANADA Charity Classic, 
founder of the Casino Regina Women’s Challenge, a 
committee member of the 1992 Labatt Brier, board member 
and president of the Highland Curling Club, and a founding 
member of the Sandra Schmirler Trust Fund. 
 
She does all this, Mr. Speaker, while working as an assistant 
vice-president for SGI, showing once again how many 
members of our Crown corporations go above and beyond the 
call of duty in giving back to our communities. 
 
I ask all members of the House to join me in congratulating Ms. 
McIntyre’s win and showing what Saskatchewan people can do 
when they work together. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wynyard Honours Laycock Rink 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month I had 
the privilege and the honour to be in attendance in the 
community of Wynyard when the community packed the civic 
centre to honour the Steven Laycock rink, the world junior 
men’s curling championship team. 
 
The reason that the citizens of the area gathered in the civic 
centre was to honour one of their own. Kyler Broad was the 
lead for the Steven Laycock team. 
 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

 

Mr. Speaker, the evening started with the traditional piping in 
of the head table, the curling team. And the program . . . part of 
the program, the father of Kyler, Ken Broad, had put together a 
video history of their run for the championship, Mr. Speaker, 
including their key shots in their winning games in Ottawa and 
a number of the highlights from the world championships in 
Switzerland, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly as one sat and listened to the comments of these 
young representatives from Saskatchewan, it made one realize, 
Mr. Speaker, that truly Saskatchewan people certainly can be 
the best in the world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government’s Response to Questions  
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the NDP’s (New 
Democratic Party) contempt for the legislature and the people 
of Saskatchewan reached a new low. 
 
The CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
minister refused to answer question after question after 
question about the NDP’s failing investments. And then he told 
reporters that he has no intention of answering opposition 
questions because he doesn’t agree with our agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, have you ever heard of anything so arrogant? We 
don’t answer questions from people who don’t agree with us — 
that’s what the NDP are telling the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree with the minister’s 
arrogance? Does he agree with a minister who refuses to 
answer questions in this legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this 
government has been accountable and will continue to be 
accountable, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government 
provides accountability that was never provided in the years, in 
the 1980s, when they were government, Mr. Speaker, never 
provided that level of accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker, through 
Crown Corporations, through a new process, through 
significant transactions, Mr. Speaker, we will be accountable to 
the people of Saskatchewan. Should we improve on that? 
Absolutely we should strive for ways to improve on that and 
we will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After a litany of 
cover-ups — cover-up after cover-up — the NDP is then 
saying, we’re not going to answer any questions from people 
who don’t agree with us. That’s not democracy. That’s 
dictatorship. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not supposed, Mr. Speaker, we’re not 
supposed to automatically agree with the government. That’s 
why we have a government and an opposition. The 
opposition’s job is to hold the government accountable by 
asking questions, and the government’s job is to answer those 
questions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CIC minister is refusing to do his job. He is 
showing nothing but arrogance and contempt for the people of 
Saskatchewan and for this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are asking the 
Premier: will he fire the Minister of Crown Investments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is it, is it the 
Sask Party’s and the opposition’s role to keep the government 
accountable? Absolutely it’s their role, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to this quote yesterday. Here’s 
what a journalist who’s covered the legislature for years had to 
say about — on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
yesterday — said that, referring to the Sask Party Leader, says, 
that he asks questions that 99 per cent of which are a litany of 
political rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. A litany of political rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one disagreement. The 99 per cent may not 
be high enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if those members opposite want good answers, Mr. 
Speaker, if they want answers they should go to Public 
Accounts, Crown Corporations, where they get detailed 
answers, Mr. Speaker. And they shouldn’t fill their questions 
full of rhetoric, Mr. Speaker — don’t fill it full of rhetoric. 
 
And they too should be accountable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Tell us what your agenda is on privatization. 
Tell us, Mr. Speaker. They should tell us, Mr. Speaker, what 
their agenda is on selling off the Crowns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday and on previous 
days the opposition has asked the minister specific questions 
and he has refused to give answers to those specific questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read you a quote. I’d like to read you 
this quote: 
 

We, the opposition party, have a responsibility to ask the 
government tough questions, and they have a responsibility 
to answer them.  
 

Do you know who said these words, Mr. Speaker? The Premier 
did when he was in opposition. The Premier was specifically 
criticizing the former government’s investment in Saskferco 
and he was demanding answers because in his words, this 
money is coming out of the public purse. 
 
My, my, my, how the Premier has changed his tune. Today his 
NDP government loses millions of taxpayers’ dollars out of the 
public purse and he doesn’t think his government has to 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

answer. 
 
My question for the Premier is: why doesn’t he live up to his 
own words? Will the Premier become a man of his word and 
order his minister to start answering questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well such 
self-righteous indignation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a quote yesterday from the Sask Party 
leader yesterday. And here’s what he said. Mr. Speaker, he 
said, and I quote, he says: 
 

We will make a commitment to answer questions in the 
House. We will not stonewall and we will not disrespect 
the Legislative Assembly.  
 

Mr. Speaker, what did the member from Swift Current do less 
than five minutes later, Mr. Speaker — less than five minutes 
later? You know what? He was asked questions on 
privatization and on deregulation. He refused to answer the 
questions. Three times in a row, Mr. Speaker, he refused to 
answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, self-righteous indignation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. Order. Order. One at 
a time here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So after their 
Leader of the Sask Party says that they won’t stonewall and 
they’ll answer questions, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift 
Current gets up here — three chances he has to be absolutely 
clear on their policy on deregulation and privatization. He 
struck out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well my 
colleague, the member from Swift Current, has answered that 
question previously; he answered it again today. We will 
answer it consistently every time we are asked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just two months ago in the wake of the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) scandal, 
this Premier held a news conference to announce, we’ve 
learned our lesson; we’re going to be more accountable from 
now on. But what’s happened since then? 
 
The NDP lost millions on bingo and they covered it up. They 
lost millions on their Palm Springs cable company and they 
covered it up. They lost millions on their Atlanta-based 
dot-com and they covered it up, Mr. Speaker. They lost 
millions on Ag Dealer and they covered it up. Yesterday the 
minister admitted that he had no intention to answer any 
questions about any of these events. 
 
I ask the Premier today, who has defended his minister: what 
happened to the Premier’s promise to the people of 
Saskatchewan to be accountable? Why is he allowing cover-up 
after cover-up after cover-up by his ministers? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well there are 
no cover-ups, Mr. Speaker. There may have been in the 1980s, 
Mr. Speaker. There may have been in the 1980s. But I’ll read 
this quote again, Mr. Speaker, from the provincial . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well here’s 
the auditor’s opinion, Mr. Speaker, in 1991, March 31, 1991, 
referring to the years prior, Mr. Speaker, in the late 1980s: 
 

In my opinion, (he says) because of the accounting 
principles used to prepare these financial statements (they) 
are inappropriate, these combined financial statements do 
not present fairly the financial position of the Government 
of the Province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 

And then, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 
 

My general concern is that the legislators and the public 
are not provided the financial information required to help 
them understand and access the financial position and 
results of the operations of the Government. 

 
(14:00) 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, here’s what the auditors say now after 
we’ve come in and cleaned things up, Mr. Speaker. He says: 
 

In our opinion, these consolidated financial statements 
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position 
of the corporation as at December 31, 2002 . . . 

 
Who isn’t providing accountability, Mr. Speaker? It’s right 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
have a question for the minister responsible for SaskTel, who 
keeps apparently saying the loud part quiet and the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this minister has a bad habit of 
saying the loud part quiet and the quiet part loud. Because 
when he does finally get around to sort of, kind of, sort of 
answering a question, the answer’s not correct. 
 
Yesterday here’s what he said in this Legislative Assembly, 
and I quote: 
 

(The Saskatchewan Party) refers to investments in Palm 
Springs . . . Mr. Speaker . . . there never was any 
investment in Palm Springs. I’ll say it again publicly — no 
investment. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a couple of 
documents: 
 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

 

Craig Wireless . . . (that’s the company they’ve invested in, 
Craig Wireless) is a . . . cable and internet provider with 
operations in Manitoba, . . . (BC), and Palm Springs, 
California.  

 
Here’s another one: 
 

Craig . . . International . . . is a wireless cable and internet 
(service) provider with operations in Manitoba, British 
Columbia, and Palm Springs . . . 

 
Those quotes come from SaskTel’s annual reports. So if they’re 
wrong, Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: did he 
approve of those annual reports before they were tabled in this 
legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well so much gusto. Mr. Speaker, when SaskTel . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well listen if you want to hear the answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel, when they . . . When SaskTel 
International, Mr. Speaker, invested in Craig Wireless — listen 
carefully — when they invested, Mr. Speaker, there was one 
employee in Palm Springs that was employed by the parent 
company. SaskTel did no business down there whatsoever. And 
you know what? That one employee, they wound down the 
business there, Mr. Speaker, within a year. One employee. 
SaskTel did no business down there whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s interesting of course 
because that information about Palm Springs appears not only 
in one SaskTel annual report, it appears in the next year’s 
annual report too. You’d think they might, you’d think they 
might of picked up on a small issue, like where are the 
companies that we’ve invested taxpayers’ dollars actually 
active in, Mr. Speaker. But apparently it’s not a priority. 
 
We asked questions, Mr. Speaker, yesterday also and the day 
before about agdealer.com. So we didn’t get any answers to 
those, but we’ll ask the questions again today. 
 
Will the minister confirm the NDP paid $8.1 million for 
agdealer.com? How much money did Ag Dealer lose in 
2001-2002? And what was the net value of agdealer.com’s 
assets when they were transferred into DirectWest? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I stand by the 
original point I made, much more than 99 per cent of what they 
ask is rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In answer to the question, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to Craig 
Wireless — because that was the first part of his question, Mr. 
Speaker — I indicated that there was one employee, Mr. 
Speaker. And now, because the Crown corporation’s report in 
minute detail down to apparently one employee, Mr. Speaker, 
now they’re being critical of that. Mr. Speaker, one employee 
was employed down there. 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to Ag Dealer, Ag Dealer was rolled 
into DirectWest in the year 2002, Mr. Speaker. I was absolutely 
clear about that. And the profits that DirectWest have made 
because we now own it 100 per cent, or DirectWest we’ve 
owned 100 per cent for two years, had a profit of about $1.7 
million. Is there any problem with that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is still no 
answer. There’s still no answer from this minister. This 
government’s own financial statements book the assets of Ag 
Dealer, value the assets of Ag Dealer, when they were rolled 
into DirectWest, at under $300,000. This is an investment they 
spent 8.1 million taxpayers’ dollars only two years ago. There’s 
a huge difference there — well over 7.5 million taxpayer 
dollars unaccounted for. The minister won’t answer the 
question. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question then we can move to perhaps yet 
another SaskTel investment. Over the past couple of years, 
SaskTel has paid a total of $5.4 million for a dot-com, a 
dot-com in Nashville, Tennessee called tappedinto.com. Will 
the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan how much money 
the NDP has lost so far on this dot-com gamble? And what is 
the value of the NDP’s $5.4 million investment in 
tappedinto.com today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that question . . . First of 
all — I’ll answer the question — but that question, Mr. 
Speaker, he knows it is very unlikely the minister would have 
that level of detail in the Assembly here. 
 
But let me say very publicly, very publicly — and we’ve done 
this, Mr. Speaker; we do this through order in council with 
respect to tappedinto — the investment that was approved was 
$7 million. That’s what was approved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have access to those records. They have access to them, 
Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, he stands up in here and he 
asks the question. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to make this point. There are one of 
two possibilities: either they ask these detailed questions 
because they don’t want to get into the discussion about the big 
picture and the policy on their . . . their policy on Crown 
corporations or — or, Mr. Speaker — or they don’t understand 
balance sheets like they didn’t understand them in the 1980s, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think they don’t understand them again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here is why we want to ask these 
questions about out-of-province investments by SaskTel. 
Here’s why we want to ask questions and ask the government 
to defend its own record of losing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Take a 
minute or two and a deep breath, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s records show, last 
week, that the NDP government blew 85 million taxpayer 
dollars. They lost them on out-of-province investments like 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

we’re talking about right now and that’s why we ask these 
questions, Mr. Speaker, because that $85 million should have 
been available for health care and education and highways in 
the province of Saskatchewan. That’s why we ask the question. 
This is the government that pleads poverty. It says it has no 
money to balance the budget, but yet it won’t defend or account 
for the blowing of $85 million. 
 
The question was about tappedinto.com in Nashville, 
Tennessee. They’ve invested the taxpayers’ money — $5.4 
million worth of it. What is the status of that investment and 
what is the total exposure for taxpayers on that investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I don’t 
understand the question, Mr. Speaker, from this perspective. He 
says they would have this extra money for things like health 
care and education. Mr. Speaker, correct me if I’m wrong, but I 
thought the Sask Party in their platform were freezing health 
care and education. I thought they were going to freeze it. What 
do they want with the extra money, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have no idea about balancing books, Mr. 
Speaker. They have no idea about business. None whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again and I will repeat in this House and 
outside this House, they have one agenda. It is to discredit 
Crowns; it is to discredit the investment of those Crowns so 
they can position themselves — irrespective of what the Sask 
Party member from Swift Current says today about 
privatization — so they can sell the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the privatization plan on this side of 
the House that that member should be most aware of and most 
concerned about is our plan and the people of this province’s 
plan to privatize that minister, to privatize that whole front 
bench back to the private sector, Mr. Speaker. That’s the plan 
that they should be worried about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is the record of this government. They lost 
$28 million on a bad SPUDCO deal and they didn’t tell 
anybody — they hid it; they covered it up — 17.2 million lost 
on Coachmen, 7.9 on mega bingo, 9.5 on Persona Inc., 10 
million on Craig Wireless, 13.5 million on Navigata, 14.5 
million on Retx. Mr. Speaker, the list of losers goes on and on 
and on. 
 
Will the minister just stand in the House then and please 
provide the name of one . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, members. 
I just once again ask members just to lower the tone so that the 
questions can be fully heard. And I invite the member from 
Swift Current to put his question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister just rise in the 
Assembly then and name one winner. And failing that, will he 
. . . I’ll go back to the last question. If he can’t name one 
winner, just tell us what’s the value of the taxpayers’ 
investment in the Nashville dot-com tappedinto? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well at least 
if they privatize me I would have the one benefit of not having 
to listen to the rhetoric from that member any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, but I have a 
bigger agenda than that, Mr. Speaker, and I think the winners 
. . . He asks where the winners are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know who the winners are? The winners are the people of 
Saskatchewan. They’re winners, Mr. Speaker, because our 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker, employ 9,500 people. They’re the 
winners, Mr. Speaker, because over the last 10 years they got 
$1.6 billion to provide services to the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re winners, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. 
Speaker, because they have head offices here in Regina and 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, they are winners because they partner 
with over 600 businesses, buy goods and services from over 
12,000 businesses here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
why they’re winners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Annual Report of the Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in the 2002 Fall 
Report, the Provincial Auditor criticized SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) and SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority). Mr. Speaker, according to the 
Provincial Auditor, SLGA is responsible for supervising SIGA 
and the SLGA’s supervision of SIGA remains deficient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SIGA was required to table its 2002 annual report 
by September 30, 2002. According to the Clerk’s office, this 
report has not yet been tabled. Mr. Speaker, SIGA’s annual 
report is seven months late. Will the minister answer, why has 
it not been tabled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member knows 
and the public know, there has been significant changes at 
SIGA that have involved the chief financial officer. We have 
new executive at SIGA. We have brought under control . . . We 
have met the benchmarks, Mr. Speaker. And it must be 
understood, with a new chief financial officer, with the new 
executives that head up that very competent, that very 
competent board and the executive, Mr. Speaker, that document 
will be filed in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is the minister that allowed 
the NDP in the dead of night to form a coalition with the 
Liberals to enable the NDP to stay in power. This is why the 
province is in more debt and deficit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. 
 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Now this same minister is willing to be less 
than forthright with his answers to protect this NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that SIGA’s annual report has been 
delivered to the minister of Liquor and Gaming. Will the 
minister tell this Assembly, does he have SIGA’s annual 
report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That member 
has the audacity to stand in this House and talk about 
dead-of-the-night deals when she’s surrounded with the very 
people that resulted in her being where she is, Mr. Speaker. 
She’s spiralling totally out of control, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only that. Now once again that member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, the Saskatchewan Party, their agenda not 
only to discredit Crowns, Mr. Speaker, but also to discredit 
SIGA, our First Nations communities that we have partnered 
with in this province and have been very successful in 
supporting communities, both for health care, for community 
funding. And, Mr. Speaker, they have the audacity to stand up 
in this House and be critical of their efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — In the fall of 2000 auditor’s report, the auditor 
makes it clear that 7 of the 19 recommendations made by him 
to SIGA have not been met. The concern is around the timing 
of the delivery of annual reports and it’s also about the content 
of the annual reports. And now the pattern continues. 
 
And this minister dares to stand in this House and somehow tell 
us that he is not responsible for this NDP government being in 
power in the province of Saskatchewan today. He’s the one that 
went with the minister, the Minister of Finance, and enabled 
this government to become the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and he is responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister of Liquor and Gaming has the 
annual report, will he table it in the House and if he will not, 
what is he hiding from the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that member is 
certainly spiralling totally out of control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nothing’s being hidden. We have made 
tremendous progress with our partners, the First Nations 
community of this province. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think — I don’t think, I know 
— because a lot of people have told me: thank heavens that you 
and your leader did what you did because otherwise it would 
have been devastating to this province for that inexperienced 
group of men and women to try and take the seriousness of 
governing a great province like Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and table 
written questions no. 151 and 152. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to no. 151 and 152 have been 
tabled. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger, that Bill No. 13 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a privilege 
to stand in this Assembly today and to speak to this piece of 
legislation we have before us, The Parks Amendment Act, 
2003. 
 
And as some of my colleagues have already indicated, Mr. 
Speaker, there were some issues in this Bill that I think we need 
to look at very carefully. Certainly we want to recognize the 
fact that the Bill acknowledges the need for grazing permits, 
and extending the grazing permits from one to five years is 
certainly an important first step. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last few years we have seen in the 
province of Saskatchewan that farmers and ranchers across the 
province have been dealing with some very difficult times and 
certainly areas of this province that have seen significant 
drought conditions resulting in lack of pasture, a lack of 
grazing opportunities, as these farm families look to build their 
farming opportunities and their farming enterprises. 
 
And one of the issues we have raised over the past number of 
years, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we have felt very strongly 
that it’s important the province of Saskatchewan be prepared to 
act and address some of these concerns, especially in areas 
where we have public property like parks. 
 
And we’ve also noticed with the wildlife federations and Ducks 
Unlimited in the province of Saskatchewan where they control 
vast areas of land and over the past number of years have really 
limited, in fact in some cases just stopped, all grazing 
opportunities on these lands. 
 
And what this Bill does . . . One of the things that this Bill does 
indeed is looks at and addresses an issue of grazing 
opportunity. And we certainly would take a moment to 
compliment the government for what they have done, 
especially last year, in opening up grazing opportunities in our 
provincial parks and on provincial lands where there was 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

basically a hold put on grazing over the past number of years. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the province of 
Saskatchewan, this province continues to have a very large 
dependence on agriculture. It’s an agricultural-based 
community. And while we have moved into less of a 
dependence on agriculture and the economic activity and 
spinoff that we have from agriculture, Mr. Speaker, we still as a 
province will continue to see the economic impact in this 
province is, in a major way, will continue from agriculture. 
 
And even the last few days, Mr. Speaker, while some areas of 
the province have experienced exceptionally good moisture 
conditions, whether it’s rain or snow, there are certainly vast 
areas in the province that continue to see a lack of moisture and 
additional moisture that will be needed to help build up the 
reserves that have actually disappeared over the last few years. 
 
And while those reserves are being built up, and while we’re 
waiting for rainfall to establish the growth of our grazing 
opportunities and grazing lands and certainly our hay and 
pasture lands, it’s important that the province react and, as 
we’ve seen, open up the doors for grazing opportunities. 
 
And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, and my colleagues have 
mentioned over the last period of weeks in this Assembly as 
well, that it’s important for the province to give some 
leadership and to show the people of Saskatchewan and the 
farming community, the agriculture community — and more 
specifically when we talk about grazing we’re talking about the 
livestock industry in this province, Mr. Speaker — show, give 
some leadership in showing that we’re supportive and we 
recognize the importance of your industry. 
 
And so what this Bill does is adds to and goes, I guess I would 
say, a step further than what it has in the past, in the fact that it 
opens up the door now for the government to extend the 
grazing leases from one to five years. And we certainly think 
that is a move in the right direction. And I know many of the 
livestock associations across this province have been telling us 
that that is a good move; that is what they’ve been looking for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look at this Bill as well, and the 
amendments that are coming forward in the piece of legislation, 
an issue that continues to be raised with my colleagues and I is 
the issue of land entitlements. And while this Bill doesn’t 
necessarily deal directly with land entitlements, basically one 
of the major concerns . . . While the Bill is extending grazing 
permits from one to five years, one of the big concerns in the 
province — and certainly coming from the livestock industry 
and people who rely on grazing leases — is the fact that until 
these land entitlements issues are dealt with, a lot of livestock 
producers are sitting in a situation where they really have a lot 
of uncertainty in regards to their farming operations especially 
when we talk about farming operations that have been in 
families for a number of years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we agree with and we acknowledge that this 
step of moving from one to five year grazing leases is an 
important step, and it’s certainly a step that is going in the right 
direction, and we compliment the government for that. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, this legislation as well talks about 

updating various park legal land descriptions and we have some 
major questions we’d like to raise in that area. 
 
We feel that there’s certainly been a lot of uncertainty over the 
past number of years as we’ve seen the changes in how the land 
titles have been handled in the province of Saskatchewan as 
we’ve moved from handwritten to a computerized program and 
the glitches that landowners and homeowners have faced as 
they’ve had land transfers from . . . either through a sale of land 
or transferring to a family member and the slowdown that 
we’ve seen in that area. And in fact it’s what we’ve . . . What 
most people have experienced has become a more costly 
process of land transfers as a result of the changes to The Land 
Titles Act. 
 
We feel that there are a number of issues that need to be looked 
at as to what the government is really talking about when it 
talks about updating park legal land descriptions. And I think 
we . . . There are some questions we need to ask, certainly 
some questions that are being raised with our caucus in regards 
to this issue and the changes in this legislation regarding legal 
land descriptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I noticed as well that the minister has indicated 
there’s also a land exchange between the Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band and Lac La Ronge Provincial Park. And I think the 
minister indicated the community of Sucker reserve and reserve 
land at Bittern Lake and the Lac La Ronge Indian Band — 
they’re all involved in this certain section of the legislation. 
 
I believe what it is doing is trying to address some of the issues 
surrounding Indian land entitlement. And we certainly are 
taking the time to look at this, to see exactly what it means in 
regards to the Lac La Ronge Provincial Park and what it will 
mean for the Indian bands in the area as the government looks 
at moving some land out of the park into the Lac la Ronge 
Indian Band to address their needs. 
 
The minister indicated that this change will allow for 
accommodation of future housing needs on the reserve. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think your colleagues, certainly my colleagues 
on many occasions have, as we’ve met with our First Nations 
leadership on our reserves, have . . . that one of the issues that 
has always come to the forefront is housing needs. And a little 
later on this afternoon I think we’ll be able to get into some of 
that discussion with the minister now responsible for Sask 
Housing. 
 
But in regards to the legislation we have before us, the changes 
in the Act that allow for some of the land to move from the 
parks to the reserve, as the minister indicated . . . He talked 
about the fact that it would allow for future housing needs on 
the Lac La Ronge Reserve. And I think that’s an area we’d like 
to get into further discussion with the minister at the time, and 
it may not necessarily be with the minister responsible for 
housing in the province of Saskatchewan, but it’s an issue that 
we want to look at very carefully. 
 
And we need . . . The question that will need to be asked is, 
will the changes that this legislation is allowing, will they be 
instrumental in really addressing the serious needs that the band 
has in regards to its housing needs and whether or not we might 
be looking at some changes down the road? 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

 

So it’s certainly important, Mr. Speaker, that we take the time 
to review this legislation more carefully. While at the . . . off 
the top it would seem that it’s a fairly straightforward piece of 
legislation, I think there are a number of questions in this 
legislation in regards to a number of issues, as I’ve discussed, 
that need to be addressed. And therefore at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 18 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with mixed 
feelings that I stand today to speak on this Bill. This Bill brings 
forth presumptive WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) 
legislation for a cancerous link to firefighting. 
 
I acknowledge that firefighting is a dangerous occupation. That 
every day men and women risk their lives in the line of duty, 
fighting fires to save lives and property. And I commend the 
good work that the firefighters of this province do for all of our 
communities. 
 
I also acknowledge that there is a growing body of evidence 
that links the occupation of firefighting to occupational 
diseases such as cancer. This Bill recognizes brain cancer, 
bladder cancer, kidney cancer, primary non-Hodgkins 
lymphoma, or a primary leukemia. 
 
If a firefighter suffers one of these diseases, it will be presumed 
that this disease is a result of his or her occupation. The 
individual must be or must have been a full-time firefighter for 
a designated period of time and must have been regularly 
exposed to the hazards of a fire scene. The mandatory period of 
employment for anyone contracting these cancers is to be 
determined by the regulations after consultation with the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Toxins and carcinogens released during the combustion of 
synthetic materials — which is very common these days in 
industrial fires — pose both an immediate and long-term risk to 
firefighters. 
 
I understand that the need for this legislation is because . . . 
well despite WCB’s claim to recognize occupational diseases 
as compensatory, firefighters with these cancers have had their 
claims denied. 
 
(14:30) 
 
In fact in 1982, firefighters in Saskatoon were exposed to a 
burning heap of chemical waste at the University of 
Saskatchewan. This waste contained radioactive materials as 
well as acids and numerous chemicals. The Saskatchewan 
Professional Firefighters Association indicate, and I quote: 
 

Of the dozen firefighters who fought the blaze, half have 
already died from cancer and two others have been 

diagnosed with leukemia. 
 
That’s eight out of twelve people who responded to this fire, 
six died and two have leukemia, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
according to the Firefighters Association, and again I quote: 
 

All but one of the WCB claims filed in connection with 
this case were denied. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, out of the eight claims, only one was 
accepted — one out of eight. So despite WCB’s claim to 
recognize and compensate certain occupational illnesses, its 
track record is abysmal. In fact the WCB’s track record is 
exactly the reason that this presumptive legislation is necessary. 
Because if the system was working the way it’s supposed to 
work, firefighters who submitted their evidence to substantiate 
their claims of occupational illness would not have had their 
claims accepted. But only one out of eight had their claims 
accepted — one out of eight. 
 
So what this legislation does is reverse the onus for firefighters. 
Firefighters will no longer have to prove they got the cancer 
from the job, but the WCB must prove that the firefighter 
didn’t get the cancer from the job. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know it’s very troubling that after we 
have men and women protecting our towns, cities, and citizens 
from fire and then they get cancer due to job-related causes, 
that while they’re going through their cancer recovery process 
they’re forced to fight the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
This Bill is good for firefighters who are struggling to hold 
onto their lives fighting cancer. They can put all of their energy 
into healing and they will no longer have to go through the 
frustration of dealing with the WCB in order to have their claim 
accepted. So I believe that this Bill improves the process for 
firefighters. 
 
But I also have some concerns. Every fire is different and every 
firefighter is different. Now I understand that this legislation 
only applies to firefighters who have been regularly exposed to 
the hazards of a fire scene. And I assume that within the 
research that’s been done, only long-time firefighters have been 
studied. And this is concerning because the term regularly is 
arbitrary when it comes to toxic fires. 
 
Given certain chemical fires and given that individuals may 
face different circumstances while fighting these fires, it’s 
possible that one fire may be enough to cause serious damage. 
So I would hope that the research in this area is ongoing and 
that the regulations are updated regularly to provide for future 
research findings. 
 
I’d also hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that based on this research, 
improvements to firefighters’ protective gear might limit 
exposure in the future and reduce the chances of them 
developing cancer or leukemia. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I support legislation that improves the 
process of settling claims for injured and sick workers. If 
workers are led to believe that they have coverage for 
occupational illness, and there is documentation that certain 
industries have higher incidences of certain illnesses, then these 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

workers should not be denied coverage under the WCB system. 
 
I also have concerns for other emergency workers who may be 
at the scene of a fire — such as paramedics, policemen, so on 
— who may be subjected to toxins in some cases once, or in 
other cases perhaps on numerous occasions relative to their line 
of duty. They too would be acting in the line of duty and they 
may not have the protective equipment firefighters have, yet 
could be subjected to toxic smoke and fumes. 
 
So I would hope that in the future some of these grey areas may 
be addressed. Which leads me to my next concern and that is 
this legislation is rather a band-aid solution to one of the many 
problems within the workmen’s compensation board. When 
there is the kind of medical evidence available on occupational 
disease that there is, for example, on the firefighters and cancer, 
it seems that the WCB should not have to be forced into acting 
to accept this medical evidence. 
 
Instead the firefighters must go through a lengthy process of 
organizing and lobbying, and extensive work must be 
undertaken to bring this Bill before the legislature to deal with 
a problem that should already be dealt with under the WCB 
system. To this point I would like to read a few clauses from 
the WCB policy and procedure manual on occupational 
disease. It says, and I quote: 
 

A work related disease or condition normally refers to an 
injury which results from exposure to a causative agent in 
a work environment, or one that manifests itself following 
a latent period after exposure to a causative agent. Though 
it normally results from numerous exposures, it can relate 
to one, though this . . . (would) usually be (a) traumatic, 
(case) where it is . . . (easy) to identify . . . (with a) cause. 

 
The policy states, quote: 
 

When a number of claims are submitted for a disease or 
condition from the same trade, occupation, industry or 
employer, and the employment environment provides 
exposure to the causative agent, a record of these trades, 
occupations, industries or employers is to be maintained 
and referenced for any future claims of the . . . disease or 
condition. 

 
In other words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, firefighters submitting 
claims for cancer should be well documented at the workmen’s 
compensation board by this point. The policy also states, and I 
quote: 
 

Where the worker’s exposure to a causative agent is 
peculiar to a trade, occupation, industry or employer, the 
CSR (client service representative) shall make inquiries to 
determine if any non work causes exist and if none are 
present the claim shall be accepted. 
 
Where there are both work and non work causes, the CSR 
will assess the degree of exposure or effect on the disease 
by both and determine, based on such things as: the 
latency, progression and the nature of the disease, degree 
of exposure and medical support of the cause, whether to 
accept a claim. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the WCB’s policy on occupational 
disease. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s pretty clear that 
the WCB’s policies are not being adhered to and hence the 
need for this presumptive legislation. 
 
The problem is that this legislative amendment only deals with 
firefighters and not other workers who may find themselves in 
similar dilemmas. And I know that every MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) in this Assembly has had a substantial 
number of calls from injured workers seeking guidance about 
the WCB system because they have had a legitimate claim 
denied. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I recognize that there 
are cases of WCB fraud which must be guarded against so 
workers with legitimate claims can be given proper 
compensation. I also recognize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
employers who foot the bill by paying WCB premiums are also 
concerned with escalating administrative costs and increasing 
premiums. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rather, these problems have 
yet to be addressed by this government. And with these 
comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to say that I 
support the Bill and move that the Bill now proceed to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 9 — The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s an honour today to be able to stand and 
speak to Bill No. 9, The Act to amend The Agricultural 
Implements Act. 
 
It, according to the minister, aligns our legislation with 
regulations with the other Prairie provinces, and it’s quite long 
overdue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s been some time 
since this Act has been amended and the industry has changed 
and evolved over time. 
 
When I read the minister’s notes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
minister stated that these amendments are directly a result of a 
series of consultations with key stakeholders who have worked 
with the government to improve and strengthen The 
Agricultural Implements Act. And he also stated that these 
stakeholders provided their expertise and thoughtful advice. 
And I quote — he said, “They spoke with us and we listened.” 
 
And it’s a very interesting statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
it was sad, quite frankly, to lead the public into believing that 
this is a very proactive and responsive government. 
 
But sadly, as with most issues, it simply isn’t true in this case 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

 

either. A more descriptive statement that the minister should 
have used is, we dragged our feet long enough, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we didn’t have enough legislation prepared for 
the session to justify our existence in the House so therefore I 
guess we’ll finally make the changes that the industry has been 
asking for, for probably going on six or more years. 
 
It’s to my understanding that the consultation process has been 
ongoing for at least that long. These are changes that the 
stakeholders in the industry have been asking for for at least 
that long. And finally, this particular minister did decide to act 
but, you know, as far as listening well, Mr. Upshall, I’m sure, 
listened too and Mr. Lingenfelter, he listened as well. And 
finally I think because of, due to lack of legislation that they 
have available for this session, they decided to amend this Act. 
 
Many of the amendments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are updates to 
the definitions and explanations that were within the Act. They 
simply make the Bill more clear, comprehensive, and definite. 
So that is a positive thing, I believe. And other changes that I 
view as positive improvements, you know, there’s a number of 
those and I’m more than happy to support them. 
 
The protection in the Act has been expanded to leases, with or 
without the right to purchase. And I feel that’s an important 
change, as more and more equipment is being leased rather 
than purchased outright. So the members on this side of the 
House are quite pleased to see that the protection for the 
producers who are leasing equipment will be extended to those 
leases, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another section of the Bill allows financial institutions on 
financial leasing corporations in Saskatchewan to provide farm 
implement leases — and the farmer who gains finances through 
these outlets, that they will still be fully protected under the 
Act. And that is a good thing for the producers of the province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Two particularly very welcome changes that I like to see are 
that the dealer will be allowed to sell parts at a price different 
than the list price and that will mean that they can legitimately 
offer a discount, that there won’t be . . . That will not be in 
question. It does make the dealers more competitive within one 
. . . against each other. But it is something that I think is very, 
very important to them. 
 
And it will also allow the dealers to sell whole goods and parts 
for a product even after the manufacturer has gone into 
receivership. And again, that’s an extremely positive thing for 
the dealers in order for them to serve their clients and their 
customer base. Because prior to the changes in this Act, the 
dealer was not allowed to make those sales until the assets of 
the manufacturer was purchased by someone else. So that 
meant that they were unable to service their customers who had 
equipment manufactured by the manufacturer who had gone 
into receivership. So those are, those are positive changes. 
 
One that I know in talking to people involved with the industry 
that I don’t see in this piece of legislation but I do think that it’s 
very valuable to producers to have something in place, is that 
the dealers in Alberta are required to get a performance bond of 
no less than 50,000 from insurance companies. So that if a 
farmer puts a deposit on a piece of equipment and the dealer 

goes into receivership before the farmer has a chance to pick up 
that piece of equipment, the farmer’s not out his deposit, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it’s disappointing that that change wasn’t also made in this 
piece of legislation because I feel it’s a very important 
protection tool for the producers. When we’re talking about 
agriculture equipment, we’re talking about large amounts of 
money, quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it’s something that I don’t feel this minister addressed and 
he could of. So that was disappointing when I went through the 
Bill. 
 
The Bill interestingly addresses changes to the Ag Implements 
Compensation Fund, which is a fund that is available to 
producers if they feel aggrieved in some way by a dealer or if 
they’ve suffered a loss for some reason. And the ag dealers 
quite welcome this fund, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it 
alleviates small claims having to go to court. It’s a good way to 
deal with smaller grievances by producers, if there has . . . 
something’s gone wrong with the deal. 
 
And in the case of a claim, the maximum award was $5,000 
and this amendment will increase that to $10,000. And I realize 
that very few farmers actually have the need to file a claim. But 
for those who do it’ll be interesting to question the minister 
what the size of those claims are because, as I mentioned 
earlier, when you’re dealing with agriculture and agriculture 
equipment, you know, the bill can be quite large. 
 
So is the increase from 5,000 to 10,000 even enough or should 
it have been a little bit bigger increase? And many of the 
people in the industry are saying they wouldn’t have minded if 
it had have been increased even more because it does keep 
smaller claims out of the courts. 
 
Something that is of concern that I’ve seen in the Bill is the Ag 
Implements Compensation Fund, which is a building fund to 
deal with claims, is now going to be directed into the General 
Revenue Fund. So it’s something that I feel that is happening 
far too often with this government. They have specialized funds 
to deal with special situations and suddenly they’re depositing 
more and more of those specialized funds into their General 
Revenue Fund. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Now I don’t think it’s a huge sum of money, but it is 
substantial. I’ve been told that it’s around $400,000 and I can 
be corrected if I’m wrong in that. And I’m looking forward to 
being able to question the minister why he felt that that specific 
fund should be directed into the General Revenue Fund. And 
unfortunately it happens far too often where then it is 
squandered by this NDP government. 
 
Another really questionable change in the Bill is that it 
empowers the board who handles the claims to levy a fine if a 
particular dealer had a number of complaints filed against him. 
Now at first blush, this seems to protect the farmers a great deal 
and it would. You know, the intent obviously of the change is 
to address difficulties that occur due to a repeat problem dealer. 
 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

But I guess the question that I need to ask of the minister when 
that chance arises is, has that been a problem? Has there been a 
need that made him feel that this change had to be made? 
Because usually, I would think that if there was a dealer who 
wasn’t maybe forthright and honest in dealing with his 
customers or his clients or the producers, fairly soon he would 
be out of business, Mr. Deputy Speaker; that the market would 
dictate who’s the good dealer and who isn’t a good dealer. So I 
question why that change needed to be made, why did the 
minister feel that that was a provision he needed to add to the 
Act. 
 
Possibly one of the most concerning changes, and again it 
raises many questions as to why, is that this Bill gives 
unbelievable power to the minister himself. The minister may 
impose additional terms and conditions on a dealer for their 
licence that the minister deems appropriate. And this is not 
something . . . A lot of the changes within the Bill aligns the 
Bill with what’s in legislation in both Manitoba and Alberta, so 
in the Prairie provinces. But this particular change is not in 
either Alberta or Manitoba. 
 
So it will be interesting for the minister to answer that question 
as to why he felt the need to empower himself and his position 
in future years when he is no longer the minister. Why did he 
feel the need that that position should have that type of power? 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting this Bill. There 
are questions that I, you know, definitely will be asking when 
the opportunity arises. 
 
And this is something that the industry has asked for. There’s 
been consultation, as I mentioned earlier, for many, many 
years. And so this is a Bill that I think has a lot of merit to good 
changes. 
 
But something else that I think that the agriculture dealers 
would be very, very happy to see, quite frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the agriculture dealers want to see a strong agriculture 
industry. And they want to see profitable farms and they want 
to see financially stable farmers. 
 
And that is something that this government has dropped the 
ball in a big way in providing for this province. They, you 
know, a number of years ago, tore up the risk management tool 
that the producers of the province had available to them, 
promising to replace it year after year, and never did — and 
basically left the producers on their own, and something that 
other provinces did not do. Most provinces have companion 
programs in place, and so when a year comes along where 
there’s a wreck — such as what we’ve been facing now for two 
years — they at least come into that situation fairly stable. And 
yes, it’s a difficult time, but they’re able to get through it. 
 
It’s unfortunate that our producers didn’t have that opportunity 
to be able to access a risk management program that would 
have helped them through the situation. And that is where I feel 
that this government has failed the producers of the province in 
a great deal. 
 
And the other thing that they’re facing is increased crop 
insurance rates that are astronomical and extremely difficult to 
face considering that it has been years . . . or it has been two 

years of a drought and low income. They’re looking at low 
prices. 
 
So if the NDP government had grown the economy, if they had 
grown the economy so that we had a strong economic base here 
in Saskatchewan, we could afford those programs for the 
producers of this province. Instead all we hear is excuses. 
 
And that’s what agriculture dealers would like to see — a 
profitable industry, profitable farmers who could afford to 
come and be their customers. 
 
So with that, I would like this Bill to go on to committee. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have 
these officials with me today. Seated next to me is Mr. Gord 
Nystuen. He’s the deputy minister. To my left is Mr. Hal 
Cushon, who is the assistant deputy minister. Over to my far 
right is Mr. Doug Matthies, who’s the general manager of crop 
insurance. Seated directly behind me is Mr. Ross Johnson, 
who’s the manager of operational services, and beside Mr. 
Johnson is Karen Aulie, who’s the director of corporate 
services branch. And in the back row I have Louise Greenberg, 
who is the assistant deputy minister; and Maryellen Carlson, 
who is the assistant deputy minister; Greg Haase, who is the 
director of lands branch; Dave Boehm, who is the director of 
financial services branch; and Laurier Donais, who is the senior 
manager of financial services, corporate services branch. 
 
And those are my staff, officials that are with me today, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I’m looking at a 
copy of the Speech from the Throne that your government 
started this current session with, and in that speech there is a 
section dealing with the whole area of greenhouse gas 
emissions and carbon credits and so on. And the section that 
I’m referring to, your government expresses disappointment 
with the Government of Canada in that the federal government 
has refused to recognize credits for farmers’ carbon sinks. 
 
Your government indicates that you will be taking the federal 
government to task on this issue and make it a point of 
negotiation. I wonder if you could explain what action your 
government has taken to date on this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much. I thank the 
member, Mr. Deputy Chair. I want to just say a number of 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

 

things. That in the Throne Speech, as you know, our 
government has been front and centre in terms of ensuring that 
we have established in this province a grain strategy and an 
environmental sustainable strategy and done a number of things 
around it. On the greenhouse gas emission piece there have 
really been three things, three pieces of work that have been 
conducted, primarily led by the . . . initially by the Minister of 
Environment, certainly complemented by the ministry of 
Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
And to date the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs has been 
the lead ministry on this, certainly complemented by the work 
that we do out of Ag and Food around three things. One is that 
we want to see in the actual allocation of carbon sinks, which is 
I think where the member is leading this conversation to. We 
have already written to the ministry of Intergovernmental 
Affairs in Ottawa, led by our Saskatchewan minister, and 
we’ve asked for three things to occur. 
 
One is that we want to see a larger recognition of the carbon 
credits for Saskatchewan because we feel that the work that the 
federal government has done in establishing the level of carbon 
credits for our province has been underestimated and so the 
minister has asked that we see a higher allocation for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, the provincial government has asked, the 
Saskatchewan government has asked the federal government to 
provide or see that those carbon credits can see their way to 
producers. Because we think it is they who in fact at the end of 
the day are creating the credit for Saskatchewan people and for 
the national government and accordingly they should be 
credited to Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And thirdly, what we have also been saying is that the federal 
government has indicated that the implementation period of the 
carbon sinks would begin in the year 2000, I believe, and 6 or it 
might actually be 8. It’s 8, I think; it’s 2008. What we’re saying 
here is that there should be a period of retroactivity here to 
incorporate those producers who have already been ensuring 
that we have capacity in our province today to provide for the 
carbon credit. 
 
And so it’s those three areas of which we’ve already written to 
the federal ministry. The Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
has yet not received a response from the federal government 
but it is on that front that we’re proceeding to get the benefits 
of carbon sequestration for our Saskatchewan producers. It’s a 
tough word, Mr. Member. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. Then I take it from your 
comments, to summarize, the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs has written and raised this issue with the federal 
Minister of Environment. I wonder if you could provide us 
with a copy of that communication between the two ministers. 
 
I guess secondly what I would ask is, within your own 
department, Minister, what type of resources have you devoted 
to this file, this whole area of carbon sinks and storage of 
carbon and the benefits that it could provide to our producers 
down the road? 
 
We know that when the Kyoto is, when it comes into effect, 

and that I guess hinges — is my understanding of the whole 
issue — it hinges on whether Russia signs on, signs the Kyoto 
Protocol. But if that time arises when we are into this whole 
implementation program, we know that farm producers along 
with the average citizen in the province will most likely see 
higher energy costs, higher gas and diesel prices, higher 
electrical costs due to the nature of the whole implementation 
plan where our energy producers will be required to spend 
significant dollars to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. 
And I’m sure they will attempt, as most businesses do, to pass 
those costs along. 
 
So we know that our farmers will have higher energy costs. 
That’s pretty well a certainty. And as far as I can see in this 
whole area of greenhouse gases and implementation plan and 
so on, the carbon sinks are about the only thing that I can see at 
this time that offer some benefit. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And it’s a hugely important issue for the producers of our 
province and for our province, not only for our farm people but 
for our whole . . . for all citizens of this province. And I think 
your government — I’m hoping at least — that your 
government is devoting sufficient resources and energies to this 
issue. And I would like an explanation as, Minister, as far as 
the resources you have allocated to this file in your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I thank the member for the question. We 
have the intergovernmental department committee that’s been 
working on this piece now for some time and we do have 
representation from the Department of Agriculture and Food 
that serve on this committee. This committee has been struck 
for, as I’ve said, for some months now. 
 
The lead ministry has been Intergovernmental Affairs, given 
that the negotiations and discussions really do need to happen 
at the national level with the federal government. And 
accordingly it’s been led by the ministry. 
 
And you’re absolutely right that, over the period of time that 
we move forward on this file, we’re going to see a greater need 
for us to become far more responsive in terms of how energy is 
conserved and who gets the credits here. 
 
And we, through our department, have had involved as well a 
number of farm organizations. The Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture, as you know, is very much involved in this 
process, as well at the national level. At the local level in 
Saskatchewan we have the soil conservation group that has 
done a tremendous amount of work on it. The Saskatchewan 
Research Council has done additional work. 
 
So collectively we have a number of groups and organizations 
that are assisting us collectively in putting together the strategy 
and also to ensure that Saskatchewan at the end of the day 
becomes a benefactor of the decisions that are made at the 
national level. 
 
Now we know that this will be a difficult discussion and 
certainly some difficult negotiations and the minister of 
Industry and Resources in the past, who led the campaign on 
this file and now is leading it from Intergovernmental Affairs, 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

clearly in my view has a very good understanding and 
appreciation of it, has served Saskatchewan very well in terms 
of the negotiations to date. 
 
And I know that with his full knowledge of this file, 
Saskatchewan will be and Saskatchewan producers at the end 
of the day will be well served through his leadership and for 
sure through the work of the intergovernmental department 
committee. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I take it from your comments that you 
have one or two departmental people that are responsible for 
this area, or is it just some individual who has this 
responsibility as a bit of an add-on? 
 
I see that this whole issue, it’s certainly not confined to 
Agriculture. Agriculture’s only one area that will be affected by 
this whole . . . of this implementation plan, certainly Industry 
and Resources. And I would expect that that department would 
also be a key player in the whole . . . developing the whole, the 
position, the provincial position, and leading the discussions. 
 
But I would hope, Minister, that your department is equally 
strongly represented and that you have personnel and resources 
allocated to this particular file because, although as you 
mentioned, farm organizations are playing a very active role 
with it, I don’t think we can expect to leave everything up to 
those people. Quite often they’re limited with as far as 
resources, and whether it be financial or personnel and that sort 
of thing. And I would certainly urge your department to take a 
very active role because this — as I had said — this is a hugely 
important issue. And I would certainly not like to see the 
province of Saskatchewan once again be left out in the cold on 
this issue. I think this is an issue that needs to be driven from 
the provinces. 
 
I guess I would ask, Minister, are you consulting with our 
neighbouring provinces, the other Western provinces, who will 
be equally be affected and could also benefit from the 
implementation of a carbon storage regime or method in these 
. . . in our country that will recognize the contributions that our 
farmers are making and allow them to participate in the 
financial rewards that may be there, if this whole area is 
developed to the extent that that in fact could happen? 
 
So, Minister, I guess to summarize, once again could you be 
somewhat more specific as to the type of resources you’ve 
allocated, and also are you in the consultation with our 
neighbouring provinces on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member, we 
have a number of people, my officials tell me, that are involved 
on the Intergovernmental department team that is working on 
this piece. And they would be from individuals and folks who 
are working on the ethanol strategy, which you know has a 
significant impact on environment and on greenhouse gas. We 
have people in the Department of Agriculture and Food who 
are in the ag forestry side, and we have people from the soils 
division that are also working on this piece. So we have a 
number of branches within the government of which people are 
included in the larger intergovernment committee that’s 
working on this. 
 

And although we’re not providing the lead ministry on this 
piece, the reality is is that collectively the officials and the 
ministers are working closely, making sure that we not only 
complement each other but also ensure that Saskatchewan’s 
position is well represented from a variety of different fronts. 
 
As well we have had discussions with the provinces of 
Manitoba and Alberta around this piece because they too have 
large agricultural communities, of which agriculture will play a 
large part in terms of the carbon sinks, and accordingly those 
discussions will continue. 
 
Collectively we have been raising similar and like issues and I 
expect that as we move along on this file, you’ll see a stronger 
voice coming out of Western Canada collectively as ministers 
then approach the federal government for some of the more 
difficult challenges that we’re going to have, as I’ve described 
in the onset, as to increasing the level of recognition on the 
sinks and to where the credits go to. We’re going to have, as 
you can appreciate, a head-butt on that front because the federal 
government has their own position as to what that should look 
like. And at the end of the day we’re going to . . . we know 
we’re going to be in a difficult debate. 
 
And just to make a short comment, Saskatchewan and its 
people have never been in the cold as long as we’ve been 
making sure that good public policy is in place in 
Saskatchewan, and you can be assured here that we’ll be sure 
that this issue too will ensure that Saskatchewan is extremely 
well represented in our work. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, to refer to your last comments, what I 
was referring to and I think you would have to agree, that when 
it came time to develop some of the safety net plans that we’ve 
just seen go by the wayside — I’m thinking of AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) and CFIP (Canada 
Farm Income Program) — I would suggest that you may have 
to reluctantly agree, Minister, that Saskatchewan certainly 
wasn’t at the forefront when AIDA was developed. In fact the 
minister at the time, Mr. Upshall, saw a slight increase in the 
PRO (pool return outlook) values of some 10 cents a bushel 
and says, we don’t have a problem, and went off to Mexico and 
allowed the federal government and the Eastern provinces to 
develop AIDA. And then of course the rest is history. 
 
But having said that . . . And that’s where my fears come from, 
Minister. I want to make sure that Saskatchewan and your 
government has the responsibility of taking the leadership role 
on this issue, that you are out there actively looking after the 
interests of our producers. 
 
I had recent conversations with officials from the 
Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association and they tell me 
that the big issue out there is we have to determine — and I’m 
saying we, we in Saskatchewan and we in Canada, I guess — 
have to determine who actually owns the carbon sinks. 
 
And as I understand the current position of the federal 
government, that the business-as-usual carbon sinks, they’ve 
taken those as a national treasure and there’s some 10 million 
metric tons that will be applied to offset some other emissions 
and that anything beyond, any other carbon that is stored once 
we get into the . . . past 2008, the period when we start 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

 

measuring and accounting for all the carbon that’s emitted and 
stored and so on, that that is the time when farmers will then be 
able to assume ownership. And in fact there is some question 
around that. 
 
And so the whole question is . . . And the point of the 
business-as-usual carbon credits, that whole area, I’m assuming 
from the comments in the Speech from the Throne, that is the 
area that you will be discussing with the federal government. 
And I certainly support your efforts in that and I’m urging 
intense negotiations on that point. 
 
And I should mention, Minister — you may not be aware of 
this and perhaps you are — at a recent annual meeting of the 
Soil Conservation Council of Canada, there were four 
resolutions passed on March 19 addressing this whole area of 
carbon sinks. And I am told that all the associations from 
across Canada were in agreement on this issue that carbon 
sinks should belong to the landowner— that we don’t need two 
types of carbon sinks. We don’t need the business as usual. 
And then the ones that will take effect after 2008 and producers 
. . . One of the resolutions recognize or call on governments to 
recognize agricultural sinks should go to the producers and as I 
said, recognize that; and that also we should go back to a 
baseline of 1990 to start counting the things that need to be 
done and farmers should be given credit for that. 
 
So those are the points that I would urge your government to 
carry forward vigorously. And I had asked earlier whether you 
would be providing us with a copy of the letter that you have 
sent, and you’re indicating that you will. And I would ask that 
you keep the farm organizations involved. They are both 
willing to be involved and as you indicated, they have been 
involved to this point in time. And I would urge perhaps a 
closer liaison with all interested parties, including members on 
this side of the House, Minister.  
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the member’s 
comments because this is a huge issue for Western Canadian 
farmers and for sure in Saskatchewan a huge issue, given the 
large land base that we have in this province and the 
contributions that we’re making today into carbon collection, 
so through our soil conservation efforts that we make. So 
there’s no doubt that you and I and others in this province agree 
that this is a substantive issue for producers in the province. 
 
And we also appreciate the effort of . . . and the work which 
you had outlined has been led by the Saskatchewan 
conservation community, because we think that that’s 
important as well. And for sure, over the next little while we 
too appreciate the support that you say you’re prepared to give 
and that’s a good thing because it’s been a rare occasion that 
we’ve witnessed that from that side of the House. And so from 
time to time when you’re able to, when you’re able to put it 
forward, we will appreciate that. 
 
And I wouldn’t, I wouldn’t say this at all, Mr. Chair, to the 
member opposite but he raised with me AIDA and CFIP. And 
any time he raises with me AIDA and CFIP, about how in fact 
AIDA and CFIP have in fact . . . that AIDA and CFIP have not 
been well supported by this government across Canada or in 

this province, I always get a little bristly about it, Mr. Chair. 
And I don’t like getting bristly but when it gets there for me, 
then I have to raise it. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite, we too, like you, 
did not like AIDA and we too didn’t like CFIP. And at the end 
of the day it looks like CFIP will also be gone and we’ll have a 
new national program in Canada, of which our Canadian 
farmers will have the benefit of. And we’ve been at the table 
negotiating that as best we can with our federal friends. 
 
So I really do appreciate your comments about how it is that we 
need to keep you informed on this process, how you’ll be 
supportive in that, and because the carbon sinks and the carbon 
issue is a huge issue for Saskatchewan. And collectively, I 
think that we can set the politics aside and should set the 
politics aside because it’s about making a difference in 
Saskatchewan on the environment and crediting those people 
who really deserve to get them on the ground, which are the 
producers. And we are working with the farm groups and the 
organizations and will be sure that we include you in providing 
the kind of information that we need along the way. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, just a few comments to respond to the 
minister’s comments. Certainly we on this side of the House 
feel that this whole carbon sink issue is a hugely important 
issue and we are willing to work with you and lend our support 
when we see that it’s fit to lend support. 
 
Your government has a track record of dropping the ball on 
some key ag issues. We’re hoping that this won’t be such an 
occasion. And that’s why I made the request that you keep us 
informed so that we can not only have some input but also to 
make sure that the direction that your government is taking is in 
the best interests of our agriculture producers. And as you’ve 
indicated, that is your intent. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Although history will have shown that sometimes you tend not 
to keep your eye on the ball, your government sometimes loses 
its vision and its way and we would certainly . . . And the 
people that are the net losers in that situation are our farm 
producers, Minister. And therefore, we feel that we have a 
responsibility as an opposition to make sure that you keep your 
eye on the ball. And having said that, that is in the spirit of 
co-operation that we would offer at this time, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I just want to say that 
I’m really pleased that the member opposite recognized that at 
least we’re carrying a ball. And so as we carry the ball, we’ll 
pass it to you now and then so that you can add a little bit to it, 
and we could then build a larger agricultural policy for 
Saskatchewan producers. And any time that you’re prepared to 
help us carry the ball on agriculture, I’d be very happy to share 
it with you as we move along. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It is such a delight to hear the minister is 
being so co-operative today because that’s actually what I’m 
going to request is a little bit of co-operation in the explanation 
of his news release, the news release from his department on 
April 29. And I just had a couple of questions about that news 
release, Mr. Chair. 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

And it follows the day after a federal government news release. 
And the federal government news release said that a review has 
been undertaken, which is something that we asked, that an 
independent review be done, and the one that Vanclief is 
talking about is been conducted by IBM Consulting and George 
Morris Centre. And in his press release, he says that it shows 
that this will be a great program in the risk management 
envelope of the APF (agriculture policy framework) and it will 
work better than what previous programs have for the 
producers. 
 
The minister’s press release, the provincial minister’s press 
release however, questions that. It says that it: 
 

. . . raises questions about the level of funding committed 
by the federal government. 

 
And he also . . . It mentions that: 
 

The independent report indicates the risk management 
program proposed by the industry “resulted in better 
measures of stability . . . than does the proposed program.” 

 
I just wanted to question him as to what study was done by the 
industry. Who in the industry? And since he’s being so 
co-operative today, could I get a copy of that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member from 
Watrous, I want to first say that the report that you’re asking 
about is really . . . was really prepared by CFA. The Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture prepared the report of which they 
submitted to the federal government, and it’s that report of 
which the federal government alludes to in their press release. 
 
And it’s also that report of which IBM and the George Morris 
committee also talk about. So it’s that report that they talk 
about. 
 
Now I don’t have a copy of it because it was delivered to the 
federal ministry, and it’s this committee that we’re speaking of 
today that actually did a short appraisal of it. When I responded 
to the press release that was . . . In my press release when I 
responded to the work that was done by the committee, I was 
really responding to the points of reference of which the 
committee addressed. 
 
And in the executive summary, which I’m reading from here, 
they talk about, this committee talks about really five or six 
things that they believe have been well addressed by the 
national package on the APF in business risk management. 
 
And these are these. They said this, that — and I quote — that 
they wanted to be sure that the new business risk management 
would be responsive. 
 
And this group that’s examined it led by Mr. Martin and Nancy 
Brown Andison, and Lloyd Davenport and Harry Stoddart, and 
Allan Mussell, it’s the committee that actually did the work on 
the analysis. 
 
They say that there was good responsiveness in the APF 
business risk management and it ensures that government 
dollars are in fact directed to areas of need with respect to 

income stabilization, disaster mitigation, insurance coverage, 
and investment. 
 
And then they also say in the second bullet, that this new 
package actually does provide equal treatment for farmers 
across Canada, because the compendium programs are coming 
out. And thirdly, they also go on to say that this new program 
provides the ability to minimize distortion of farmers’ 
production and market decisions. 
 
Fourthly, they said it provides better ability for farmers to 
manage risk management stability in the entire farm and to 
avoid duplication of payments; and it does provide simplicity 
and ease of understanding far better than what the three 
programs did in the past; and it provides the ability to facilitate 
long-term planning for farmers. 
 
So from a general perspective they highlight those conditions, 
or those positions in terms of the package. 
 
And they did some analysis on some farm plans. They took 
three Ontario cash crop farms, an Ontario swine farm, and then 
they took four Saskatchewan cash crop farms for the period 
1995 to 2001. And I’m just simply reading from the executive 
summary, not actually having seen the data. And we’ll get a 
more detailed response. 
 
And then they go on to say — which I responded to in my press 
release because I think these are critical to the discussion that 
we’ve been having over the last year and a half and the ones 
that we need to have in the months to follow here — they say 
that the proposal that was put forward by the Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture is relatively sound but the problem 
with it is that the envelope of $1.1 billion that’s been set aside 
for business risk management in Canada is not sufficient. It’s 
not enough dollars. 
 
So to take the three programs, reconstruct them into two, and 
try to meet the kinds of expectations that the CFA package 
alludes to, there isn’t enough money in the package is what this 
report said. 
 
And then the other piece that this report really says and they 
make a point of saying it in their comments here, is that the 
three programs deal with short-term injury caused by such 
levels as dumping and single-year subsidy programs. But they 
then go on to say that none of the programs really address trade 
injury. 
 
And this is where we part company and have parted company 
for some months with the federal government, by saying to 
them that we were successful in negotiating for Canadian 
producers $600 million for last year and again this year, of 
which Saskatchewan’s going to get 183 million, or 30 per cent, 
which is now off the Fredericton formula, which we too have 
been able to negotiate with the federal government. 
 
But we’ve said that the problem with this new package is that 
the $600 million stops after this year. And what Canadian 
producers will have access to is 1.1 billion and will no longer 
have any benefit . . . the benefit of the 600 million into the out 
years which really should reflect the trade distortion caused by 
the US (United States) farm Bill. 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

 

And so we’ve been arguing for months now that what we 
should . . . what should happen here is that the federal 
government, if it’s not putting any more money into the 
business risk management package of 1.1 billion, they should at 
least put in the $600 million over the next four years to 
correspond with the farm Bill in the US. 
 
And it’s there where I think we need to hang our hat and where 
we need to take up the debate not only as Saskatchewan 
producers but also as provincial ministers across the country, 
and I think oppositions. 
 
There’s a role here, in my view, where opposition parties do 
have a leg up to some degree. We should be hearing on the 
floor of the legislature . . . or the floor of the House in Ottawa 
on a regular basis, questions to the federal government from the 
opposition parties about how are they going to support in the 
future the trade distortion of which is in fact the big issue for 
Canadian producers and right here at home. 
 
And so my press release addressed itself to the fact that if 
you’re going to build a stronger business risk management 
package outside of the one that we have today, that is led by 
something like the CFA have crafted, you need to have more 
than the 1.1. 
 
If you can’t get any more than the 1.1, which is what the 
federal government has been saying to us all along, then you 
should pick the ball up — if I take the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood about carrying the ball — you should 
pick up that ball on trade injury and you should reinstate it 
again into the debate and you could see and should see whether 
or not we could grow into the out years, the next four years, an 
additional $600 million per year. Because that’s where I think 
we have our greatest opportunities. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That was very 
interesting. I don’t think you will hear any member on this side 
of the House not agree that we would like to see the 600 
million per year extended. 
 
However, I’m quite frankly and I’m sure a number of us and 
the producers are tired of the sandbox talk. We have a federal 
government that says it’s got nothing to do with trade injury. 
We have a provincial minister who says it’s trade injury. So we 
can say he said, she said, and go around, round, and round the 
circle on this one, but it’s getting nowhere, quite frankly. 
 
It gives the federal government the excuse then that, if it’s not 
trade injury, they don’t have to continue it. That’s their excuse 
and therefore it’s no longer all a federal responsibility if they 
don’t call it trade injury. And the province can run around and 
say it is trade injury and that gives them the excuse not to put in 
40 per cent. 
 
So let’s be realistic about what it is. We don’t know what it is 
but each level of government’s going to call it what serves their 
purpose. So yes, we agree it should be extended because it’s 
necessary money and there’s a number of issues that needs to 
be addressed in our agriculture industry. 
 
But I’m going to go back very briefly to the press release 
because maybe I’m a little too analytical but when the wording 

says that an independent report indicates that the risk 
management program proposed by the industry resulted in 
better measure of stability, then does the proposed program — 
I’m assuming that would mean the proposed program by the 
federal government . . . I would think there was a program, 
there was something that I could take my numbers or my 
neighbour’s numbers or another farmer’s numbers and plug 
them in and say, this works, this does not work, and if it 
doesn’t work, how can it be fixed? 
 
I am tired of these little statements of, you know, how it’s 
responsive and how it’s going to do this and that. We need to 
see a program that we can put money . . . or numbers into, quite 
frankly, and say, this is where there’s a problem and this is 
where there isn’t. 
 
This insinuates that there is a program, there is something that 
we can put numbers into, and that there’s two of them, quite 
frankly, is what the press release insinuates — that there is one 
proposed by the industry and one proposed by the federal 
government. Is that right or is it wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I can understand, Mr. Chair, the 
member’s frustration because I too have sensed the same kind 
of frustration trying to answer this question for you for some 
months now, trying to tell you and your official opposition and 
your leader that there are two national programs now that have 
been designed. 
 
There are two national programs in the business risk 
management side that have been developed. They’re called 
crop insurance and an enhanced NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) is what they are. And you’ve had ample 
opportunity to see what they are because they’re public. 
 
The farm groups and organizations have them today. SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) has a copy 
of the work that has been done today. And if there’s somebody 
missing from this equation, APAS (Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan) has it. Farm organizations and 
groups know exactly what these two programs are looking like. 
And it’s exactly against that analysis of which this review has 
been compared to — it’s exactly against that analysis. 
 
So if you’re standing up today and representing your political 
party and saying we don’t know what it is, then you should find 
out what it is because it’s well-known across Canada today 
what those two programs are and what they look like. 
 
In fact probably delivered in your mailbox to your community, 
you got a brochure from the federal government. For sure the 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood did because he stood 
up and asked me a question during question period and said I 
got something in the mail from the federal government. Well 
what he got in the mail is a definition of what those two 
programs are. 
 
So when you stand up today in this Assembly and say to me we 
don’t know what they are, you should know what they are. And 
if you don’t know what they are then you should have a 
conversation with your leader or whomever is in charge of the 
agricultural direction there and they will get a full explanation 
of what it is. 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

Now this isn’t about who, what he said, and what he said, on 
the trade injury piece. And we should be sure that we get this 
right because the $600 million — of which this province and 
this minister and this government and this Premier were 
successful in leading by the way — the $600 million that we 
got for the last two years has been driven by this Premier and 
this ministry and this government. That’s why we have it. 
 
And Canadian farmers are the benefactors of it, and so are 
Saskatchewan producers the benefactors today of the $180 
million that’s flowing to their jeans because of the work that 
we’ve done here. 
 
And when you stand in your place and say . . . Because every 
farmer in Saskatchewan and farm group in Saskatchewan 
believe that that $180 million that we got last year and will get 
again this year and the $600 million is trade injury, it is trade 
money. And they all believe it’s trade money. And for you 
standing up in this House and saying to Saskatchewan 
producers that it’s not trade money is absolutely deceiving and 
you should not use that language. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Because you are allowing the federal government to escape 
without having to . . . There should never be any participation, 
Mr. Chair, in trade injury money here by Saskatchewan 
producers ever. And as long as I’m the Agriculture minister for 
this province and represent this government, we should never 
have anybody from that side of the House walking around this 
province saying that we should be contributing to trade injury. 
That’s absolutely absurd. 
 
And when I hear you say it and members of your opposition 
members’ party say it and your leaders say it, it is disgraceful 
when you use that kind of language because it’s asking 
producers to pay for something they’ve already paid for. The 
40 per cent that we’re receiving today in trade injury is what 
we should be getting from the federal government, and we 
should never be letting them off the hook on that. 
 
And you shouldn’t be saying that we should be participating on 
a cost share on trade injury money because it’s not supported 
on any front, by any producer, by any farm organization, or any 
province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — That minister can stand . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Sorry, Member, before we begin I 
just want to remind hon. members that in the committee the 
Chair has taken a less aggressive approach in ensuring that 
members communicate to the Chair and through the Chair. But 
I do find that if the discussion continues to be pointed, that I 
will start to enforce that rule. So I just remind hon. members of 
that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — That minister can stand here in this House 
all he wants and try to twist words and do a little rant, but I 
want him to tell me when the federal minister has ever said it 
was trade injury — and that was my point. Because we want to 
sit here as a province with our head in the sand and say it’s 
trade injury and therefore we’re not, you know, we’re not 
taking part in it. And we have never pressured him to take part 

in it and pay 40 per cent on this side of the House. 
 
However, there has never in my knowledge been a statement by 
the federal government that says that this is a trade injury 
payment, because they too are shirking their responsibilities. 
 
So for him to say that he and his Premier are largely 
responsible for this, I just don’t buy it and the people in the 
industry do not buy it, the producers don’t buy it. He can say it 
all he wants but the simple fact is he’s dropped the ball. The 
NDP government has dropped the ball numerous times and this 
is no different. 
 
It is because the agriculture producer groups, being out in 
Ottawa, that there was an extra $600 million payment. And 
nowhere, absolutely nowhere has the federal government 
acknowledged that it had anything to do with trade injury. 
 
Does that mean we should still negotiate for trade injury? 
Absolutely, Mr. Deputy Chair, because that is a federal 
government responsibility. 
 
But to have this minister stand there and insinuate that I don’t 
know what I’m doing because . . . and how dare I say that it’s 
not trade injury. Well then let him stand up and put something 
where his mouth is and prove to me that that federal minister’s 
ever called it a trade injury payment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Now we’re going to go back to this news 
release and he’s trying again to say, if you don’t know what 
we’re talking about, there’s two programs. Yes, I know there’s 
two programs; there’s new NISA and crop insurance. I know 
that. 
 
I was questioning the wording in his own news release that 
insinuates that there was a risk management program proposed 
by the industry. It doesn’t say proposed by the federal 
government, and it says that those results were better than the 
federal government’s results. 
 
Which one . . . Did the industry propose crop insurance or new 
NISA? Does he not even understand his own press release? 
And if he doesn’t, then maybe he should get a better writer 
because it is a very confusing press release. It insinuates that 
there is two programs, risk management programs; and it is his 
problem and his department if they can’t word these things 
correctly. 
 
So with that I am going to turn it over to someone else because 
I don’t even . . . I don’t think the minister can answer that 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair . . . well, Mr. Chair, I’m 
going to try answer the question because I want to try and be 
sure that both she and I understand what the press release says. 
 
The press release, in my view, says that what we say, Mr. 
Chair, is that in fact the report raises the question about the 
level of funding committed by the federal government. And I 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

 

say, and I say in my press release, the committee itself is saying 
in its review that the $1.1 million cannot address the kinds of 
enhancements that the Canadian Federation of Agriculture 
proposal puts to the table. It’s not enough money. It says that 
right here. 
 
And I say exactly the same thing. I say they’re right and we’ve 
been saying that for the better part of 10 months — that if you 
want a different, enhanced, broader program of which CFA is 
calling for, you have to put more than the $1.1 billion in there. 
So that’s what my press release says. 
 
The other thing that I say, coming right out of the report that 
was done by IBM and the George Morris Foundation, by that 
committee, they say right in their report, there is no trade injury 
money. They say it right here. Now where on earth would they 
come up with that language if they wouldn’t be . . . They’re 
doing the work on behalf of the federal government and they 
recognize that the federal government isn’t putting any money 
into trade injury. 
 
And the member should just go back to last fall. I mean last fall 
in Saskatchewan, we had a number of people who came 
together. We had about 15 groups and farm groups and 
organizations, and your own leader was at this meeting in 
November . . . or in September of last year where we met in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And what did we highlight at that meeting, Madam Member? 
We highlighted with the federal government, with Mr. 
Pettigrew, Mr. Chair — Mr. Chair and Madam Member — we 
outlined a number of things. So what we said is we need to see 
the federal government put money into trade injury. And your 
leader was at the very same meeting that we were at, Mr. Chair. 
Their leader was at the very same . . . (inaudible) . . . he too 
was at that meeting. And he said, you know what, this is trade 
injury and what we should have today is we should have the 
federal government participating towards trade injury. 
 
And around that table was the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture and SARM and other farm groups and 
organizations that were at this meeting, where we had about 
150 people in a room. And we all agreed it was trade injury, 
including your leader said it was trade injury. And we were 
successful in negotiating with the federal government two 
lumps of money or two bags of money for $600 million for 
each of those years and it’s dedicated towards trade injury. So 
everybody in Saskatchewan knows it’s trade injury. We call it 
trade injury. 
 
The federal government doesn’t call it trade injury, no. Why 
doesn’t the federal government call it trade injury? Because 
they want the provinces to share in it. That’s why they don’t 
call it trade injury. And so we’re not using and adopting that 
language. And I say to the member opposite, please recognize 
along . . . as your own leader has recognized, this is trade injury 
money; it’s trade injury money for farmers. And you need to 
accept that language and we need to continue to work towards 
getting more money into the out years. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Through you to the 
minister today, if there’s any confusion on your part or our part 
about what the APF is all about, I am sure it’s only superseded 

by the confusion created by your government as it relates to 
Crown grazing leases. 
 
As you are well aware, Mr. Minister, the issue of Crown 
grazing leases has grown in significance over the last year or 
two. And I think it was brought to a head by the sudden arrival 
of a treaty land entitlement claim that was placed on many 
thousands of acres in the southwest part of the province last 
fall. And as a result of the TLE (treaty land entitlement) claim 
many of the producers in the southwest — particularly in the 
Cypress Hills but other areas that are as equally affected — 
have had a number of questions arise concerning the validity of 
their leases and the reliability of their leases and the role of the 
government in the renewal of those leases. 
 
And as I stand in this House day after day and read petitions 
signed by leaseholders, individuals whose livelihood is largely 
dependent on continuing to hold those Crown grazing leases, 
and as I talked to producers throughout my constituency and 
other areas of the province, I’m finding that there is a growing 
element of confusion and uncertainty among those leaseholders 
as to the long-term viability of their operations, vis-à-vis the 
government’s decision on what’s going to happen with this 
lease land. 
 
The issue of Crown grazing leases has been thrown into quite 
an uncertainty because of the TLE, because of what is known 
as a review that was sprung rather surreptitiously on producers 
at the last minute, and because of the complications brought 
about by the transfer of lease land to new owners when certain 
ranches and farms trade hands at commercial sale. And as we 
have discussed in private conversation in this House, Mr. 
Minister, the issue is even further complicated by the 
provisions of the new land ownership laws. 
 
So would the minister stand in the House today and give us a 
very clear understanding of what it is his government intends to 
do with lease land, as it affects all three of the different 
scenarios that I have raised this afternoon. I think the producers 
of this province need to know definitively what the government 
stand is as it concerns Crown grazing leases. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is a very significant 
and important question, and I have responded to it on a variety 
of different fronts. And there is in my view some less, there’s 
some less confusion about this then the member paints, but 
there is certainly a number of very tender issues of which we’re 
needing to address. 
 
I said that to the group of . . . Saskatchewan landowner lease 
rights group, which I met with probably a month or so ago 
now. I met just yesterday again with SARM, who are also 
doing a good deal of work on this particular piece and are most 
interested in what happens with treaty land and Crown land, 
and have been certainly well apprised of the work that’s 
happening today within our government, the government’s 
interdepartmental committee that are working through this 
very, very significant piece. 
 
The member would recognize the difficulties around this 
because clearly we have situations today where First Nations 
have made selections on Crown land. And when they make 
selections on Crown land, under the treaty right entitlement 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

legislation, they have right to the property or access to the land 
that’s been, in fact they’ve selected. 
 
And some of that land of which they’ve now selected is in fact 
Crown land, Crown lease land, of which there have been 
long-term leases that have been held by ranchers for periods of 
33 years. And some have been renewed and they’ve been in the 
family for long periods of time. And at the same time, within 
some of that land that’s being selected today, there are mineral 
rights of which we also need to ensure that we protect and also 
ensure that make their way to the appropriate source. And 
finally there is land today within the Crowns which is dedicated 
for wildlife protection. 
 
And so there are four scenarios here of which you’d be working 
with and there are more than one group that you’re working 
with. So it is ranchers, and it’s First Nations people, and it is 
individual deed holders of property, and it is those oil 
companies or gas companies who wish to come and do work in 
Saskatchewan. So then it becomes a significantly larger 
complicated issue. 
 
The issue is not just about making a decision about who should 
own the land. Should you extend the lease to the rancher or 
should you in fact turn it over to First Nations who’ve made the 
selection? And it’s there where the debate really has centred 
itself. And what we’re trying to do on this side of the House is 
to try to find a solution where those people who have had the 
land in their possess for long periods of time might continue to 
continue to possess it and use it for the kinds of efforts and 
work that they’ve had. 
 
And can we also accommodate within the treaty land 
entitlement legislation a responsibility of ensuring that First 
Nations get access to the land that they’re calling for today, and 
also protect the mineral rights for Saskatchewan people in the 
way it needs to be done? And has this been a difficult 
challenge? Absolutely it’s been a difficult challenge. And it’s 
not as easy as saying, well the lease expires, you should renew 
the lease, and the rancher should continue to hold it for 33 more 
years because it will get challenged in the courts. 
 
And we have two pieces of legislation of which we have to . . . 
or one piece of legislation and a policy that we have to work 
with. We have the policy of Agriculture and Food as it relates 
to Crown land, and we have the treaty land entitlement 
legislation that we need to deal with. And so our task here is to 
try to find a middle ground. And so we’ve used mediation in 
some of those efforts where we haven’t been able to find 
resolution. But at the end of the day we think that we can find 
some resolution on this piece without ending up in the courts. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the 
Chair, to the minister, I appreciate the fact that you have 
responded by focusing primarily on the TLE issue. The other 
issues that I alluded to can be raised and discussed in more 
detail at a later opportunity. 
 
But I guess the question for the minister and the government is 
this: in view of the legal opinion that you’ve received and in 
view of the expressed concern by the minister that simply 
renewing the leases might bring about legal action, I don’t 
know that that opinion is necessarily an appropriate opinion. 

(15:45) 
 
I have not yet heard why it isn’t possible for the LAND’s (Land 
Titles Automated Network Development) branch, on behalf of 
the provincial government, to renew the leases as they existed, 
especially since the treaty land entitlement legislation says that 
there has to be a negotiation based on a willing buyer-willing 
seller scenario and by renewing the lease, that does not, that 
does not impede that process. 
 
In fact, what it does is makes the process considerably more 
fair to the existing leaseholder than a situation where the 
government would refuse to renew the lease and then deal with 
the treaty land entitlement claim. This is not about denying the 
treaty land entitlement claim. This is about meeting the 
requirements of the existing legislation that provides for a very 
clear, definitive way to establish the value of any piece of 
property that a claim might entail or might encumber. 
 
This is a . . . The process that was set out in the TLE legislation 
tries to address the issue of fairness. And by not renewing the 
leases, the provincial government is basically saying to the 
current leaseholders, your third party interests are of less 
significance and they’re certainly going to be of lesser value by 
not renewing the leases. 
 
The issue of fairness is the victim here. And I think that if the 
government was being completely fair and responsible in this 
matter, one legal opinion aside, they would go ahead and renew 
these leases, make their commitment to the existing 
leaseholders, and let the leaseholders and the First Nations 
people sort out the value of the property and the issue in a 
one-on-one type of negotiation. What has happened here is the 
government has imposed itself by an arbitrary decision which 
has undermined the long-term benefit of the current 
leaseholder. 
 
And I really think that what we’ve got here is a situation where 
the province has decided that by not renewing leases, the 
province can then become the willing seller in this whole 
scenario and it just . . . it completely undermines the 
opportunities on behalf of the current leaseholders. 
 
Will the minister undertake to get a second legal opinion, 
another legal opinion that might balance off the opinion that he 
says he has on this matter, and try and arrange a situation here 
that will recognize the rights of the existing leaseholders and 
give them some reasonable expectation of fair treatment on the 
behalf . . . on the part of the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well you see, Mr. Chair, to the member, 
he describes this as being a very simplistic process, which is 
exactly — which is exactly — the problem with the issue. 
Because when you look at who owns the land, the leaseholder 
does not own the land. The land is held by the province; this is 
who owns the land. 
 
So when you say that there should be an agreement between a 
willing seller and a willing buyer, that works fair and it works 
well, except that you have today inserted over top of that a 
selection. You have a selection by First Nations who believe in 
their legislation that they have right to that land because it’s no 
longer occupied, because the lease expires. And that’s where 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

 

the legal debate begins. Because First Nations people will say 
that, we have selected the property today, the lease is expiring, 
and it should now be turned to us. 
 
And you’re right. We have had situations where in fact a 
leaseholder and a First Nations individual and/or a band have in 
fact been able to reach a resolution. But it’s when they can’t 
reach the resolution that it becomes an issue for us — not ever, 
ever intended that we would find ourselves in this place when 
the treaty land entitlement package was struck. 
 
And we had people from a lease . . . large leaseholders who 
were part of that debate and a part of that very discussion. And 
today, when I met with them a month ago, they too recognized 
that we have an issue today which they didn’t anticipate would 
be unresolved within the work that we did. They didn’t 
anticipate that we would find ourselves in this situation. 
 
And there will be a legal challenge from either party. There 
will be a legal challenge because you don’t have a willing seller 
and a willing buyer on all of these fronts. And you don’t have 
people wanting to buy the entire package. 
 
If you had today the band coming forward and saying we want 
to buy the entire package, you might find yourself in a situation 
where you could get a deal. But they’re not selecting the entire 
package. They’re selecting bits and pieces and parcels of a 
package, which makes the rancher’s asset invaluable in most 
cases because they want to sell the entire piece. And as a result 
of that there’ll be a challenge by the rancher. There’ll be a 
challenge. 
 
And as a result of that, that’s why we’re trying to find a 
mediatory process here so that we can ensure that the rancher 
and the landowner at the end of the day, and the land leaser and 
the First Nations might be able to find that kind of compromise. 
Because in fact, they are not, they are not willing to part with 
their land and their assets in the way in which you describe, as 
comfortably in which you describe it. They are not. And that’s 
why we find ourselves in the middle of the process. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. 
The reality of the fact is, Mr. Minister, that you are minimizing 
the opportunity for the ranchers to negotiate a fair deal with the 
First Nations if they so wish, by refusing to renew their leases. 
 
You know, your argument is that if the lease isn’t renewed, you 
have unoccupied land and the former lessee has no real claim to 
it. It becomes provincial land. But the role of the government 
has been in many, many instances to refuse to renew the lease 
when they had the chance well in advance. So you’re creating a 
situation, Mr. Minister, where favouritism is being shown in 
this whole process. 
 
I’ve looked at the treaty land entitlement legislation and there is 
no need for the provincial government not to renew the leases 
in advance if they’re asked for. Now the scenario you’ve 
described is a situation where some rancher has left his lease 
renewal to the last few months and then all of a sudden finds 
himself on the short end of the stick not being able to renew the 
lease. But there are . . . In most instances, the ranchers are 
willing to come to you to renew the lease three, four, five years 
in advance, and your government is saying no, I’m sorry. 

You’re creating an imbalance in this situation that is 
unnecessary and whether or not, whether or not ranchers might 
want to sell is not the issue. The process that has been set in 
place says that a willing buyer and a willing seller is the 
requirement for a commercially transacted deal. And frankly, 
you’ve undermined the position of the willing seller. I mean 
you’re putting them in a position where they have no choice but 
to sell if in fact the buyer is interested in providing them a 
commercial value or a commercial price for their place. 
 
So I guess, Mr. Minister, I’m not suggesting that this is a 
simplistic or an easily solved problem. I know it’s complex. 
But what I think has happened is by the so-called legal opinion 
you have received, you have actually created a more 
complicated problem than is necessary. And I think frankly that 
that has been an irresponsible position for your government to 
take. 
 
The other issue that comes into play here, I suppose, is the 
decision by the government to undertake a Crown grazing lease 
review. Now this is something that arose quite unexpectedly 
and came about some time subsequent to the initial placing of 
TLE claims on a number of the ranches in the area that I talked 
about earlier. 
 
It’s my understanding that there were four TLE claims. The 
first two were denied within the 90-day period because of 
extenuating circumstances. Whether it had to do with 
sensitivity of the environmental concerns, whether it had to do 
with watershed, whatever the reasons were, the first two were 
denied. The last two were not denied within the 90-day period 
that the TLE legislation requires. What we got was all of a 
sudden two claims held in abeyance. 
 
Now my understanding, Mr. Minister, is you don’t have the 
legal authority to put TLE claims into abeyance sometime 
around that 90-day period; you have to make a decision within 
the 90-day period. Under what legal authority did the province 
undertake this review and put the TLE claims, the remaining 
two claims, into abeyance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, as long as the review is 
in place, we’re not making any decisions, and that’s what 
we’ve said. We’ve not . . . As long as the review process is in 
place, we aren’t making those decisions on what we’ll do with 
the land that’s been selected. 
 
But I want to go back just to make a comment or two to the 
member about . . . And I’m not referencing at all that the 
member thinks that this is a simplistic issue because I 
appreciate that your phraseology, understanding that it’s not a 
simplistic issue. But as long as there has been a selection — as 
long as there’s been a selection — then we can’t renew it. We 
cannot renew the lease based on the legal opinions that we’re 
getting from the legal . . . from our legal resources. That as long 
as there’s been a selection, that we are not in a position to 
renew it. And that’s why we have the process in place that we 
have today. 
 
And you say to me that what we should be doing is, we should 
be in fact allowing ranchers to renew leases well in advance. 
Well you know what will happen when you do that and send 
that signal. That you’ll have First Nations put selections on all 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

of our Crown land, all of it. And then you’ll have a dog’s 
breakfast and chaos like you’ve not seen in our province. 
 
And we’re not interested in doing that because as we’re moving 
along today on land that’s not being selected today, we’re 
actually renewing it. We’re renewing land today. As you and I 
sit in this Assembly today and have this discussion, we have 
the Department of Agriculture lands branch renewing leases for 
ranchers in Saskatchewan, based on as long as they’ve not been 
selected. It’s the selected issues that become an issue . . . the 
debate. And I would not encourage us to have the debate about 
making sure that the leases are extended in advance because 
you’ll have a selection on every piece of Crown land in the 
province, because that’s where you’ll send First Nations to. 
 
So I say to you that there has been sensitivity. Yes, we’ve 
certainly permitted the two selections, or the two decisions to 
be made — two were outstanding — on the basis that we have 
the committee in place right now and expecting that that 
committee will be providing some report to me. We started the 
work in November. We said that within a year we’re going to 
have a resolution to this. 
 
I’ve said to the farm group with which I’ve met — the 
landowners and lease group that I met with — that they should 
not be concerned about the notion that they would not have 
access to their lease over a longer period of time when 
decisions are made. They should not have to worry about that 
because they’re not going to have their farm disappear within 
— under their feet as they suggested to me — within two or 
three months of a decision. That’s not the case. That will not 
happen as long as I am in charge . . . or as long as I’m the 
Minister of Agriculture. And our government understands this 
piece. 
 
So there would be, in the cases where selections may need to be 
honoured and we may see court cases around them, but the 
ranchers and farmers today in Saskatchewan don’t need to be 
concerned that when they wake up in a month’s time from 
when a decision is made, they’re not going to be a leaseholder 
of their property for some extended time to make some 
decisions around their own futures. 
 
And so I say to the member opposite, we need to be extremely 
careful about how we proceed down this path. I know that it 
has tremendous impact in the area of which you serve and I 
appreciate some of the work that you’ve been doing in helping 
us deal with this particular issue because it has a lot of 
sensitivity and it has a good deal of concern, both for you and 
for us. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know the complexity of 
the issue and I do understand that there is a lot more we could 
discuss on this issue. It seems that time has proven to be our 
enemy today, so we’re going to come back and revisit this at 
the next session. I appreciate the opportunity to carry on this 
discussion at that time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee report 
progress and move to estimates on Community Resources and 
Employment. 
 
(16:00) 

General Revenue Fund 
Community Resources and Employment 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (RE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I’m happy to introduce 
the officials who will be assisting us in estimates today. To my 
immediate right is deputy minister, Bonnie Durnford; directly 
behind me is assistant deputy minister, Shelly Hoover; and 
assistant deputy minister, Bob Wihlidal, is in the second row to 
my right; Larry Chaykowski, executive director of housing 
operations to my left; Bill Adams, acting director of finance 
and property management to the right of the deputy. 
 
And behind the bar are Phil Walsh, executive director, 
employment income assistance; Marilyn Hedlund, the 
executive director of child and family services; Betty West, 
acting executive director of community living; Jan Morgan, 
acting executive director of career and employment services; 
Al Hickey, senior policy analyst in employment and income 
assistance; and Ken Cameron, director of children services. 
 
I look forward to the questions of members of the opposition 
and proceeding with estimates, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, a 
month ago, I believe a month ago tomorrow, I gave a file to 
yourself and asked that you look at this file because of its 
complexity as well as its seriousness and the need for 
something to be done with this file. 
 
I tried to contact the family today and ask their permission to 
speak on this. I could not reach them so I will not use their 
name. I believe that you will know who I’m referring to. 
 
I spoke with your department yesterday, or with your office in 
the legislature yesterday, and nothing has been resolved about 
this file. In fact the family had not been contacted. And so I 
know that since this time they have received a phone call with a 
reply that nothing has been done on this file. 
 
Mr. Minister, I realize that this file, which the lady indicated, 
cuts across the lines of social services, health, and education 
because it involves her son. And her dilemma has been for 
some months that she has tried desperately to get help wherever 
she could, tried to get all these three departments to work 
together to try and find a solution. And as of yet, none has been 
found. 
 
And I spoke with this lady yesterday and she has . . . My 
experience in dealing with her is she’s been very, very patient 
and very understanding and just looking for a solution. 
However, she is becoming very agitated and very distraught 
because no one seems to be listening to her. 
 
And the fact is that this lady is trying to find a solution which is 
in the best interest of her family. Her husband is also disabled 
and is under her care as well as her son. And as she indicates in 
the letter which I forwarded to your office, is that her desire is 
that she can keep her son and her family in their, within their 
family unit, and that she can give the care with the help of 
some assistance, both from Social Services and from the 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

 

education system so that she can do this. 
 
And as she indicated to me, and which you will be well aware, 
Mr. Minister, that if she is not able to look after her son and her 
husband within their home, that there will be a huge cost to the 
public system — probably anywhere between 3,500 per person 
per month — and that’s certainly not where this lady would 
like to go. But she is at the point where she is running out of, 
quite frankly, the physical stamina to continue in her situation. 
 
And she has asked for various things. She’s asked to be able to 
have her son home-schooled. She has asked for respite in her 
home. She has asked that some understanding of her need for 
some respite be given. 
 
And in fact when she went to Social Services in November and 
they indicated to her that they would help her, what they did in 
fact was make her situation worse because they moved her into 
subsidized housing which moved her rent from 191 a month to 
331 a month. So her question is how did this help me? And 
since that time she did get a small income tax rebate and then, 
of course, that was taken into consideration and her social 
assistance has been cut even more. 
 
She’s had various problems around receiving health benefits. 
She was going to be cut off by Social Services, then she was 
back on. There’s been several concerns around this whole issue 
and with her dealings with Social Services and getting answers. 
 
But her main concern, I guess, is for adequate care for her son. 
And the situation is so severe, Mr. Minister, that at times this 
lady drives around for hours with her son in her vehicle 
because that is the only way she can calm him down. 
 
The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) have . . . are 
working with her and are trying to get her a Plexiglas window 
to put in her vehicle as a protection for both herself and her son 
when she is driving him around. 
 
The income tax money that she received back, her intent was to 
use it to make repairs to her vehicle which she has to have in 
order to look after her son and in order to be able to get him to 
appointments and so on. And she desperately needed this extra 
cash to do that. And then of course because she had these 
dollars and actually presented the bills to Social Services to 
show them that she had used this money responsibly and for a 
need that she had to provide for her family, still it was not 
taken into consideration and she has been penalized 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. Minister, again, this lady just wants the government 
departments to work together to somehow find a solution for 
her and her family. And when I spoke to her, she basically had 
three requests. One, that she would have some kind of 
home-schooling for her son and would be provided aides to 
work with him in the home. He cannot be left unattended. He 
cannot be in the care of only one person and so there needs to 
be two aides in the home. When she tried to get this issue dealt 
with by Social Services, I believe she was told that it was some, 
I believe it was 60 — I’m just trying to find it, Mr. Minister — 
60 hours that she would be allowed from Social Services to pay 
for home help in her home. 
 

The other thing is that she stressed again upon me the fact that 
she has to have a vehicle. Her vehicle is not a good vehicle but 
it does enable her to make the appointments she needs within 
Regina. At one point they told her that she should have . . . she 
would have to come to Regina for appointment and she said, I 
simply cannot do that; I do not have a vehicle that is in good 
enough condition that I can come to Regina for an appointment. 
 
And she is also very concerned about some kind of 
understanding from Social Services and Health that she wants 
to keep her family unit together, is willing to do that, but she 
needs a certain amount of money to live on and she needs some 
help in paying for aides to come into her home. And as she 
stated in her letter, Mr. Minister, her understanding is that all 
children in Saskatchewan are supposed to . . . are actually 
entitled to schooling. At the present time this is being denied 
her son. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would like to know what you would do in 
order to help this lady and her family live in dignity and with 
some assurance that every day she isn’t going to have to fight 
with another government department just to hold her family 
together. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for 
her question and do appreciate as well the importance of, as she 
said at the beginning of the question, of not getting into names. 
I consider that to be an extremely important principle as we’re 
dealing here on the floor of the Assembly that we avoid 
reference to individual cases and, in fact, I remind us all that 
we’re obliged by law to do just that. 
 
I do want to advise the hon. member that — and I think she’ll 
be aware of this already, Mr. Chair — that my office was in 
touch with her office about two weeks ago, and I think there 
was a discussion yesterday with my office. However, regarding 
the . . . so that’s related to the follow-up with the hon. member 
for the case that she did bring to me and that we’ve been 
following up on. 
 
My office has had a discussion with the person this day, earlier 
this day as a matter of fact, and is working together with the 
individual to assure that all of the assistance that can be made 
available through the resources of the department, Community 
Resources and Employment, are being brought into play in as 
helpful a way as possible, in the way that the regulations that 
come into effect are applied. 
 
And also my office, Mr. Chair, in dealing with the individual, 
will be aiding as much as possible in terms of assistance with 
other departments other than our own, as the hon. member has 
said, Mr. Chair. And this is not an uncommon circumstance 
that assistance is required related to more than one single 
department. And we’re endeavouring to aid in a collaborative 
kind of way in terms of resources brought by the province to 
assist this family. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and that is correct. I 
guess the point that I was making was that I did give the 
information to yourself which you passed on to your office. 
 
It is very clear in the letter from this lady what she is wanting, 
and what her needs are. And when in fact she was contacted 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

today by your office, the gentleman that contacted her said to 
her, well I thought you were looking for placement for your 
son. And it is very, very clear from this letter that that is the last 
thing that she was looking for. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So first of all, she was not contacted until I phoned yesterday 
and asked why she hadn’t been contacted. And secondly, it had 
been read in such a shabby manner that the person that was 
handling the file didn’t even know what the request was or 
what the concerns were. And so, Mr. Minister, I have a real 
concern about that. 
 
And after talking to her today and realizing what had 
transpired, that’s why I brought this to the House today, 
because this is something that needs to be addressed. This has 
been going on since last November and nothing has been done 
to resolve this issue. And in the meantime, her son is in their 
home, he is not going to school, and their bills keep piling up. 
And she is finding herself in not only a state of financial 
difficulty, but also in a state of great emotional despair for 
herself and her family. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, to add to her problems, as if she didn’t have 
enough, then she had a great deal of difficulty dealing with 
Social Services in relationship to her health card, which was at 
one point cut off and then it was reinstated and then cut off. 
And I believe now it’s been reinstated. 
 
But one of the incidents that happened around that was that 
after she’d moved to the low-income housing, she did not 
receive her health card and was told she was cut off because no 
one knew where she was and knew what her address was, when 
it was Social Services that moved her there. And yet that was 
their excuse for cutting her health card off. 
 
So then again, she had a . . . She went to get the drugs for her 
son at the pharmacy and was told that she didn’t have a health 
card so, you know, and it had been cut off . And that was 
because of some lack of attention in an office where her health 
card had been cut off and supposedly because no one knew 
where she was or what her address was, which is very alarming 
when it was indeed Social Services that had moved her. 
 
And again, the whole issue around her . . . by Social Services’ 
request and by them trying to help her, she moved, and now 
finds herself in a greater financial difficulty than she was 
before. 
 
In fact, in her words, she states: 
 

I’m even further in the hole because of the rent difference, 
so I wish to pay back to Social Services what I have to pay. 
And I’ll be writing a letter to them this week to repay 
them, although now I’m being told by a worker at Social 
Services that my health coverage could be cancelled so I’ll 
go back to paying a third of the cost of my health care. 
 
I do not think it was very fair not to tell me about the rent 
or income tax till the last minute, especially when they 
knew about the cut-off notice. 

 

And then she goes on to say: 
 
I’m also peeved about not qualifying in December, January 
when my income was exactly the same. I’m peeved at the 
three-hour conversation I had with Social Services on the 
17th to do a needs assessment for my son even though they 
had doctors’ reports to show the need. 

 
And so this lady has been very traumatized by her dealings 
with government departments and the lack of any answer to her 
needs. I would ask the minister what timeline he sees towards 
resolving this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
statement, I will resist commenting on the specifics. The 
important thing is that there is contact with the family. There is 
communication that’s occurring that’s current, and any issues 
that the family has regarding access to service will be followed 
through. 
 
I would also point out, Mr. Chair, that that’s not particular to 
this case, that that would be standard procedure. And that’s 
what we will continue to do to work together with the family in 
order to aid them in their circumstance. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I asked a question and I would 
appreciate some kind of an answer about the time frame that 
this family is looking at for this being resolved. And I would 
also ask you: who is going to be the lead person on this? Is it 
going to be your department and someone in your office, or is it 
going to be someone else? I need a name or a contact for this 
family because they have had a continual runaround. And as 
this lady has stated to me, I cannot physically go to any more 
meetings because that means that I have to find someone to 
come into my home and look after my son; I cannot leave him 
alone; and that’s another financial burden that I simply cannot 
afford. 
 
So I would like a time frame and who is going to be the contact 
person. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, there is, as I said in my 
previous response, there is contact with the family that is 
current. I understand that the party involved has a social worker 
and it will be the worker that will be the person that will be 
dealing with her. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So, Mr. Minister, if I understand you correctly 
then, this lady is going to once again have to deal with Social 
Services in Weyburn and this is not going to be handled from 
your office? And I also would like a time frame. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, casework is not done from the 
minister’s office. Contact is made to ensure that the appropriate 
actions are being taken by the department. As is the usual and 
appropriate course of action, Mr. Chair, it would be in this case 
the family, together with their local Community Resources and 
Employment worker, who will be engaged in seeking the best 
solutions that are available. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, will this person . . . will you be 
asking for a follow-up to ensure that this is dealt with? And 
again I ask you for a time frame. 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as is the usual case when a 
matter is referred from my office, I do expect follow-up. That’s 
the normal course of action. I do expect that therefore in this 
case as well. And it will be dealt with as expediently as 
possible, which is my normal expectation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. Mr. Minister, I’d like to follow up a 
little bit on some of the discussion we were just having in 
regards to dealing with individuals who have to — I shouldn’t 
use the word have to — but work very diligently to provide the 
supports for family members. 
 
I have a very similar situation in one of my communities, an 
elderly lady who’s looking after her son. Her husband passed 
away, I believe, a couple of years ago and unfortunately didn’t 
really have a lot of opportunity to . . . as a single, as a business 
person really didn’t have a lot of additional CPP (Canada 
Pension Plan) benefits and what have you paying into. So this 
specific individual is left with her . . . just a standard old-age 
pension plus the supplements. And her son gets some 
employment opportunities in the summertime working for 
some of the rural agriculture community who do try and assist 
by involving him in his limited abilities to actually work in 
their operations. 
 
But I guess what I would like to know, Mr. Minister — and it 
follows up along the question we’ve just had discussed — what 
avenues are there available to individuals who are providing 
assistance and caring for family members with disabilities who 
have limited resources to . . . as far as income opportunities? 
And in this case I think there is some support off and on from 
the Department of Social Services. There is also some 
recognition for some special supplements in the area of food 
requirements as a result of some of the health issues that are 
there. 
 
And I guess the other issue as well is in some cases, in many 
cases, you’ll find people with disabilities or some impediments 
do have some health problems as well. And while for a person 
on assistance there is health services provided or health 
benefits, I guess the question I’m asking is: what avenues are 
open to individuals that come to the department and seeking 
assistance? 
 
And the other question I would have: when a person runs into a 
situation where they seem to be at loggerheads with their 
worker, what avenues can they pursue over and above the . . . 
My colleague had mentioned about your office, calling your 
office, and your office getting directly involved. And as you 
indicated, and I think rightly so, other than asking and doing 
some follow-up there’s — rather than your office doing it — 
there must be, within the department, avenues that people can 
follow to indeed have situations addressed where they just have 
no . . . I mean have come to the end of their resources in trying 
to deal directly with their resource worker. And there must be 
an avenue that they can pursue over and above that to make 
sure that they are being dealt with fairly, versus just continuing 
to work with a worker that seems to be going nowhere. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the question. I’m 
interpreting this is not a question about a specific case that I’m 
. . . If it is, then I’m misunderstanding. I think it’s a general 

question that’s being asked. And I see the hon. member 
nodding, so I’m assuming that. 
 
First of all, I’ll need a bit of time. This is a long list of things 
that are the response to the question. 
 
Let me deal with the second part first. If an individual is 
unhappy with or feels that he or she is not being fairly or 
properly dealt with by the person they’re dealing with in the 
system and would like to . . . So the question is, to whom can 
you appeal to have reconsideration? 
 
There is a list there. The first and most logical person locally 
would be to the regional director, the person who’s responsible 
for the operations of the office. So that would be, that would be 
the local answer. 
 
(16:30) 
 
As was previously referred to in previous questions, one course 
of appeal that some would use would be to call the minister’s 
office and then a follow-up is done that way to address. 
 
Other avenues that are available as well, of course, is the 
Ombudsman, which is an appeal mechanism that some will 
choose to use. 
 
And if it is — although I think the question the hon. member 
asked was . . . if there is a sense of working relationship that’s 
not felt then this won’t come into play in that case — but if the 
person feels that they’ve not been fairly accommodated their 
rights as a Saskatchewan citizen, then there is an appeal 
mechanism and an appeal process. There are appeals 
committees — they exist around the province — that are 
available to hear the appeals that individuals may have. 
 
I’m assuming the question is in the context of income security 
cases, when I’m answering it here too. There’s other things if 
we’re into other areas of service. 
 
But those would be the various avenues of appeal to either 
decision or assignment that a person would have available to 
them. 
 
The broader question, which was the first asked: what are the 
kinds of supports that we have here in Saskatchewan for 
someone who has disabilities of some sort? And again I’m 
largely focusing in my response here on income-related and 
employment-related things. 
 
There will be in the income entitlements for people with 
disabilities, eligibility for perhaps — and these need to be dealt 
with, with the individual worker — for special needs. 
 
There can be . . . There is, as he referred to, health coverage is 
provided, of course. The disability allowance, which is 
increased in the budget that we have before us right now. For 
families who are caring for somebody with a disability, there 
can be respite supports that are made available to the family. 
 
Then there will be the whole list of employment-related things 
ranging from the child benefit to the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement, the family health benefit. These 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

would apply to people who are not necessarily receiving 
assistance. 
 
Employment supports, child care subsidies is another part of 
that picture often; the EAPD — employability assistance for 
people with disabilities. 
 
There will be some of the times supports that are available, not 
directly at the career . . . or at the Community Resources and 
Employment office, but sometimes these are available through 
community-based organizations that are contracted with the 
department. 
 
And there will be, through the career employment services 
offices then, supports for employment attachment for people 
with disabilities and others, bridging, rate subsidies, 
self-employment supports, JobStart future skills, the provincial 
training allowance, skills training benefits. The list is really 
quite lengthy. 
 
Perhaps if there is an area that the hon. member would like to 
focus on I can be a little more specific. I don’t want to take the 
time of estimates here today to be going through and giving 
some description of all of those. But as you can see there is a 
fairly long list. 
 
And the objective is to, as much as possible, to use the 
resources that we have in the various programs to apply then as 
effectively as we can in support of individuals living as 
independently as they possibly can. And as much as we can, 
supporting people’s attachment to the labour market which we 
believe to be, at the end of the day, the most helpful kind of 
assistance in the long run whenever that can be achieved. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. The 
circumstance I’m relating to, and I believe I’ve touched base 
with the office, I’ll just do some follow-up to see exactly 
what’s transpired in that situation. 
 
But I think in general what we’re discussing here, Mr. Minister, 
is the policy that is in place in dealing with families who have 
family members with disabilities and just find that they are 
somewhat strapped for income, especially when they’ve got 
limited resources. And in this particular case that I’m talking 
of, we’re talking of an individual who’s strictly on a pension, 
just the one pension, just the average regular pension, old age 
pension, plus . . . and thereby qualifies for the supplements. 
 
And yet the needs of her disabled son are a little more than just 
having some standard support from Social Services and what 
would be just strictly the income . . . or not the income but the 
social assistance plan which does take into consideration the 
limited amount of work that is available during the summer 
months. And that’s a limited resource. 
 
But the thing I . . . The issue I think as well is compounded by 
the fact that when a person, the disabled individual is actually 
employed then the access to or the ability to continue to have 
some access to the health and the other benefits that would be 
there that you would have if you were solely on assistance. 
 
And so the . . . that’s the question, Mr. Minister, what the 
general policy is in that regard is, if you happen to find 

employment and so you’re employed right now and you’re off 
assistance; even though you have got special needs, your 
employed opportunity may be fairly limited. 
 
Is there a policy that would basically say you would still 
qualify for these benefits? And I think it’s probably related to 
the income, but I just want to know exactly what I can relate 
back as far as what you could expect from the department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member, he puts his finger on a very important subject that in 
fact we’re dealing with in this budget that is before . . . not in 
this department, but in the budget that is before the Assembly 
as we are here in this term. 
 
The hon. member may be aware that last week I did an 
announcement of a series of things related to supports for 
people with disabilities, many of which are supports related to 
the labour market attachment. And if I can just summarize 
those very, very quickly and then we can go into more detail if 
he wishes. 
 
First of all, there is in the budget of this department that’s 
before us right now an additional $1.85 million that is — that’s 
an additional amount, bringing to total I think 2.35, if I’m not 
mistaken, million dollars — targeted to assist individual people 
with disabilities address the barriers that they have to the 
workplace. 
 
And there is about $300,000 in addition to that in this budget 
that is intended to deal with employers in the promotion and 
recruitment of opportunities for people with disabilities to 
attach to mainstream employment. Those are in the context 
then of supporting the concept of citizenship for people with 
disabilities and ability to participate fully in the economic and 
social life of their communities. 
 
There is in, not from this department, but in this budget as well, 
for people with disabilities, some, if I remember correctly, 
$750,000 — 750,000? — $715,000 sorry, from the Centenary 
Fund to add an additional 13 paratransit vehicles to aid in 
transportation, bringing to, if I remember correctly, I think the 
number is 76 vehicles that have been replaced over the last four 
years. 
 
But particularly related to this point, in this budget from the 
Department of Health — not from my department — there is 
money that will enable people with disabilities who are 
currently receiving assistance to take their health benefits with 
them if they leave assistance to go to employment. And this has 
been an important move forward I think, addressing what has 
been a — by government policy — a bit of a barrier to, in the 
way of people with disabilities being able to move to 
mainstream employment, losing very important protections in 
the process. 
 
To put this into a context, this is trying to move forward in 
support of people with disabilities in the same way that we did 
in the Building Independence Program for parents and 
low-income families, who still have then the family health 
benefit that they can take with them if they’re leaving 
assistance or be eligible for it without coming on to assistance. 
 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

 

And so I think the hon. member, Mr. Chair, correctly identifies 
what has been to date a policy impediment, to being able to 
enthusiastically move from assistance to employment. And I’m 
happy to report that that’s in this budget, although it’s not 
strictly in the estimates of the department before us right now. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to welcome 
the officials that are with the minister this evening. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I have a few questions for you surrounding 
the recommendations that came out of the Special Committee 
to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the 
Sex Trade. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, to my knowledge, at this point your 
government has undertaken to make sure that there is some 
legislative matters in place . . . or legislation in place rather, 
that is addressing deterrents to men and women that would 
sexually exploit children. And today in fact I guess is the first 
anniversary of that, that legislation — or the legislation in fact 
being put into effect. 
 
And I’m really very pleased and happy that in fact that did 
happen because from the information that I’ve received there 
has definitely been a positive effect in deterring johns and 
pimps as far as their exploitation of children. And so that is 
good news. There is some concern at this point that possibly 
some of this activity may be driven underground. 
 
I believe this is a good measure that we have put in as a 
legislature — a good piece of legislation. And it certainly is 
being effected very well. 
 
Mr. Minister, in addition to that measure that was put forward 
by government, there was a measure that you had mentioned 
last year. One of the recommendations that would be put 
forward and implemented was a safe house in Regina. 
 
Now I talked with you a bit about that the last time we had 
estimates, I believe. And I believe that you mentioned to me 
that the safe house would be at the YWCA (Young Women’s 
Christian Association) in Regina. I’m not quite sure whether 
that was a suggestion of where it might be, but I’d like to get an 
update on the status of the safe house in Regina, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and I 
thank the hon. member for her question and her support, not 
only for the legislation. 
 
I too agree that it is . . . In my judgment, a year later the 
legislation is as good as it was contemplated to be, I think it’s 
fair to say, serving not only to put in place a vehicle for dealing 
specifically with actions of exploitation, sexual exploitation of 
kids, but also to serve as a deterrent, and not underestimate the 
significance of that. Clearly, in whatever ways that we can 
achieve the deterrence of exploitation is much more preferable 
than dealing with remedial circumstances after the fact. 
 
On the safe house, there has been a process which in my mind 
has been an example of one of the best . . . sort of the best parts 
of what can happen from a partnership point of view. There 
was a call for proposal for the operation of the safe house and 
then that was successfully achieved by the Treaty Four Urban 

Services who is the party then that will be providing the safe 
house services here in the city of Regina. 
 
Levels of government, together with FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and Treaty Four Services, then 
have been working on identification of a location. And in fact 
this week the location has now been finalized. I don’t intend to 
give the location here in the public record at this moment. Staff 
have been hired and will begin their training next week, and the 
training of the staff at the safe house here in Regina will also be 
offered to training to the staff at the safe house in Saskatoon as 
well. So there is the ability to get some synergy there as well. 
 
And the training will be about a month in duration and it’s 
expected that the safe house will be operating . . . will become 
operative in the month of June. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what will 
the training entail? What kind of training will be given to the 
staff at the safe house? My concern here, and certainly the 
concern of many people in this province, is still that we need to 
make sure that from the safe house, the voluntary safe house or 
protective safe house, that there is a real, ongoing, healing 
purpose for that; so that there are strategies employed, through 
assessment first of all, of what is needed for that youth, what 
kind of services they need — they and their families — and 
how those services are going to be delivered. 
 
So I’m wondering whether or not the training that you’re 
talking about today include those kind of things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The simple answer is yes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Right. So, Mr. Minister, there has been identified 
time and time again that we don’t have enough services in 
place. It was identified actually through the report that was put 
forward by the special committee, and it was one of the 
recommendations that . . . In fact recommendation no. 17, on 
the rights of abused children to adequate services. And the 
committee recommended: 
 

. . . that every child who is on the street and at risk of 
sexual abuse or suffering sexual abuse should be 
guaranteed the right to services in a timely and coordinated 
way including a safe place to stay, (so that you’re 
addressing today, you’re saying in Regina there’s going to 
be a safe place) medical care, addictions treatment, 
counseling for abuse, help in making the return to school, 
and lending assistance to children to make effective steps 
towards a full recovery. 

 
Now that is quite a huge order, Mr. Minister, there’s no doubt 
about that. But I’m concerned that whatever services are 
provided through the voluntary safe house, that they do include 
at least an avenue from the safe house for youth to be able to 
tap into those kind of services. And we don’t have adequate 
drug and alcohol addiction treatment for youth in this province 
at this time. 
 
And so I’m wondering whether or not the minister can confirm 
that all of those services will at least be addressed at the safe 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2003 

 

house, and from the safe house there can be a strategy 
employed that will ensure that there is timely — which is very 
important — a timely way to ensure that youth have some 
access to drug and alcohol addiction treatment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’m happy to advise the hon. 
member that the 26 prioritized spaces that are distributed 
around the province of Saskatchewan, that I know she’ll recall 
were identified as being available on a priority basis for kids 
who have been identified as sexually abused or sexually 
exploited, have been fully utilized over the course of the 
intervening period of time in a prioritized way. And I think 
sufficiently so, that at this point in time our judgment would be 
that it appears to be appropriately meeting the need. And it is 
arguably, is the right number. 
 
Inevitably when you’re dealing with human beings in 
unpredictable circumstances, there will be some occasions that 
you can find when it wasn’t immediately available at that hour 
or that day, but within a very short period of time. The system 
seems to be accommodating the needs of kids there. 
 
And similarly, I’m advised, access to addictions and mental 
health services for these kids as well — which I know is an 
item of some appropriate discussion — and that I’m advised 
that there has been prioritized access in the system there. And 
that that would be our judgment that at this point in time, the 
system seems to be dealing in a timely kind of way with the 
need for access to those support services for kids who are 
coming in contact with the system and making use of those 
prioritized services. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you’ve 
mentioned that there are 26 spaces throughout the province that 
can be accessed by youth. 
 
Now just imagine this, Mr. Minister, you know a youth 14 or 
15 years old who is traumatized through sexual exploitation, 
abuse on the streets, who is undernourished, who has multiple 
health problems, who has mental health problems, are often 
associated with drug addiction, and in fact forced drug 
addiction. 
 
Just imagine all of that, Mr. Minister, and a youth and their 
family looking at seeking some counselling and some treatment 
for how their family might be able to work together — because 
family is the most important — the child needs family support, 
especially in the event that the family is able to support to some 
degree. But certainly they need to be in the environment of 
their own community, somewhere where they can get some of 
these services, I’d say within a proximity of at least 10 miles 
from their home. 
 
I know that sometimes it’s beneficial if youth are really in 
danger of being exploited and being sought after by pimps and 
so on, that it might be necessary to remove them from in fact 
their environment. But in most cases, Mr. Minister, most of the 
youth are within their home community. They need the support 
that they’re familiar with. And they need to have access to 
some of these treatment provisions, along with their family. 
 
And so, how do we reconcile the fact that we may have to take 
a youth — 14, 15, 16 years old — and place them somewhere, 

an available spot, which might be miles away? If that is 
happening too, I ask you — and time is so short and there’s so 
much to discuss — I ask you too, how . . . has there been a 
determination about a time period that a youth may be staying 
in one of these spaces? 
 
And at what point is it deemed that that youth may then return 
to their community and receive ongoing treatment? And have 
those treatments been identified in the communities that that 
child would be from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, again, to the hon. member for 
the question, Mr. Chair. I think the — to cut to the chase — the 
important thing I think is that the principles that the hon. 
member refers to are high priorities, and in my judgment, are 
being actively put in place. 
 
There are intervention committees that have been established in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert and that’s to aid in the 
process of appropriate referral and support plans for these kids. 
These are vulnerable kids. 
 
The hon. member correctly identifies these kids as kids who 
have been through I think what many of us would call an 
experience that has trauma as part of its characteristic. 
 
And clearly the intention is that the supports will be as close as 
possible to home. Clearly in a province as huge as we are with 
1 million people, I think everyone understands you can’t have 
all of the services right available in the community in which 
you live. 
 
But clearly, I’m advised, in the substantial majority, substantial 
majority of cases in fact the services are delivered very, very 
close to home. Sometimes the nature of the support that’s 
needed does require some distance but we minimize that as 
much as possible. 
 
The treatment times are determined by the individual need of 
the — so there is no cookie-cutter approach here — and that 
would be what would guide our supports for these kids. 
 
Mr. Chair, I think maybe, I know the hon. member would like 
to . . . I think we may have time for one more quick question 
and quick answer if she wishes before we’ll have to move on, 
well, and go home. Pack up and go home. But I’ll stop right 
there. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. I’ll have a really quick question here 
and if the minister doesn’t have the details for the answer, I 
would certainly be willing to wait for the answer to be provided 
for me in the next few days. 
 
Mr. Minister, since your government announced those 26 
spaces that would be used, could you give me a number of 
youth that have in fact been able to use those spaces? And if 
you have that number right now, it would be great and I’d be 
happy to hear it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — It’s very close to 100 that have made use 
of that space since they’ve been in place. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Chair, and looking at the clock and 



April 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

 

appreciating the need for others, for all of us to be moving to 
other duties, I’ll now move that the committee rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................792 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................792 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................792 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................792 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................792 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................793 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Bicycle Safety Video 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................793 
 Employment Equity at Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................793 
 Midwest Female Lazers Win Provincial Hockey Title 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................793 
 Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Arbos Award Recipients 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................793 
 Deregulation of Electrical Industry 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................794 
 Curling Association Awards 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................794 
 Wynyard Honours Laycock Rink 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................794 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Government’s Response to Questions  
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................795 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................795 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................796 
 Annual Report of the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................798 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................798 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................799 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................799 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................799 
 Bill No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................801 
 Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................802 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................804 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................804 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................807 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................811 
 



 

 

 General Revenue Fund — Community Resources and Employment — Vote 36 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................814 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................814 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................817 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................819 
 


