















































Hansard: June 04, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1425 
 June 4, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people from my constituency that 
are concerned about Highway No. 49 around Kelvington. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in the area. 
 

The people that signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, and Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and area 
concerned about a lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

As you might expect, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon the signatures 
on this petition are all from the city of Moose Jaw, and I am 
pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition once more on behalf of the constituents of Cypress 
Hills concerning the increases to crop insurance premiums for 
this year. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and to restore 
affordable crop insurance premiums to our struggling 
farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
communities of Abbey and Cabri, as well as Lancer. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the alarming number of rural 
school closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to retain schools in rural communities 

such as Denzil and supply adequate education for rural 
families of our province. 
 
And as in duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Denzil and Cactus Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the fairness of Crown lease land. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain the first option to renew those 
leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the citizens of Blaine Lake, Osler, and Krydor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens recognizing the 
condition of Highway 14. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair this highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic development in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petition is signed by the residents of Wilkie. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are upset with the NDPs (New 
Democratic Party) handling of the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance premiums. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Shell Lake 
and Parkside. 
 
I so present. 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
dangerous and deplorable condition of Highway No. 43. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Regina and Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens who are concerned about the 
dangerous and deplorable condition of Highway No. 20. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and facilitate economic growth in 
rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Nokomis and Tisdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise on 
behalf of residents of my hometown of Swift Current concerned 
about a health care issue in our community and specifically 
suggesting to the government they reconsider plans to allocate a 
used CT (computerized tomography) scanner into Swift Current 
as opposed to a new one, and allocate the used one for training 
purposes in other districts that have no experience to date with 
this technology. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT scanner to Swift 
Current and instead provide a new CT scanner for the 
southwest. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the great 
city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 36, 100, 119, and no. 120. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 

on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: did your 
department recommend an individual company to provide 
pager equipment to local emergency measures organization 
boards; if so, what company and why were they chosen? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 
Assembly, a group of 43 students from Waldeck School, 26 
grade 5 students and 17 grade 6 students, seated in your east 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The students are accompanied by Miss Hain, Mr. Parscheuer, 
and Mrs. Wallace. And I hope that all members will welcome 
these students and I hope that they’ll have an educational and a 
fun day here in the legislature and in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
number of visitors that I would like to introduce who are today 
seated in your gallery. But if I may say, Mr. Speaker, given the 
events in Manitoba yesterday, I say with some confidence that 
they sit today in your gallery but this group of men and women 
soon will be seated on the floor of the legislature . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . as members of the next New 
Democratic Party government. Mr. Speaker, as I make this 
introduction I note members opposite are checking to see if 
there’s wheels under their desks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members, I would like all 
members to welcome those visitors who are here today with us 
in your gallery: John Vinek from Cut Knife-Turtleford; Len 
Taylor from The Battlefords; Wayne Byers from Lloydminster; 
Joan Beatty from Cumberland; Lon Borgerson from Sask 
Rivers; Russell Scott from Saskatoon Silver Springs; David 
Pattyson from Estevan; Bryan Barnes from Humboldt; Trevor 
Davies from Wood River; Lee Pearce from Biggar; and Henry 
Friesen from Cannington. Welcome all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Catholic Women’s League of Canada 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Monday I had the opportunity and pleasure to attend the 55th 
annual Saskatchewan Provincial Council of the Catholic 
Women’s League of Canada. 
 
Their theme for this convention, Mr. Speaker, which was held 
in Arcola, was Cast Out into the Deep. The host council was the 
Immaculate Heart of Mary which represents the three 
communities of Arcola, Carlyle, and Manor, Mr. Speaker. 
There were about 250 people in attendance at this convention. 
 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

 

And the CWL’s (Catholic Women’s League of Canada) 
mandate or mission, Mr. Speaker, is spirituality, family, 
teachings of the Church, and social justice with peace and 
humanity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This organization was founded in 1920 nationally, and in 1947 
became a provincial organization, Mr. Speaker. They represent 
approximately 180 councils and 9,400 women across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I didn’t have the privilege to attend 
and wait, they had a very, very good roast beef supper that 
evening for the convention, Mr. Speaker. They were showing 
their support for the cattle industry in Western Canada. And 
Father Banga and his group were catering and I’m told he does 
an excellent job. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Manitoba Election 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, well, to 
paraphrase the Good Book, Mr. Speaker, yesterday there was a 
sign from the East, a vision from Manitoba of things to come in 
Saskatchewan — an electoral foretaste, let’s call it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know all members will join me in congratulating Premier 
Gary Doer and the Manitoba NDP (New Democratic Party) for 
their resounding victory in yesterday’s election. 
 
Premier Doer’s government was re-elected with an increased 
majority from 31 to 35 seats with 50 per cent of the vote. The 
Sask Party look-alikes, the Conservatives, dropped to 20 seats, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why did we win again? Two reasons: one positive, one 
negative. First, responsible, balanced, open government was 
rewarded. Second, the Sask Party, oops, the Tories, ran on a 
right-wing philosophy of two-tiered medicine, gutting labour 
legislation, ignoring Aboriginal issues, centralizing education, 
and providing tax breaks for the rich. 
 
It didn’t work in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, and it won’t work 
here. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Sweet Shoppe in Landis 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sharon Clay, owner 
and operator of the Sweet Shoppe in Landis, Saskatchewan, 
calls her hometown a one-horse town. Officially a village with a 
population of around 125, Landis is 32 kilometres west of 
Biggar in west central Saskatchewan. If you blink twice you’d 
miss it, but it is all well worth the stop within its corridors. 
 
When Sharon found space available in a building which housed 
her daughter’s insurance agency, she decided it was time to 
open her own store. She had always wanted a leather shop. 
 

Sharon, her husband Bob, and her family raise 80 head of 
buffalo outside of Landis. Two of the daughters, Chandra 
Archdekin and Candace Miller, share 40 head. 
 
This candy store/gift shop is full of both delicious and beautiful 
things, selling everything from candy to Sharon’s buffalo hide 
products. More buffalo products abound: beer sausage, meat 
patties — spiced or not — roasts, steaks, smokies, and plain 
ground buffalo, all fresh frozen and wrapped in freezer paper. 
 
The kids in town love the little 5 cents and 10 cents candies. No 
one can resist an old-fashioned hard ice cream cone from the 
long list of flavour choices or maybe a cup of coffee from the 
state-of-the-art coffee machine with another long list of flavour 
choices. 
 
The store is stocked with pieces of art by local artists and 
non-locals, several of whom are relatives, confirming that this is 
indeed a family affair, and a very talented group at that. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Sharon Clay, owner and 
operator of the Sweet Shoppe in Landis, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Woodworkers’ Guild 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, about 25 years ago a group of 
people who had an interest in woodworking got together to talk 
and share ideas. From that first meeting grew the Saskatchewan 
Woodworkers’ Guild, the oldest and largest guild in the country 
with over 250 members across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last weekend the Minister of Industry and 
Resources and I had the pleasure of attending the opening of the 
guild’s 25th anniversary woodworking show, Wood 2003, 
being held this week in Innovation Place. Not only does Wood 
2003 showcase the results of the guild members’ labour but is 
also an opportunity for the members to demonstrate and share 
some of their woodworking skills and techniques. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the guild doesn’t only do good work. Guild 
members also donate materials and time — over 2,600 
volunteer hours a year — to the community. Among other 
things, they provide specialized instruction to teachers and 
students in school wood shops. 
 
Students are encouraged to show their work. Some are 
displaying at Wood 2003 and some even go on to careers in 
woodworking. Guild members carve pumpkins for UNICEF 
(United Nations Children’s Fund) each fall and at Christmas 
they collect money for the Salvation Army and make toys for 
the Denny Carr Secret Santa campaign.  
 
Mr. Speaker, it is people like the members of the Saskatchewan 
Woodworkers’ Guild who ensure that Saskatchewan’s future is 
wide open. 
 
I ask my colleagues to join me in wishing them continued 
success in all their endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

Newsask Community Futures 
Youth Business Excellence Awards 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to report 
that several students from my constituency won awards in 
Newsask Community Futures Second Annual Youth Business 
Excellence Awards. The awards are open to students from grade 
12 . . . 6 to 12 who submit business plans in developing their 
own enterprises for opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Andrea deGooijer of Naicam turned her 10-year passion for 
piano into a money-making venture and won the first place in 
the Business Venture Individual Category. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Sarah Rain Warsylewicz from Greenwater and Stacey Lutz of 
Porcupine Plain composite school won the Business Venture 
Group for Rain Works . This venture grew from Sarah’s 
therapeutic activities following a lengthy and remarkable 
recuperation from an acquired brain injury she attained in a car 
accident eight years ago. 
 
Students of Porcupine Plain’s entrepreneurship class, instructed 
by teacher Anthony Lau, swept the Business Plan Group 
Category of the YBEX 2003 awards. Stacy Kwiatkowski, Jason 
Saufert, Derek Schultz took first place in Always Sideways 
Rally Club, Ltd., with their goal of offering entertainment for 
the entire family. 
 
Amy Shuya and Christin Thorpe took second place with a plan 
to build a kennel service near Greenwater Provincial Park . 
Third place winners were Brock Norum, Nicole Kaziuk, and 
Brett Bohachewski, and Dallas Kohl’s business, KBBK Agro 
Enterprises, which would supply farmers with the ultimate agro 
superstore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating this future generation of entrepreneurs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Transportation Week 
 

Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform the 
Assembly that the first week of June has been officially 
proclaimed as Transportation Week in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, transportation plays a fundamental role in the life 
of Saskatchewan and that is why in 1997 this government made 
the commitment to spend $2.5 billion over 10 years on 
highways and transportation — a commitment we are well on 
track to meeting. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to recognize 
and acknowledge all the people of this province who work in 
the various aspects of the industry — be it air, water, road, or 
rail. I think sometimes we forget that without the efforts of 
everyone in the transportation industries — from snow removal 
crews to baggage handlers to ferry operators to train engineers, 
to name just a few — we’d be going nowhere and getting there 
fast. 
 

And so I ask all the members of this Assembly to join me in 
applauding their contributions to this province and in thanking 
them for keeping us moving. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ed Thoen Inducted into Baseball Hall of Fame 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to inform this Assembly of a man who has 
brought distinction to himself, his community, and the sport of 
baseball in Saskatchewan. 
 
For more than two decades, Ed Thoen of Birch Hills was a 
starting pitcher, leading his teams to a great many victories. It is 
for this achievement that Ed will be inducted into the 
Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame in North Battleford on 
August 16 of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ed Thoen grew up on a farm south of Viscount, 
and at the age of 14 began his long and illustrious foray as a 
starting pitcher — from his local school at Logan, then on to 
Plunkett, Viscount, and Colonsay where he earned the 
incredible amount of $300 per month to ply his pitching skills. 
 
Ed moved to the Birch Hills area in 1947 and exhibited his 
pitching until 1958 for a local team in Hagen, Mr. Speaker, 
again for the princely sum of $300 per month — a tidy sum in 
the 1940s and ’50s for someone starting farming and raising a 
family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Ed Thoen on being recognized 
for his pitching prowess. And I ask that all members of this 
Assembly join me in saluting him as he is inducted into 
Saskatchewan’s Baseball Hall of Fame & Museum . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Corporation Accountability 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A column in 
today’s paper suggests that even some in the NDP aren’t happy 
with the lack of accountability from the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apparently nothing has changed since the 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) disaster. NDP Crowns are still losing millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars on bad investments and the NDP continues to 
refuse to release the details about these bad investments. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers are tired of the arrogance and 
lack of accountability of the NDP government when it comes to 
the Crowns and how they are spending taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier: when is his government going 
to stop covering up its multi-million-dollar losses on its bad 
Crown investments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the great returns that are 
brought to the people of Saskatchewan from our Crown 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

 

enterprise are widely known. On occasion when there have been 
losses, they are, too, widely known. 
 
The improvement, Mr. Speaker, if I may say, in accountability 
of our Crowns has been, I would argue, exceptional. Does that 
mean, Mr. Speaker, there is not yet room for improvement, not 
yet room for change? No, it does not mean that at all. And this 
government, and I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan who 
believe in their Crown utilities and their Crown enterprise, will 
want to find even better ways to be accountable for that 
enterprise. 
 
Let me just ask this question though, Mr. Speaker, to the Leader 
of the Opposition. How would he propose to have 
accountability of utilities after they are sold off to private 
interests? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s good to 
see the Premier practising to be the leader of the opposition 
when he has all his potential candidates up there in the gallery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now the NDP has started talking about 
making the Crowns more accountable. But that’s exactly what 
they said after Channel Lake and nothing changed. That’s 
exactly what the Premier said after SPUDCO and nothing has 
changed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP still refuses to give straight answers on 
how much money they are losing — losing all over the world. 
In fact earlier in this session the Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation said he had no intention of answering our questions 
about how much money the Crowns were losing on bad foreign 
investments under his watch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what the NDP doesn’t understand. It’s not 
their money; it’s not the Premier’s money or the Minister of 
Crown Investments Corporation money. It’s the taxpayers’ 
money that they’re losing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers deserve answers. Will the minister 
provide a full accounting of how much money the Crowns have 
lost on bad investments over the last five years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just remind all 
members, tempting as it might be, not to involve anybody in the 
gallery in the debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition full well knows that there is a wide, public reporting 
of all of the profits and benefits of the Crowns as well as the 
losses. We’ve spent considerable time in this session describing 
and debating some of the losses that have been accrued by some 
of the Crown enterprise. There’s no mystery about this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is . . . The Leader of the Opposition 
wants to remind this government about who are the true owners 
of these Crown enterprises. We know who the enterprise 

owners are; they’re the people of Saskatchewan. That’s the 
owners. 
 
And so I challenge him then to be true, to be true to the 
commitment he made in the campaign last time around. He said 
before any Crown enterprise would be sold off in this province, 
he would go to a referendum, to the owners of these Crown 
enterprises, to ask those owners, should they or should they not 
be sold. 
 
I ask him — I challenge him — to again declare that today in 
this House. If he should form government, will his new 
government go to the people of Saskatchewan before any 
privatization of Crown enterprise in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, maybe the 
Premier has fallen asleep in his own caucus meetings because it 
appears that there are some NDP members that are suggesting 
there should be more accountability from the Crown 
corporations. In fact, some of them are suggesting that they 
should fire at least three of the five major Crown . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, order. 
Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
mentioning, there are a few of the NDP members that are 
suggesting the government should fire at least three of the five 
major Crown presidents. Now, Mr. Speaker, they’re not saying 
which three. We’re wondering which ones they’re considering. 
I guess perhaps if they just say three out of five, they hope that 
that will keep all five of them on their toes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier if he knows which three Crown 
corporation presidents is the NDP considering firing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the question today, given 
the results in Manitoba yesterday, that is being asked by the 
people of Saskatchewan, are which of those Sask Party MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) are we going to fire in 
the next provincial election? That’s the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition, the 
Leader of the Opposition and his research wing at the Regina 
Leader-Post might want to answer these questions. 
 
He wants accountability. We’ll be accountability for all the 
activity of government and all the activity in the Crown sector. 
All he needs to be accountable for is his own caucus and his 
own political party. That’s all he needs to be accountable for. 
 
Will he be accountable therefore for the member from Weyburn 
who stood up in this House this week — I sat right here; I heard 
it; all the members heard it — when the member of Weyburn 
stood up and said they’d be fully supportive of privatizing 
liquor distribution in this province. Well does he accept that 
position? 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

Is he accountable for his member from Kindersley who 
yesterday in this House — I sat right here; I listened very 
carefully to the member of Kindersley — who, like his leader, 
will not now commit to any referendum in the unlikely 
circumstance they ever form government. Let’s have the Leader 
of the Opposition show a little bit of accountability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s truly 
amazing when we get a little peek into the NDP caucus 
meetings, Mr. Speaker. And let me tell you what that recent 
peek was into the NDP caucus meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don Ching, head of SaskTel, was standing up at 
the front of the caucus meeting. The Premier was sitting quietly 
at the back of the caucus meeting. Now that has some 
disturbing symbolism in itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Ching refuses to answer questions about the 
Crown corporations, in particular SaskTel, will not tell the NDP 
caucus what he’s doing at SaskTel. And the Premier sits at the 
back of the meeting and refuses to demand answers from Mr. 
Ching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ineffectiveness of our Premier and your 
cabinet and caucus means that the Crown corporations are 
getting away without reporting to the people of Saskatchewan 
how they are losing taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier order Don Ching and his minister 
for Crown Investments Corporation to start answering questions 
and to start answering those questions today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat what I said 
earlier. There has been tremendous improvement in the 
accountability and the transparency of public enterprise in the 
Crown corporations in our province. But is there room for 
further improvement? Yes, there is. 
 
And this is a government, this is a government who represents 
the will of Saskatchewan people — that those public enterprises 
should be strong, providing service at good rates for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And we’ll work with the people of 
Saskatchewan, with those Crowns, to find even further 
measures of accountability. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition stands up and he wants to 
talk about peeking — peeking, I think he said. He peeked over 
here. Well I’ll tell you who’s peaked — that party. They peaked 
a few months ago and it’s downhill from now. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, get this. Then he stands up and like he 
somehow thinks he’s had a little peek into the caucus meeting 
of the government caucus. He thinks he’s had a little peek 
because he reads the research wing there in the Leader-Post. 
Well I’ll tell you, I wish I’d had a little peek into his caucus 
meeting when he’s trying to explain why he’s firing Grant 
Schmidt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Investments 

 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you can tell that the Premier 
is all talk and no walk because if anything, what he just said, 
were true, he would have had the courage to call an election in 
the province of Saskatchewan. But he didn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, he says there’s room for 
improvement. We want to see if they’ll accept the room for 
improvement today. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have gambled $24 million 
on a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia called Retx . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order please, 
members. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know the NDP have 
finally admitted that they have lost about half or more than half 
of the 24 million taxpayers’ dollars they risked in a dot-com in 
Atlanta, Georgia through SaskTel. 
 
The question they haven’t answered, the question we ask today: 
how much more money have the NDP approved to be risked in 
this Atlanta-based dot-com? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I’ve answered that question a number of times in the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been clear, we’ve been clear, Mr. Speaker, 
about SaskTel and their investments. SaskTel will continue to 
diversify, Mr. Speaker, so that they can ensure that they can 
provide service to people across our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are in a world that is very, very competitive. They will 
compete and provide choices for the people of Saskatchewan. 
They will provide as the Premier indicated, Mr. Speaker, 
high-quality service at the most affordable rates right across our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, how much money did SaskTel lose 
on its $8.1 million, of taxpayers’ dollars, gamble on the 
Ontario-based agdealer.com? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
member is now one of . . . is a member of the Crown 
Corporations Committee, Mr. Speaker, and they are meeting 
weekly as I understand it; as I believe tomorrow probably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these questions are very appropriately asked at 
Crown Corporations, that level of detail. But, Mr. Speaker, let 
me generally answer for . . . as the minister responsible, from a 
policy perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Crown corporation, SaskTel, and all of our Crown 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

 

corporations, have been forced into a world of, Mr. Speaker, of 
competition. They’ve been forced into a world where they have 
to diversify so that they can continue to provide high-quality 
service at the affordable rates that they have provided for the 
years past, Mr. Speaker. They want to provide those services at 
the affordable rates for years into the future. 
 
 And the only way they are able to do that, Mr. Speaker, is to 
make the very difficult decisions that they make; that is to make 
investments outside of our province so they can provide these 
services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the . . . What we 
know now today after the article in today’s Leader-Post is that 
Don Ching won’t even answer questions that the government 
poses to him and yet that’s where we’re supposed to go for the 
answers to the questions. That minister is responsible to the 
taxpayers. He ran for office. That Premier has promised to be 
more accountable. 
 
Here’s another one, Mr. Speaker. We know that the NDP have 
risked about 20 to 60 million taxpayers’ dollars to develop their 
cable TV venture at SaskTel. How much more money has the 
NDP budgeted to risk on this TV venture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, to listen to that member 
from the Sask Party from Swift Current talk about SaskTel, you 
would think that SaskTel operates the worst telephone company 
in the entire world, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what they think and 
that’s what the people of Saskatchewan . . . they would want the 
people of Saskatchewan to believe, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
they’d want the people in Saskatchewan to believe. 
 
I look at The Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker, of Saturday, May 
24, and I look at the caption that says, Canadian phone bills 
cheaper than in the US (United States). 
 
But do you know what, Mr. Speaker? It goes on, Mr. Speaker. I 
look at Chicago where the average monthly bill is sixty-eight 
sixteen. I look at, Mr. Speaker, at Toronto where the average 
bill is thirty-five sixty-eight. Do you know where the cheapest 
monthly phone bill in all of Canada is, Mr. Speaker? Right here 
in Regina. It’s at twenty-six eighty-three right here in Regina, 
the service provided by SaskTel — the corporation that they 
criticize on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister has 
just underscored for the people of the province why the Sask 
Party position on the Crowns is so popular. We have said time 
and time again that SaskTel’s greatest success is when its focus 
is on Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’ve said. 
 
How much better could it be today, Mr. Speaker, had they not 
lost $60 million last year alone on NDP out-of-province 
schemes in Australia and Georgia and Tennessee? How much 
better could it be? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Monday the Sask Party asked the minister 
about the millions of taxpayers’ dollars the NDP lost on 

FarmGro Organics, that mill that is currently in bankruptcy. The 
minister didn’t answer the question; he didn’t answer the 
question. 
 
To the minister: on the FarmGro Organics bankruptcy, how 
much money have the taxpayers lost — not how much was 
invested — how much money have the taxpayers lost on that 
NDP deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well there were a dozen questions in 
that question, Mr. Speaker, but first of all let me say I want to 
correct myself in my answer on the last question, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to SaskTel. I said they had the lowest rates in 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has the lowest rates in North 
America, Mr. Speaker — the lowest rates in North America. 
 
And as it pertains to FarmGro, Mr. Speaker, I was clear in the 
House the other day and was clear also . . . or the CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) officials were clear 
in disclosing all of the detail as it pertains to FarmGro outside 
to the public and to the media, Mr. Speaker. The investment, 
Mr. Speaker, was at something over $6 million, roughly $6.5 
million, Mr. Speaker. The recovery was $3.4 million, Mr. 
Speaker. CIC’s investment was something . . . A loss, Mr. 
Speaker, on this investment in actual dollars was something 
over $4 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, the investment continues to 
operate, continues to function. Mr. Speaker, we are looking at a 
growth in the number of jobs out there. They will continue to 
mill organic flour and other cereals so that will maintain jobs 
out in that community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at least we’re getting, sort of, 
something answers now from the minister on that particular 
investment. So let’s try our luck on one more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the NDP have committed $20 million to 
the ethanol project at Belle Plaine. Now we also know that the 
CIC president, Frank Hart, has confirmed that $25,000 has been 
spent by the NDP with Scotia Capital to review the deal 
between the government and Broe Companies, the private 
sector partner on this deal — except, Mr. Speaker, that no deal 
existed when the review would have taken place. Unless, Mr. 
Speaker, unless there was a deal when the review took place last 
year and the deal involved the NDP using taxpayers to 
guarantee the debt of that ethanol project — to guarantee the 
debt of that ethanol project, all or some of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the question of the minister: of the $25,000 
taxpayer-funded study done by Scotia Capital on this ethanol 
deal, will the minister confirm that that original deal involved 
the taxpayers, the taxpayers guaranteeing the debt on this 
project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as it pertains to the investment out there at Belle Plaine, as it 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

pertains to the ethanol development, Mr. Speaker, we said that 
we would keep the public informed on this. That’s what we 
have done. Mr. Speaker, we said we would try to achieve the 
best possible deal that we possibly could for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan and that’s what we would do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deal, as we announced, still stands. But having 
said that, having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to — I 
don’t have it right here in front of me — but I want to refer to 
what the member from Lloydminster said in an article in the 
Lloydminster Booster, who said that the government was doing 
the right thing, Mr. Speaker, by taking their time and putting 
together a deal, Mr. Speaker; a deal that would be good for the 
people of Saskatchewan is what that member said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to remind 
the minister what another member of this Legislative Assembly 
said about this very subject. He happens to be the Premier 
today; then he was the member for Moose Jaw North. What did 
he say about a Belle Plaine deal very, very similar in scale 
anyway to this particular one in terms of timing, also of the life 
of that government? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the headline of that article says, “New 
Democrats want all the facts on Belle Plaine.” And here’s what 
the Premier said at the time, it’s very strange the deal would be 
announced without the details in place. He says the New 
Democrats want the details. 
 
He promised it back in the late 1980s, Mr. Speaker. In the wake 
of the SPUDCO scandal he promised honesty and 
forthrightness again — again. Mr. Speaker, he’s got a chance to 
now deliver on a 13-year-old promise that he’s made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will he direct the minister to clearly outline the 
specific details of the arrangement with Broe on this particular 
project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we have outlined in detail 
the specifics of the deal, Mr. Speaker. We’ve outlined in detail 
the specifics of the deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say again, let me say again . . . I’m going to 
talk about and answer the question by saying, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
talk about the big picture. You’ve heard the questions, one after 
another, Mr. Speaker, where they try and select — cherry-pick, 
Mr. Speaker — losses. That’s what they try and do — 
cherry-pick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s remember, let’s remember that our Crowns 
last year, through Crown Investments Corporation, through the 
CIC, throughout the industrial incorporated investments, Mr. 
Speaker, returned on the investments across our province over 
$11 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crowns as a whole, through its subsidiaries, 
returned to the people of Saskatchewan for services here in 
Saskatchewan, $300 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Over the last 10 years, they’ve 
improved services for the people of Saskatchewan. They 
employed 9,000 people and returned $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’ve cherry-picked 
about seven or eight projects already with still more to come, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Specifically, yesterday SaskEnergy announced it has finalized a 
deal to invest in $60 million in Nova Scotia, Mr. Speaker. So 
the same utility that’s currently jacking up rates here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, they’ve announced yesterday they’re 
going to invest $60 million to grow the province of Nova 
Scotia, Mr. Speaker. That’s, Mr. Speaker, $60 million of 
taxpayers’ dollars that will be gambled in yet another, another 
NDP investment with such a stellar track record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is this, the NDP have 
returned to the people of the province of Saskatchewan not a 
single dime on their out-of-province investments since 1995. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Once again 
we’ve reached a stage here where we seem to have about six or 
seven debates taking place simultaneously, and I would ask 
members to pay attention to the questioner and to the 
respondent. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for 
SPUDCO wanting to get into this debate, that is like a turkey 
wishing for Thanksgiving, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely 
unbelievable. 
 
The fact is this. Since 1995, the NDP have not made . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Once again, the 
member for Swift Current has the floor. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP haven’t made a single 
dime on their out-of-province investments since 1995. All these 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars gambled. 
 
Will the minister, will the minister undertake today to table or 
make public the terms, the specific terms of this agreement and 
table the due diligence of this $60 million gamble in Nova 
Scotia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well once 
again that member from Swift Current from the Sask Party 
completely misrepresents the facts when he talks about the 
investment by SaskEnergy in Heritage Gas in Nova Scotia. 
 
And may I point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Conservative 
Premier of Nova Scotia, the Conservative Premier, who 
apparently there may be some relationship with their 
philosophy over there, talks about, Mr. Speaker, in glowing 
terms, SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. He talks about it as a Crown 
corporation . . . as a utility that operates as one of the best 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

 

energy utilities in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And that member 
suggests and infers that SaskEnergy is going to lay out $60 
million without, Mr. Speaker, any customers on line. Nothing 
could be further from the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is going to build as you 
buy on this project, Mr. Speaker. Therefore there will be no 
construction until they have customers; there will be no — 
virtually no — expenditures of dollars, Mr. Speaker, until 
customers are signed up, Mr. Speaker. Unlike what they did in 
the 1980s where they built and built and built. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard this 
story before and we’ve heard it from this minister. We heard it 
on SaskTel Max. We heard it on their TV scheme that didn’t 
work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We heard it from the member for P.A. (Prince 
Albert)-Northcote, the demoted minister over there, on the 
SPUDCO file, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard it even from that 
minister. Six years of deception on the SPUDCO file, 28 
million loss, scandal after scandal. He’ll have to forgive the 
people of the province and so will the Premier if they just don’t 
believe him on the Nova Scotia deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — If that minister, Mr. Speaker, is so confident 
about this deal, then will he stand up today and agree to table 
the due diligence, and report back to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and assure them that this is not yet the latest 
NDP boondoggle with their money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, you’ll 
have to forgive me, Mr. Speaker, if I don’t always believe what 
that member says when he sits in the dead of night with his glue 
and his tape, Mr. Speaker; misquotes this minister, Mr. Speaker, 
completely misquotes this minister and then apologizes for a 
punctuation error, Mr. Speaker. Please forgive me, Mr. Speaker, 
but I don’t believe that member sometime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is — the point is on this, on all of this 
with our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker — is that they 
provide high-quality service, very affordable rates, lower rates, 
Mr. Speaker amongst . . . (inaudible) . . . all of Canada. They 
employ over 9,000 people. They partner with over 600 
businesses. They buy goods and services from over 12,000 
businesses across our province. 
 
Our view — and he will hear it over and over and over and over 
again — our view is that we will maintain these Crowns to 
provide their services. Their view is they will sell those 
Crowns, full stop, period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
(14:15) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Telehealth Network Expansion 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today in 
this Assembly to announce a major expansion of Saskatchewan 
Health’s Telehealth network to five new sites in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is a very important provincial 
government funding announcement, Mr. Speaker. Our 
government is investing one and a half million dollars for the 
expansion of Telehealth services in the regional health 
authorities across southern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
Telehealth network is a key initiative of our government’s 
Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care that the Premier and 
I were pleased to announce in December 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the size of our province and the long 
distances that exist between our communities can pose some 
significant challenges to how we live, work, and deliver 
services. It is those distances and the remoteness of some of our 
communities that make it more difficult to provide the best 
access to specialized health care services for all patients. Mr. 
Speaker, those distances also cause isolation for health care 
providers and present challenges in retaining and recruiting 
health care professionals. 
 
Our government is responding to those challenges by 
announcing the expansion of the Telehealth network. We are 
joining with our health region partners, Mr. Speaker, and the 
Telehealth Saskatchewan Management Committee to announce 
the expansion today of Telehealth services to five additional 
regional health authorities across the province. They are: 
Sunrise, Yorkton; Five Hills, Moose Jaw; Cypress, Swift 
Current; Heartland, Kindersley; and Sun Country, Weyburn. 
 
In addition, we have a new Telehealth suite at the Regina 
General Hospital. This new site in the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region will act as the anchor for the southern locations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that in total we now have 17 sites 
in 15 communities; a provincial network that stretches from 
remote northern areas of our province to central and southern 
rural communities. 
 
Funding for today’s network expansion is part of a collaborative 
initiative with the federal government, the provincial 
government, and the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority. One 
million dollars came from a Health Canada federal grant, 
$200,000 from the regional health authority, and our provincial 
contribution is 1.5 million. Our government is very pleased to 
work with these partners in support of Telehealth technology in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our immediate goal is to establish a least one 
Telehealth site in each region. In our government’s action plan 
we set a long-term goal to have a total of 24 sites in the 
province. These sites, along with the existing sites and nursing 
stations in Pinehouse Lake and Beauval, and the site at the 
Kinsmen Children’s Centre in Saskatoon, will bring us in the 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

future to 27 sites in 23 communities. Mr. Speaker, we are 
making real, great progress in reaching this goal. 
 
This is a viable strategy to improve access to quality health care 
in Saskatchewan while also improving the efficiency of 
specialized health care services. Using the latest communication 
and multi-media technologies, Mr. Speaker, the Telehealth 
Saskatchewan network is able to provide a broad spectrum of 
services. 
 
People who normally would have to travel great distances to see 
a specialist are able to save time and money by having a remote 
consultation via Telehealth. Health care workers and the public 
are able to keep up with the latest developments in health care 
without leaving their communities. 
 
Another very important aspect of adding Telehealth sites to the 
network, Mr. Speaker, is our goal to support rural doctors and 
health care providers by introducing technology that will allow 
them to stay in touch with their peers in larger centres and to 
participate in educational sessions. 
 
One of the challenges that all health care providers face in rural 
areas is feeling cut off from colleagues as well as from research 
and educational opportunities. Telehealth has the potential to 
reduce isolation. It is our hope that through Telehealth 
education, doctors may be encouraged to stay for longer periods 
of time in remote and rural areas because they can stay 
connected with the latest procedures and techniques. In this 
way, Mr. Speaker, we add to our initiatives to revitalize and 
sustain our rural communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some very positive statistics on the usage 
of Telehealth services in Saskatchewan. Approximately 9,500 
participants have attended 670 education sessions. This includes 
health providers as well as community members. Nearly 1,000 
patients have been seen during 390 specialist clinics. 
 
Another use for Telehealth, Mr. Speaker, and one that is already 
in use here in Regina, is connecting medical residents who are 
practising in Regina hospitals to their colleagues in Saskatoon. 
Through Telehealth, Regina’s medical residents are able to 
participate in resident rounds, grand rounds, and other 
educational opportunities with their Saskatoon peers. 
 
Telehealth also provides information on preventative care and 
health promotion to patients and their families, Mr. Speaker. If 
patients have good access to health information, particularly if 
it helps them to understand their illness or the treatment 
recommended by their doctor, they will have a better chance for 
improved health. If they are able to conveniently attend 
educational sessions by Telehealth link in their own 
communities for such things as diabetes, nutrition, parenting, 
and fetal alcohol syndrome assistance, both individuals and 
communities as a whole will benefit by having better health 
outcomes. 
 
Given all of these benefits, Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the 
Telehealth Saskatchewan network, and that the new sites we are 
announcing today as part of the expansion to this valuable 
network, are an important part of our health care system in 
Saskatchewan. It is a program that greatly adds to an already 
strong foundation of health care services and programs in our 

province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a program that fits well with the direction this 
government is taking to improve and secure health care for the 
future in this province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise to respond to the ministerial statement in regard to the 
expansion of the Telehealth network in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we are starting to understand 
more and more in this day and age — and it’s more particularly 
difficult and challenging for those of us of a certain age — is 
the important possibilities of the digital age and the advances 
made because of electronics and all of the things itinerant 
around the communications industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a part of my role of opposition Health critic, 
I’ve travelled to many centres. And one of the peak experiences 
that I’ve witnessed is being in Saskatoon and witnessing how 
the Telehealth network was linking to remote northern 
communities, nursing stations, and other facilities. And really 
the absolute possibility now because of the digital networks, the 
ability to transfer real-time advanced medical information is 
really quite astonishing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that these advances in technology certainly 
create the opportunity and indeed perhaps even the 
responsibility to make sure that we use these new tools that are 
available only to us in the last very few years to the very best 
advantage possible. And certainly to link electronically with the 
digital network, and in a way that’s specific to be able to have 
two-way, instantaneous communications as well as data transfer 
of imaging and test results is a very, very important initiative by 
the health system in Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe Saskatoon pioneered this technology and were very 
instrumental in setting up some of the protocols, ironing out 
some of the ways the system would operate and making 
recommendations on improvements to the system. And so 
people from the Saskatoon region and the health system there 
are to be congratulated for their foresight and their initiative. 
 
Certainly we very much support and applaud the expansion of 
this network across the whole province, and we support the 
reality that every health region in the province should be . . . is 
linked as soon as is possible to this whole Telehealth network. 
 
I’m also mindful of a visit in . . . when I was here in Regina, 
where they were talking about doing grand rounds 
electronically and digitally. And I thought well that’s kind of 
interesting, it must be happening within this facility. But in 
reality I believe, if I don’t remember correct, they were linking 
physicians in Regina to physicians in Texas and physicians in 
Europe. And they were doing consults on some diagnosis that 
were very difficult to make. And so the possibilities of using the 
digital aids are very exciting and certainly show some real 
promise into the future. 
 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we support this initiative. We think it’s 
important, and it is something that is going to be a real tool in 
making sure that we have quality health care, not only in parts 
of this province but able to link this province with the very best 
resources in the world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
with leave to move a motion dealing with an absence in the 
Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member of Swift Current, that by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the member for 
Canora-Pelly for Monday, June 9 to Friday, June 13, 2003 
inclusive to attend the CPA Wilton Park Conference at 
Wilton Park, England on behalf of this Assembly. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 649 through 670 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 649 to 670 have been 
submitted. 
 
(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To my immediate right is Ken Lozinsky, and Ken is the acting 
director of our parks branch. And then we have, directly behind 
Ken, Bruce Martin, who is a policy analyst. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
minister and your officials. I have a few questions concerning 
Bill 13, the Act to amend The Parks Act. 
 
First set of questions really revolves around the changing from 
a one, permitting a one-year lease up to a maximum of five 
years. Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the minister right now, what is 

the formula . . . or what, concerning the cost of the leases to an 
individual ranchers, what is it now for the one year? And also 
could . . . then you could elaborate on the cost to the rancher for 
one to five years after the Bill has been passed, and how is that 
price determined. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Okay. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. Just to point out that the reason why the permit 
length is being extended is to allow for activities such as 
grazing. On a one-year permit, it’s considered to be insufficient 
in length to allow the permit holder to make the kind of 
improvements such as fencing and water access that promote 
environmentally responsible grazing practices. 
 
And we determine the permit — it’s not a lease; it’s a permit — 
we determine the permit based on the number of cows. So it’s 
really on the animal unit that we determine the permit rules and 
processes. And the one-year agreement versus the five-year 
agreement, there won’t be no price change; it’ll remain 
consistent. So really it’s just a matter of looking at the . . . at a 
longer term planning time frame. So again, there’ll be no 
change in the cost. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Again to the minister, concerning 
the cost of improvements, fence, water, and access, I’d just like 
the minister to clarify, if a producer goes and puts up a 
permanent fence — what I call a permanent fence is a four- or 
five-wire fence — and after five years they may not have . . . 
may not be allowed to access that land, may not be able to get a 
permit, who owns the fence? What’s required? Is the producer 
. . . Would a producer be requested to take the fence down if it’s 
a permanent fence? And also at issue around electric fences and 
things like that. 
 
Also the second part of the question really is around dugouts. 
Would there be dugouts allowed to be dug on this land? And 
again, who would pay for the digging of the dugouts and wells, 
and any access of water as well? 
 
And also in reference to access, exactly what does the Bill mean 
by access to this land and how does that pertain to a permit 
holder? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just to point out that the Saskatchewan Environment does not 
assume any responsibility for any of the improvements. If there 
are improvements to be made on the particular parcel of land 
that we’re permitting, then the permittee would be responsible 
for all the improvements that he or she wishes to make. 
 
I think it would be advantageous to advise the opposition that 
some of these permits run from 30 or 40 years, so every year 
we’ve got to kind of renew these permits. So again, from our 
perspective, having five-year permits is much more practical to, 
you know, to undertake in reference to working very closely 
with the potential permittees. 
 
In reference to the dugouts, we don’t have any major issue with 
dugouts. There are no dugouts currently in some of the areas 
that we do permit to use. Many times some of the areas that 
we’re talking about they have a natural water source, so it’s not 
really a major issue. And again, if in the event a five-year 
permit was structured, then if they built a bunch of fences or 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

they built a well and after a few years they decided to get out of 
this, then they could either sell those assets or take the assets 
with them in the event that they want to get out of farming. If 
they want to transfer it to somebody then, you know, they can 
certainly negotiate a value for some of the improvements that 
they have on that particular site of land, or they can withdraw 
the improvements and sell them accordingly. 
 
So again very quickly, Saskatchewan Environment is not 
responsible for any improvements. And in the event that the 
permittee does not want to continue farming, then he or she can 
either sell the improvements when they transfer the permit or 
they could simply withdraw the improvements and sell them as 
they wish. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister, thank you for that 
answer. I guess my next question is more concerning my first 
question. You, the minister, had stated that many of these 
permits are long-term permits but my question goes to who is 
eligible to apply. And if a rancher has had these permits for a 
number of years, once the rancher has the permit, is it an 
automatic rollover for another term of five years or do they run 
the risk of losing the permit? What is the process of other 
people applying for these permits? 
 
And in the case of a rancher giving up the permit, what is the 
conditions and the rules around other ranchers applying for the 
permits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just to point out again that as part of The Parks Amendment 
Act, there are some grazers that use some of the park lands. So I 
just want to, you know, just to remind the opposition that this is 
in reference to park lands where we have grazing permits that, 
you know, that we allow and this is not of course a 
province-wide issue. 
 
But I’d point out that each year the permittee would get the 
permit issued in their name. And it’s been going on for a 
number of years. And there’s only once . . . Again, I’d point out 
there’s only been a few grazers that really operated on our 
provincial parks. And this five-year deal gives them a bit of 
time . . . a better time frame. It’s meant to improve that. 
 
And there’s only once where we’ve had a competing interest of 
one long-term . . . a grazer permittee that had another person 
that was applying for his particular area. And that’s where we 
go into a formula that has been developed by both Ag and Food 
and PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) that 
talks about distance from the market and whether grazing is 
their primary activity and so on and so forth. So that formula is 
usually what kicks in and what we use in the event that there’s 
been a dispute or another application for a certain area. This has 
only happened once. 
 
And again, if you look at people that may be interested in 
grazing in the park system, that we do have a waiting list, and 
we advise folks that wish to participate in this grazing permit 
that they will put them on a waiting list. And we usually don’t 
generally kick out a permittee that has been operating in a 
certain area for, you know, for a number of years. We recognize 
that they have, you know, they’ve satisfied the formula, they’ve 
had a long history, and those are some of the things that we take 

into account. 
 
So again very quickly, there are very few grazers around the 
provincial park system. Many of those grazers have been there 
for a number of years. If there’s a competing interest, but it’s 
only happened once, we use a formula that’s been designed by 
Ag and Food and PFRA. And again, the five-year time frame 
versus the one-year program is intended to have the grazers that 
have permits now to have a comfort of time that they’re able to 
operate and satisfy some of their needs when it comes to 
grazing. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister, a few questions 
concerning some of the other transactions that are in this Bill. 
Section 2 and 24 is amended under The Highways and 
Transportation Act. What are the changes being done here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. This is a minor 
housekeeping item. There’s a change of the name from The 
Highways and Transportation Act and substituting The 
Highways and Transportation Act, 1997. So really all that was 
done there is just a minor technical change where we added the 
1997 into the Act as the Highways and Transportation folks 
changed their name. So we changed it according to our Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Also, section 27 is amended under 
The Environmental Management and Protection Act. And what 
is the changes there? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again the same principle. As you 
notice, it says The Environmental Management And Protection 
Act. And what we’ve done is we’ve changed that Act to really 
quite frankly read The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2002. Again that’s technical in nature, same as 
the previous question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. This Bill updates a number of land 
descriptions in parks and I’d just like to ask you questions 
concerning two of them: what is being changed in Lac La 
Ronge Provincial Park, and why, and what changes are being 
made to Meadow Lake Provincial Park, and why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. First on the 
amendments to the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, what the 
amendment does, it facilitates a land exchange between the La 
Ronge Indian Band in which the land will be taken out from the 
La Ronge Provincial Park and will be added to the community 
of Sucker River. 
 
The park land will be exchanged for some of the reserve land at 
Bittern Lake. So really what we are doing here is we are 
exchanging land around Sucker River for land at Bittern Lake, 
where the land at Bittern Lake will become part of the park and 
the land around the community of Sucker River — because they 
need to expand, which is a provincial park now — will be used 
for future community growth. 
 
The community of Sucker River and the La Ronge Indian Band 
has requested that land be withdrawn from the provincial park 
to be added to their reserve. And the reserve right now is 
completely surrounded by a park . . . or by the park, a lake, and 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

 

a highway. And what we do in an exchange of land, it’ll allow 
the reserve to expand its land base and to accommodate future 
housing needs for the growing population of Sucker River. 
 
And secondly in reference to the Meadow Lake area, a 
15-hectare — which is a 37-acre — area of agricultural land at 
Meadow Lake Provincial Park will be removed. It is not 
suitable for park purposes, and the Waterhen River cuts off a 
piece of this park land from the rest of the park. So really it’s a 
twofold point in reference to Meadow Lake. Again, it’s not 
suitable for park purposes and the Waterhen River does cut off 
this piece. It’s kind of a piece of land that’s off to the side. And 
those are the two amendments in reference to Sucker River and 
in reference to Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the role and 
responsibilities of INAC (Indian and Northern Affairs Canada) 
concerning these transactions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to point out that INAC did not play a very strong 
role. Obviously we have certain protocols that we have to 
follow when we’re talking about designating First Nations land 
and those protocols will be followed. 
 
INAC was not the lead in this regard. They certainly want to be 
part of the process in terms of watching to make sure that we 
designate these lands as they should be designated. 
 
The negotiations were primarily from the La Ronge Indian 
Band and working in conjunction with SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) and certainly working 
with Northern Affairs. 
 
So Northern Affairs and SERM and the La Ronge Indian Band 
worked together on this particular project. We moved it 
forward. We followed a protocol with INAC because INAC has 
to make sure that the land that we’re withdrawing from Bittern 
Lake are okay to be transferred to the La Ronge park and that 
the land at Sucker River that’s currently under the La Ronge 
park becomes part of the First Nations band land. 
 
So they’re aware of all of the changes that are in place. And 
they’re primarily facilitating their needs or their issues to make 
sure that they’re able to designate these lands accordingly. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to thank the minister 
and his officials. That’s all the questions I have today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: —I recognize the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 

have with me, to my left, Duane Mombourquette who’s the 
director of health planning, policy and planning branch. And to 
my right, Phil Moleski who’s the director of the IT (information 
technology) development and operations and the corporate 
information and technology branch. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, 
Minister, welcome to your officials this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, the health protection Act of course is a very 
important amendment to the general legislation that I think it be 
fair to say ran into a few stumbling blocks in terms of its 
practical implementation when it was first enacted and hence 
the reason for not having it proclaimed. 
 
Minister, can you describe briefly is this legislation . . . When 
you sort of wed the two pieces of legislation, is this designed to 
give the responsibility, the authority, the ownership of a 
medical health record to the individual who that record pertains 
to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll answer that question, which is a very 
good question, this way. The custody and control of information 
will be in the hands of trustees and they will have a fiduciary 
duty to the individuals to manage those records appropriately. 
So the relationship is that the individual patient can rely on the 
fiduciary responsibilities of the trustees to manage this 
information. 
 
And so that’s the structure. So it has elements of the individual 
clearly knowing and monitoring what’s happening, but it also 
has elements that allow for the trustee to live up to their 
fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. In regard to the 
relationship then between the individual who the record pertains 
to and the trustee, is there any relationship that’s direct in terms 
of the patient — if you like, for lack of a better description — 
being able to set certain parameters on the trustee in terms of 
what parts of the medical record can be shared, and under what 
terms and conditions it could be shared? Or is it completely 
under the terms, the fiduciary responsibility as set out by this 
legislation that the trustee has? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think what I’ll try to do is identify in 
clearer language than the Act itself does, what kinds of rights 
individuals have so that we can have on the record how this 
works. And I think I’ll be able to answer your specific question 
by doing that. 
 
The Act specifically identifies an individual’s rights to consent 
to the use and disclosure of their personal health information 
unless otherwise authorized by the Act. It identifies the 
individual’s rights to access one’s own personal health 
information. It identifies the right of an individual to be 
informed by trustees of anticipated uses and disclosures of their 
personal health information. 
 
It gives an individual a right to be informed of disclosures of 
personal health information without consent if something 
happens inadvertently. It gives an individual a right to prevent 
access to a comprehensive electronic health record on the 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network. It gives an 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

individual the right to revoke consent to the use or disclosure of 
their personal health information. It gives an individual the right 
to request amendments to their personal health information if 
they see something is inaccurate or a problem. 
 
It gives an individual the right to refuse to provide a health 
services number as identification for a non-health service. It 
gives an individual the right to apply to the Privacy 
Commissioner to request a review of an action taken by . . . 
taken or a decision made by a trustee with respect to their 
individual personal health information. And it also gives an 
individual the right to designate another person to make 
decisions about their personal health information in certain 
circumstances. 
 
So that’s identification of the individual kind of rights that are 
spread throughout the Act. And I think that probably answers 
all your questions. I’d be happy to answer more if there are. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, currently I think the practice in 
many instances for individuals that go to their family physician 
and the family physician maintains a medical record . . . And 
those may be fairly complete in some instances. If you’ve had a 
family physician for a good number of years, the file that is 
built up can be quite comprehensive and fairly complete. There 
may well be, in individual circumstances, other pieces of the 
file in different locations. 
 
How does this legislation envisage bringing this information 
into a . . . Or maybe I should say, does it envisage bringing the 
information together into a single medical record that then is 
under the jurisdiction of the trustee in collaboration with the 
individual, under those conditions and circumstances that you 
just outlined? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, this legislation allows for and 
sets the rules around what might be called a comprehensive 
health record. So it enables it or allows for it to happen. It 
doesn’t direct that it happen but if that is created by a particular 
trustee, whether it’s a doctor’s office or a hospital around a 
particular patient, then this sets the rules around that 
compilation of information. 
 
But at this stage it really is to make sure that there’s protections 
in place if that kind of record is created. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So in the definition of trustees, it would be 
agencies or entities like doctors, specialists, things of that 
nature. 
 
What is the relationship between the record and the trustees’ 
protection of the record on behalf of the patient? Is there a 
relationship defined in regard to other agencies? I’m thinking 
particularly like agencies that may have a legitimate reason to 
have access to a health record, for example, SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) or Workers’ Compensation. Are those 
relationships spelled out as well between the trustees and those 
corporations or agencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think the answer to that 
particular question is the way the Act is set up, information 

cannot be given out unless there’s a specific purpose for that 
legislation . . . or for that information to be released. 
 
And so in the examples that you give around SGI or WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board), the trustee of the information 
whether it’s the . . . most likely the doctor would then have to 
look and see whether the relationship that they have with the 
patient allows them to give that kind of information. 
 
The most common way that it would be done is by consent of 
the patient. So the patient actually is working with SGI around a 
particular personal injury. They would then give a letter of 
consent to the trustee, the doctor, who would then in turn give 
that information to SGI. Otherwise that information would not 
flow. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So there’d be an onus of responsibility on 
the agencies requesting the information to obtain the necessary 
consent directly from the individual whose record it pertains to, 
and that’s important. 
 
In regard to, and I know this legislation doesn’t specifically 
spell out the implementation of how this system would work, 
but it provides a framework as to how it might happen. Is there 
in the parameters of making sure that records are going to be 
properly safeguarded, if we get into an electronic record is there 
going to be the standards that are going to be set so that these 
records can be accurately and completely defined by 
individuals? 
 
I’m concerned that some of the problems about duplicate names 
that we hear about in land titles and some of those things might 
be a problem that would come into an electronic record system. 
So in terms of this legislation of protecting the privacy, is there 
sort of standards that are going to be set so that any electronic 
agency like SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network), 
for example, will have to meet those standards in order to 
comply with the requirements of the privacy in this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for a very good question. And 
I’ll answer it on, I think, three different levels. One is, in 
Saskatchewan we have a fairly long history of using electronic 
records in our medical system and in our pharmacy system, that 
have been used for a while. And in that process we have 
developed a number of, I think, very high standards in 
Saskatchewan. One of the issues then becomes, well what are 
the levels of security and the standards that you use in that 
particular area? And there are industry-wide standards, as we 
know from various reviews that are done. But we also in 
Saskatchewan Health have some development of that. 
 
I think the most interesting thing is, though, that we are working 
on national standards through the Canada Health Infoway 
operation. And Saskatchewan is actually Co-Chair with Canada 
in the development of many of the things that relate to health 
information in Canada. Because ultimately the goal is that your 
health information would be available if you are in a car 
accident in British Columbia, in a way that, for the specific 
purpose of treating you as a patient, you would be able to get 
back to your record in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re quite a ways away from that, but to do that, you need to 
have some very clear standards around what kind of 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

 

information there is, what is the accuracy of it, but then clearly 
the security of it. And all of those are the things that are being 
worked at as I say on quite a number of levels. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, does the legislation specifically 
dictate who the trustees are specifically? For example, we used 
the example of the family physician would be clearly a trustee. 
But to what extent does that go and are these categories of 
people designated? For example, you might have an alternative 
medicine practitioner that is not regulated under a professional 
college, would they be considered trustees? Or how do you 
define who trustees potentially even can be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My answer to this 
question is really the definition section of the 1999 Act, where 
it sets out under section 2(t) the definition of trustee. And it lists 
a whole number of specific things, from government institution 
to district health board or regional health authority and all the 
way down the line. 
 
Now the specific question that you asked about an unregulated 
body or an unregulated profession is that it doesn’t fit into any 
of the clear definitions under trustee, but there is a final one, no. 
(xv), which is, “. . . any other prescribed person, body or class 
of persons . . .” 
 
So there is the ability to actually, in the regulations, to designate 
another group of people who would be trustees if it was seen 
that there was some problem arising around some of these other 
unregulated professions. Clearly that would be a challenge and 
would obviously involve some discussion with the particular 
group, but practically there is a way of including them in here 
so that they would be bound by all the rules. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, we talked 
about the rules about safeguarding or the relationship between 
the patient and the trustee. Is there provision for, say in the 
event that an individual may have a condition or a disease that 
would be such that it might place other people in society at risk, 
and even though that individual would prefer not to disclose 
that, that there is an overriding public purpose in making sure 
that this information was shared in some way at some level. 
 
How is that kind of a situation dealt with, where there may be 
competing interest between the individual’s desire to have their 
specific medical record shared and the overall purpose of the 
public good, if you like, and needs to be protected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, there are two answers to that 
question in that in the normal case if you end up having some 
kind of infection, you would do what’s called universal 
precaution — you’re always careful; you always set your 
procedures to deal with body fluids, or blood, or other things in 
a way that prevents a problem. 
 
But I think the more specific question that you asked relates to 
what would be on page 5, section 27, the disclosure provision, 
under (4)(a). This gives a trustee the power to disclose 
information without the consent of a subject: 
 

where the trustee believes, on reasonable grounds, that the 
disclosure will avoid or minimize a danger to the health or 
safety of any person; 

And that would deal with some of the kinds of communicable 
diseases that may be in a community and a trustee, a doctor, 
identifies that particular problem. The patient doesn’t want to 
consent, the doctor may say, no, that’s something that we do 
have to report, and there would be rules around that. And so it 
would cover it in that way. 
 
And the ultimate challenge, if there ever was a challenge, would 
be on what does reasonable grounds mean. And clearly that is 
something that if there was a dispute, ultimately a judge would 
decide and hopefully he would do it on the side of the society in 
general. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, in regard to 
information that would be more of a statistical nature and more 
generic, there are those that would argue that that should be 
pretty easily made available for statistical purposes and for 
research and advisory groups like quality councils and things of 
that nature on a provincial and a national basis. 
 
But what if a person has a circumstance that is pretty unique 
and it might be a very rare circumstance. So where statistically 
you say we’re taking and giving examples of these things on a 
provincial basis, but it might be one or two individuals and that 
might be the only individuals that would exist on a provincial 
database. And so in disclosing this general statistical 
information, you quite possibly could be violating or treading 
into an individual’s privacy, if you like. How is that kind of 
circumstance dealt with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d also like to add 
some information to the last answer that I gave. The Public 
Health Act also applies, relating to some of these 
communicable diseases that may be there as well. And that 
would provide some guidance to the trustee about when they 
might have to release the information. 
 
Now on this specific question that you’ve asked here, in the ’99 
legislation it’s clear that you can release de-identified 
information. That does happen now and has happened for a 
number years on research. But what happens is that you look at 
the information you’re going to give from Health — and which 
is normally where the broader information comes — and they 
identify what’s called a critical cell. 
 
In other words if there’s a group of one or two or three cases 
that are the only ones in all of Saskatchewan, and that 
information would clearly probably identify some people, then 
that information is not released. It’s taken out of the overall 
general statistic. And so there are some rules about any 
information where there is a very small number that would be 
reported. Then that would not be described as de-identified and 
so therefore it wouldn’t be released. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Just backtracking a 
little bit to make sure I understood you correctly because my 
colleague was not exactly clear on the answer. 
 
When we talked about agencies like SGI and WCB that may 
have a reason to request access to a patient’s file, as I 
understood it that you said, is that these agencies would be 
required to get a written consent from the patient through their 
doctor. And is it also true that it would be clearly explained to 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

this patient that this is a consent to allow SGI or Workers’ 
Compensation or whatever other agency may be appropriate to 
access the patient’s files so they aren’t thinking that they’re 
giving the doctor the right to look at the file, that it indeed is a 
request for consent from this other agency? I understood that’s 
what you said and I wanted to make sure that that was exactly 
what you intended. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think your description of what I said is 
accurate. Let me try to explain this like this. Insurance 
companies, for example, that have insurance contracts with their 
customers, will usually put in that insurance contract 
somewhere that the patient or the person who is injured 
consents to them getting information to meet their claim. So 
that’s sort of a business practice around some of these things. 
 
What we have in Saskatchewan is a no-fault insurance scheme 
now, with choice, that includes some of those insurance clauses 
right in legislation. And so I think that that may be where some 
of the questions arise, that in The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act there are some specific provisions that are like 
normal insurance contracts that give the right to that kind of 
information. 
 
Now my understanding of the practice in Saskatchewan Health 
as it relates to that particular kind of clause is that their policy is 
still to make sure that the patient knows that this kind of 
information is being requested and try to get the consent. Now 
part of the problem arises is that it is very specific in the 
legislation about getting that information and so sometimes the 
other trustees may not be as . . . have as many procedures 
available to provide that protection. 
 
But it’s in that context of where somebody seeks reimbursement 
for an injury in a private insurance contract, you’d have a clause 
that consents prior to anything happening, and then that’s 
what’s used by the insurance company. In Saskatchewan our 
insurance contract for automobile insurance is the Act. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So, Minister, for example, an individual, 
when you go to get your automotive driver’s licence, they have 
usually I think five or six medical questions that you’re asked to 
check off yes or no on. And on the basis of your answers, you 
are awarded a driver’s licence with no medical exemptions, 
depending on how you answer those questions. 
 
In that circumstance, or in a circumstance where you’ve 
answered all the questions so that it would be indicating to SGI 
that there is no . . . there should be no restrictions on your 
licence, would they have the right, under the legislation you 
describe, to actually access the patient’s file to confirm that the 
answers were answered accurately, or are they forced to accept 
the validity of the questions as answered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’m not sure if I have the full 
answer to that. It’s been a number of years since I was the 
minister of SGI when this was the kind of question that would 
come up in some of those situations. 
 
But I think, I think there is a right though for SGI, if they have 
some question about the answers that are given in that particular 

form, that they can write to the individual and ask for more 
information. Or sometimes they will ask for a medical or 
something like that. But I don’t know for sure whether they 
have a right to sort of demand it directly. 
 
So I can maybe request from another one of the other ministers 
to get an answer to that if you wish. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I think the point in 
principle here that I think is important is that I think it’s 
important to make sure and safeguard that patients sort of give 
informed consent for people accessing their medical records, so 
that they’re put in a position of being able to judge pretty 
honestly and objectively if indeed someone else accessing their 
records is in their best interest. And that whole concept of 
informed consent, I think, is the principle that I would certainly 
like to see sort of going through this whole bit of legislation in 
regard to this legislation. 
 
Mr. Chairman, one further area. Although it happens very 
rarely, sometimes there are some medical practitioners that do 
not live up to the standards of their self-regulated college after 
they have been practising medicine in one form or other in the 
province. And so it may at least be theoretically possible that 
the reliability, the quality of medical records that this 
individual, who in that case would have been in a trusteeship 
position, might be brought into some question. 
 
If there ends up being a dispute, does this legislation provide 
the faculty for someone to assume the medical records in the 
event of a trustee either being found to be negligent or 
unprofessional, number one? 
 
And in the second instance, what happens in the case of a 
trustee, a practitioner leaving the province? In some instances a 
community has found vast amounts of medical health records 
that simply seemed to have been abandoned. What provision is 
there to make sure that individuals’ medical records are being 
safeguarded in the event one of the trustees of those records 
actually defaults? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are two ways of doing this and sort 
of . . . The first one relates to, for example for doctors, The 
Medical Profession Act that has some rules around how this is 
done. 
 
But section 22 of The Health Information and Protection Act, 
the 1999 Act, sets out sort of the duties around what you’re 
supposed to do with your records and it includes transferring 
that responsibility to somebody else who remains in the 
province. 
 
But there is clearly a duty on the trustee to take care of those 
kinds of records, and then if there’s some failure in that duty the 
various penalties in the Act would apply. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I appreciate that it sets 
out the responsibility, it sets out penalties. The problem is, is 
when people are in default they might not be safeguarding or 
respecting those things. 
 
For example, I’m aware of community — or at least a 
community and maybe there has been more — where a doctor 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

 

has moved to another practice in another jurisdiction, might be 
within the country or outside of it, so the penalties are relatively 
immaterial because the individual is gone and filing cabinets 
full of records were just abandoned. 
 
Is there a mechanism in here for the trusteeship of those records 
shifting from that individual medical practice to the regional 
health authorities or to the Department of Health, or how is that 
mechanism . . . so that someone actually takes responsibility in 
a pragmatic, physical way of those records? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, under section 22(2) of The Health 
Information Protection Act, the minister may appoint somebody 
to take care of those records and do it in an appropriate fashion 
if they are in fact abandoned in the way that you’ve indicated in 
the example that you’ve raised. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Those are the 
questions that I have. 
 
I think the point that I want to stress, and I think you agree with, 
is this whole issue of that we need a practical system that is 
going to work and also safeguard the protection and the privacy 
of these individual records. And that people need, that the 
records pertain to, need to be given the opportunity to exercise 
informed consent in terms of allowing people to access those 
records. 
 
I think your answers have provided me with a level of comfort 
that that indeed is going to be the case, so thank you. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — To ask a question. 
 
The Chair: — Okay. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, in my 
remarks regarding this Bill I indicated to the minister I wanted 
him to consider the notion of certain medical procedures not 
forming part of the person’s comprehensive health record, and 
in fact an individual would have the right to indicate that certain 
medical procedures not form part of that electronic record. 
 
And I’m wondering whether the minister has considered that, 
and if he has, what amendment does he propose to this 
legislation, for instance to allow women to keep from the 
electronic record, as an example, a therapeutic abortion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The member has asked that I consider a 
House amendment to this particular piece of legislation, and I 
would say that I have considered very carefully a House 
amendment that would try to deal with some of the issues that 
the member has raised. But at this stage I am going to stay with 
the legislation as it is and I will explain why. 
 
At this point in the stage of technology the best way for 
providing the kind of protection for the individuals is to allow 
the data to be collected and then put a limit on the ability to 
access it. So basically what we’re saying is that we will provide 
the ability to put the restriction on the disclosure of the 
information, not on the collection of the information. 
 

(15:30) 
 
Now why do we take that position, or why do I take that 
position after listening to advice from many people throughout 
the health system? I take that position because at this stage the 
ability to set up electronic methods of cutting off the entry of 
information into the system is not technologically possible to do 
it. Now that’s not to say that three years or five years or ten 
years from now there may be some ways of doing that, but at 
this stage it’s not possible. 
 
And it’s this particular point that has been the challenge for our 
whole health system — the regional health authorities, the 
medical profession, others — who have said that to try to 
implement a system that allows for the non-collection of 
information of a particular patient as it relates to only specific 
parts of the information about that particular patient is unduly 
or almost impossible to do; whereas a rule that protects 
absolutely the disclosure of that total record of that patient is 
something that would work. 
 
And so we are sticking with this particular amendment as it is 
now. We will continue to examine this issue because we know 
that it’s an issue that is raised in the community. But after 
consultation throughout the health system in Saskatchewan with 
the health professions and with the people who are trying to 
manage this system, the proposal as we have it is the one that 
we intend to go with. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
explanation. Can you indicate whether this, the amendments to 
the legislation, allow for the minister to, through regulation, 
exempt certain procedures that an individual may not want kept 
in their electronic health record? That’s question number one. 
 
And my second question — which will be my final question — 
is what is the penalty, what is the punishment, for any 
individual who releases a person’s health record? What is the 
maximum fine and what is the maximum penalty that an 
individual can undergo if they disclose health information 
without the approval of the individual citizen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for those questions. The first 
question relates to the creation of the electronic health record, 
which we have not yet created, and so this type of question can 
be included in how you might design that electronic health 
record. And it would obviously have to be done with discussion 
with the health profession. It would be possible, for example, 
for the design of the system not to include any mental health 
information or not any . . . certain other kind of information 
because the information that’s collected is collected in fields. 
 
Obviously if you’re a patient, but even probably more so if 
you’re the professional, you would want to have a system that 
you could rely on that had all the kinds of information that you 
needed in the system to provide the kind of care. That’s an 
ongoing discussion that has to take place with the people in the 
whole health system as to how that would be designed. 
 
In this specific legislation there is no power to do that as it 
relates to the electronic health record, but clearly there is as a 
government policy as the health record, electronic health record 
would be designed as we move forward. 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

Now as far as the penalties are concerned for breaches or 
violations of the Act, the actual penalties in the Act are very 
serious. For each individual breach, if it’s a person that’s found 
guilty of an offence of breaching this Act, the fine could be up 
to $50,000 or one year in jail. If it’s a corporation, the fine for 
the corporation could be up to $500,000 and the officers and 
directors could be subject to a $50,000 fine or up to one year in 
jail. 
 
But I think those penalties actually pale in comparison to the 
penalties that would be on trustees who are professionals — 
whether you’re employed in a corporation or you work on your 
own — because clearly this is an area where if you’re a medical 
doctor and there’s a breach of this kind of relaying of 
information, then you could lose your whole career. 
 
And so that’s the range of penalties that there are. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank 
the members of the Assembly who have asked questions here 
today and who have been part of the ongoing discussion as we 
try to get this Act in the right form for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d also especially like to thank the officials of Saskatchewan 
Health who have I think put, simply put, spent many years 
working on this problem and how we can get the protection of 
individuals and their health information. And I would venture to 
say that this is a task that will never be done because we will be 
continuing to work on it to make sure that we provide the best 
protection possible for our individuals. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: —Order. I recognize the minister to introduce his 
official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated with me 
to my left is Roger Sobotkiewicz, legal counsel for SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Welcome to the minister and SaskEnergy’s legal 
counsel. I have a few brief questions about Bill 4, and then we 
can start examining it on a clause-by-clause basis or voting it 
rather on a clause-by-clause basis. 
 
The first question has to do with the expansion of a service that 
has been available, as the minister pointed out in his second 
reading speech, for some time and this expansion over and 
above pipeline locates. 
 
My first question that I had when I read the second reading 
speech, and prior to being able to consult with anybody, was 
whether or not there are other companies today in the province 
that would do this sort of a service. Now we did check with 
municipalities — and who would be certainly a main user of 

this, of the new service — and they seemed, the ones that we 
checked with, were supportive of this particular Bill and the 
expansion. 
 
But did the corporation look at this issue and are there any 
either in-province or out-of-province either NGOs 
(non-governmental organization) or businesses that provide 
services like this in terms of locates for over and above the . . . 
over and above pipelines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In response to the question, in the 
province as it relates to pipelines, there are not, but as it pertains 
to location of buried telephone cable, there is. And SaskTel is 
. . . This is a bit beyond what you asked, but SaskTel as an 
example contracts with those private companies. They’re all 
regionally based, and it would be SaskTel’s intent to continue to 
contract with those regionally based contractors who do provide 
that service for them. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I noted here 
that . . . And maybe through Hansard I’d just sort of publicly 
thank the city engineer in Swift Current who just provided some 
information about what the city of Swift Current does, for 
example, in their, when they’re doing locates, what the 
engineering department does. 
 
When he talked about SaskTel for example, he talked about 
using a Web site that SaskTel has: dialbeforeyoudig.com I think 
is the Web site that they use. And so is SaskTel then using these 
other regional services in order to make sure that Web site’s 
updated? Does the minister know? 
 
And I understand that this isn’t really directly related to 
SaskEnergy but is that, is that the service that SaskTel’s 
currently offering; it’s based on this information they get from 
these regional service providers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — My understanding is that that is correct. 
But I would want to get that answer with absolute certainty and 
we’d provide that information for you. But it’s my 
understanding that you are correct in that assumption. 
 
Mr. Wall: — There’s two particular municipalities in 
Saskatchewan, as the minister will know, that own their own 
electrical utilities or at least part of their . . . sort of a hybrid 
system, part of . . . Each municipality is served by their own 
light and power department. The city of Swift Current is one 
and the city of Saskatoon is the other. 
 
And so — I’m not sure if Saskatoon operates the same way as 
Swift Current, but I’d imagine that they do — that the electrical 
department of the city of Swift Current or the public works 
department will generate locates for whichever utility is needed, 
for example if the city was doing some work, and they don’t 
outsource those. So it sounds to me like they would be able to 
use then this particular service as well. 
 
(15:45) 
 
But I wonder if the uniqueness of the cities of Swift Current and 
Saskatoon were also taken into consideration in the 
development of this service and the passing of this Bill? My 
understanding is that Saskatoon . . . We checked with the city 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

 

and there seemed to be no problem there. But is there anything 
different for those two municipalities with respect to using this 
service? It sounds to me like they may well just go on . . . be 
using their own systems and maps to locate, at least on the 
electrical side of the equation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We’ve been in consultation, I’m 
advised, with these two jurisdictions as well. There is nothing 
different that . . . There is nothing specific, I should say, that 
applies to those jurisdictions as it pertains to this amendment in 
this Act. 
 
The Act is dual-focused. First of all it is to provide a better 
service to the industry and to other stakeholder groups who 
might be interested in utilizing the service. But secondly and 
foremost — maybe I should have said most importantly — it’s 
about safety. And there would be . . . This service would be 
available to those jurisdictions but there would be nothing at all 
that would require them to use the service. 
 
If they’re already receiving the service and have that 
information within their own domain, that’s entirely up to them 
to continue to use the process that they currently employ. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the other 
issue that was raised . . . that has been raised with us is just the 
delay, and certainly it’s a delay not unique to our province. 
Many other jurisdictions apparently, municipalities in this case, 
have experienced . . . or those who have experienced, the 
municipalities in different province have experienced the same 
thing, for example, often a 48-hour turnaround for locates in 
some places. So even a 24-hour turnaround in the case of a 
water break or some sort of an emergent situation, they talk 
about as being difficult. 
 
Now in places like . . . In Swift Current apparently the good 
news is, is that local officials of all the . . . of Crowns in this 
case or the city utility, are they’re local people and they know, 
you know, they’re generally very available and accessible and 
things can be dealt with quickly. 
 
But this new service that’s been introduced by SaskEnergy and 
reflected in the Bill, was turnaround time in terms of locates a 
prime consideration for this? What about this new system might 
help with turnaround times for locates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I don’t think there’s a . . . I don’t know 
if there’s really a simple answer. The time has not changed. 
Also the corporation commits to responding within 48 hours but 
in circumstances where it’s clearly an emergency or a very high 
priority, the corporation attempts to — and is successful, I’m 
advised — in having that information turned around in a much 
more timely manner. And they obviously will continue to try to 
improve the response time as we move on with better and newer 
technology. 
 
And some of this stuff, not directly, but there will be through 
this legislation as well — which I suspect you’re aware of — 
there will be opportunity, not specific to the question you just 
asked, but there will be opportunity with the technology that 
currently exists to actually provide real time information. Some 
of this might be applicable with . . . I think your reference in 
your question as it pertains to water breaks and stuff like that, 

that technology is available. This legislation, this amendment, 
will enable that to happen. 
 
But with respect to the specific question, the amount of time is 
still set at 48 hours. Okay. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying that. And 
I think the real time aspect of it, the potential for the real time 
aspect of it is positive. 
 
And the final question just has to do with the implications for 
the corporation of this expanded service. Is it revenue neutral 
for the corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, it’s revenue neutral; it’s straight 
cost recovery. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 4 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — And I would recognize the Minister of Health to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’m very pleased to have with 
me this afternoon in a counter-clockwise, starting on my left if 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

you’re following, Glenda Yeates, the deputy minister; Kelly 
Kummerfield, who is the executive director of health human 
resources; Rod Wiley, the executive director of finance and 
management services; Lawrence Krahn, assistant deputy 
minister; and Lauren Donnelly, executive director, acute and 
emergency services; Bert Linklater, executive director of 
district management services. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
you and to the officials. I’m pleased to have an opportunity to 
enter into the debate and estimates in Department of Health. 
 
First of all I’d like to begin, Mr. Minister, is you’re probably 
well aware of the fact the community of Moosomin has been 
doing a lot of work, taking a lot of initiative the last few years. 
They’ve been . . . a lot of comments and certainly the 
Department of Health has invested a fair bit into a new facility 
in Moosomin already. 
 
And just recently I’ve chatted to some of the finance committee 
and I believe the community is just short of, shy of the $7 
million mark in raising the funds required by the community 
and surrounding area. A lot of work . . . people have worked 
very diligently and hard in raising these funds and are awaiting 
an announcement from your department. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can give a sense of when 
the department will make a final decision or be in a position to 
make a final decision, and give you the opportunity of letting 
the community know that the final decision’s been made and 
we can proceed with the new facility in that community. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m very pleased to 
report that there’s been very good progress working together 
with the local community, with the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Authority, and various officials around the plan and what kinds 
of things need to be done. There’s still some more work that’s 
required and that is what’s happening right now. And so I think 
the best thing I can just say is, stay tuned. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I think what the 
community and certainly people have been hearing, we’ve been 
hearing the stay tuned scenario for a period of time. Certainly 
the Pipestone Health District, there was a fair bit of work had 
been done and accomplished and now with the Regina east 
health district. And I think at the end of the day that stay tuned 
. . . We’re hoping that we’re within — when we’re talking 
being tuned — within just a matter of a fraction of tuning the 
station in and coming forward with that announcement. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Minister, as we look at a new facility, and 
I think you can appreciate, your department officials can 
appreciate the fact that this, this community and the hospital in 
the Moosomin community certainly reaches out to a very broad, 
broad community. It’s not just a small area of, say, even 10 
miles. I think we’re looking at people utilizing that service for 
probably 40 or 50 miles. And I think we could even expand that 
a bit as we look at . . . even just looking at some of the services 
that have been provided since the surgery has been opened up in 
the community of Moosomin. 
 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, whether or not as we look at 
a new facility in that community, if service such as renal 
dialysis might be something that would be considered when we 
look at the fact that, and we talk about equal access to health 
care services and individuals having to travel to centres like 
Yorkton or Regina. If we’re not . . . By placing a service of that 
nature in that, in a facility like that may alleviate some of the 
load and some of the other services in our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I think what I 
need to do is explain a little bit about how we try to set up the 
dialysis facilities across the province. What happens is that we 
look at the numbers of patients there are across the province 
that require dialysis and then the number — or the distance, the 
number of kilometres — that they have to travel for treatment. 
 
And there’s a committee of people from across the province, 
which includes the Kidney Foundation who has a very keen 
interest in obviously getting this for a lot of the people who are 
their members and families who are members, and they look at 
and keep looking at, well what are the ways and how can we 
provide that? There the . . . I would have to say that Moosomin 
isn’t on the top of the list as far as the demand, looking in that 
light. 
 
But your question, I think, was more, well is there a possibility 
at some point that this may be there? I think you’d have to say 
the answer relies on, well if there were a whole number of 
patients in that area, it clearly has the distance question as 
you’ve identified as a factor. And so it would be something that 
is constantly re-evaluated as the years go on. 
 
But at this stage, I’m not sure it’s up high on the list. We have a 
couple of other places for sure that we’re working on right now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you for that 
response and I think it’s important that we certainly keep some 
of these things in mind recognizing the fact that at a point for 
some patients it becomes a very difficult feature. 
 
And if this is something that can really enhance the role of a 
facility such as Moosomin’s being, I think you have to 
recognize that it’s somewhat of a regional centre, and the role it 
plays as it provides services to so many families and people in 
that area. 
 
One further question and it’s been raised by a retired lab tech, 
and certainly an individual who’s involved in the . . . with 
horses in the community as well, is the whole issue around 
West Nile virus. And I know you’ve made a couple of 
announcements in the past, but just a specific question. What is 
the department doing in its overall scheme of addressing this 
issue and the preventive measures that you’re putting into place 
in order to just protect the community of Saskatchewan from 
this, from any major outbreaks that may occur? What is being 
done to protect Saskatchewan residents from the West Nile 
virus as much as is physically possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll give you a overview version and then 
if you have some specific questions, I’d be happy to answer 
them. 
 
But as you know, earlier this spring we announced some 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

 

funding that was available for some expanded surveillance and 
education and things as it relates to West Nile virus. I guess 
what I would say is there’s $1.2 million and this money goes for 
surveillance, education, and then mosquito control. 
 
And the education part is really about some of the ads that 
we’ve done, some of those kinds of things, the things that go 
through the public health system around the advising the 
general public on how to use personal protective measures for 
themselves, also how to make sure there aren’t mosquito 
breeding grounds in their residential area. 
 
Then the surveillance part is tracking the disease in birds, 
mosquitoes, and horses, and also in people if that happens. And 
then the final thing is the actual mosquito control measures that 
we do in conjunction with municipalities. And from the Health 
perspective, we have a chief medical health officer and the 
people who work with him who tie in very closely with all of 
the medical health officers and their related staff in the regional 
health authorities and the Athabasca Health Authority. And 
they’re in regular contact on what kinds of new information that 
comes up. 
 
Obviously everybody is waiting for results around the 
surveillance of the birds and the horses and mosquitoes. That’s 
an area where we hope there isn’t a problem, but we are ready if 
there is. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. I think one of 
the concerns that was raised by indeed the individual, the retired 
lab tech, was the fact that there was . . . I think in the 
Leader-Post article May 14 talked about a 19 per cent . . . 80 
per cent of people who may get affected will have no symptoms 
of the virus, 19 per cent of those affected will develop mild 
fevers, a symptom such as a fever, headache, or body aches. 
And yet this gentleman who’s worked in the health field 
indicates that his sense is that we’ve left the impression that it 
really isn’t, doesn’t create a significant problem. 
 
But he’s suggesting that people can become very sick and I 
think he’s . . . what he’s mentioning is the fact that we need to 
really imply that people need to be very diligent in protecting 
themselves from mosquito bites rather than taking the chance 
that you may become infected and you may be one of those that 
really has mild symptoms when indeed you could . . . it could 
become a very significant sickness, an illness. And I think what 
this gentleman is pointing out, we should be really relaying the 
fact that there should be some diligence and . . . in taking 
protection and precautionary measures. 
 
And just another question as well, Mr. Minister, related to West 
Nile virus — and it may not have anything to do with your 
department — but it’s the cost of vaccinating horses to protect 
from this virus. And I’m just wondering if any financial support 
has been there for individuals with horses in helping offset 
some of those costs, whether through your department or the 
Department of Agriculture. And certainly, Mr. Minister, I look 
forward to your responses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to your question 
about whether there’s . . . There isn’t any funding in the 
Department of Health for vaccination for horses. I would 
assume that’s something that might be dealt with in Ag and 

Food and Revitalization. 
 
But I share your constituent’s concern. And part of our 
challenge from Saskatchewan Health and from the government 
is to make sure that people realize the serious consequences of 
this disease and some of the people who are infected and . . . but 
also not to create a panic or a concern because there aren’t that 
many people that do get affected. 
 
But I think what I can do for you is give you a bit of the 
statistics of what happened last summer and why we’re being 
very careful in Saskatchewan. Last summer West Nile virus 
was identified in 44 birds and 30 horses across southern 
Saskatchewan. The infected birds were found in Regina, 
Saskatoon, Yorkton, Moose Jaw, and Estevan, and 20 other 
communities across the province. And there may have been 
some other birds that weren’t picked up, but those were the 
ones that were reported. 
 
There were no human cases reported in Saskatchewan last year. 
In North Dakota there were 17 cases of serious illness and two 
deaths last year; in Montana there were two cases of human 
West Nile virus and no reported deaths. In Canada last year 
there were 400 human cases, including 18 deaths that were 
associated with West Nile virus. Most of these took place, 
happened in southern Ontario. In the United States there were, 
last summer, 4,100 cases of human West Nile virus and 284 
deaths. 
 
So it’s something that all of the public health officials are 
monitoring very carefully, we are monitoring very carefully on 
behalf of the government. And we urge all people to follow the 
recommendations that come from our medical health officer. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I thank you 
for that response and I think it’s certainly imperative that we 
remain vigilant on this issue and that we take every precaution 
necessary and the public be aware of that. 
 
As well, Mr. Minister, we’re looking forward as well and we’re 
keeping tuned to your department in regards to a new facility in 
Moosomin. And while I’d have a lot more questions, I know my 
other colleagues want to get in as well so I’ll revert and allow 
someone else to enter the debate. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials here today. I have a few questions to 
ask the department and the first line of questioning is on the line 
of MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) in Saskatchewan. 
 
Does the Department of Health have a standard cost for an MRI 
that’s being done in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The cost for an MRI in Saskatchewan for 
a Saskatchewan resident is part of the global funding that goes 
to each regional health authority, so there isn’t a specific fee 
attached to it. 
 
But there is a standardized fee for reciprocal billing purposes. 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

So if an Alberta resident gets a MRI in Saskatchewan, for 
example, that cost is $655. If a Saskatchewan resident has the 
MRI in Ontario, that cost is $655. In other words, all the 
provinces and territories have agreed that if somebody has one 
of these procedures, which end up being fairly high cost, the bill 
that goes back to the home province of the person involved is 
$655. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then is it fair 
to say then that a person living in Saskatchewan that obtained 
an MRI, the cost, the value of that MRI would be $655 then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think you’d have to remember that it’s 
an estimate, that . . . because the services are funded on a global 
basis. So that where the MRIs are located in Saskatchewan, it’s 
a service for all people of Saskatchewan and so they would get 
specific funding for the capital costs, the ongoing maintenance 
costs, the staff costs, those kinds of things. And so it’s hard to 
say that the cost to a Saskatchewan person is $655. 
 
But on an estimate across the country, this is what everybody’s 
agreed as would be the reciprocal billing rate. It’s an estimate. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is it fair to say 
then that a person in Saskatchewan receiving an MRI, the cost 
estimated would be 655? Is there a different cost to an MRI if 
it’s for a head injury where MRI has taken place versus say a 
back injury where an MRI has taken place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll emphasis again that that reciprocal 
billing rate is an average cost. And so there might be some that 
will be a little higher and some that will be a little bit lower. 
And it’s an estimate because we don’t do our accounting that 
way. 
 
If you went to a hospital in Minneapolis or Phoenix or 
somewhere like that, they end up costing their procedures in a 
different way, where they would then have a certain fee for each 
type of procedure. What we do in Saskatchewan is provide the 
global amount to a regional health authority who then, that 
regional health authority provides the staff and all of those 
things are included there. 
 
So once again, I say this is an estimate in the Canadian system. 
I think that that’s the best we can say at this point because we 
just don’t account for it another way. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason for my 
question, Mr. Minister, is my son needed an MRI. Close to a 
month ago he had some head problems and he went to a 
neurologist and the neurologist said at that time that he needed 
an MRI. 
 
Now by going through the Saskatchewan health care system, he 
had to wait 12 weeks for an MRI. Now we’re again talking 
about a head injury. I got a little upset with the waiting period. 
And I know our critic for Health has raised this question many 
times as the time that is required for an MRI in Saskatchewan is 
such a long period of time. 
 
So I took my son to Edmonton where he received an MRI and 
the cost of that was below $500. Now my line of questioning 
regards to what it costs in Saskatchewan versus what it costs in 

Alberta. I paid out of my pocket the cost of that MRI, to get it 
done immediately. I couldn’t afford to wait 12 weeks to have 
him have an MRI. 
 
So my question is, if it’s cheaper to get it done in Alberta and 
the cost in Saskatchewan is a lot more, with the waiting lists 
that we have in Saskatchewan with MRIs, why are we not 
sending more patients to Alberta to get MRIs done so that their 
health can be cared for immediately and not at a waiting time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank you for the question. As the 
minister, I’m not able to comment about a particular patient in 
this context. But I am able to describe in a broader way how 
this system works. 
 
What we have in Saskatchewan obviously in our health system 
are MRI facilities. And what happens with those facilities is that 
the professionals involved — the doctors working together with 
the specialist depending on what particular area or concern 
there is with the patient — assess the patients and then provide 
some priority codes, if I can put it that way. And this is both . . . 
I think Regina has a definition of this and Saskatoon has 
something that’s similar. 
 
But basically, the priorities are in this order. First, if there’s 
immediate threat to life or permanent loss of function. Second 
level is risk of irreversible deterioration in seven to ten days. 
Third, ongoing disability or undiagnosed state causing 
significant physical or mental suffering. Fourth level, chronic 
stable pathology management and outcomes rest with the MRI; 
in other words, you’re monitoring something that’s happening. 
And fifth is a routine follow-up. 
 
And there’s . . . What happens is that if the professionals 
involved, the doctors involved identify that it’s an emergency, 
MRIs are done immediately. I mean, there’s no waiting at all. 
Urgent exams are usually done between seven to ten days 
and/or eleven days, somewhere in that sort of just less than 
two-week period. 
 
And the waiting times or the concerns that you raised about the 
12 weeks or some time like that usually would be for patients 
that are classified as non-urgent by the professionals. And that’s 
the challenge is that we end up having to rely on some of that 
assessments. 
 
Now you asked a question about the cost. Last year in 
Saskatchewan, there were 312 people who were approved for 
MRIs out of the province and the cost for each one of those was 
$655 as agreed by all the provinces and territories. Of the ones 
that were requested, there were 63 that asked but were denied. 
In other words, that those ones could be done within the 
province in what was identified as a professional, reasonable 
time. 
 
Now one of the challenges that we have, and you didn’t directly 
ask this but I think I’ll explain it in this question, is that we’ve 
been working carefully around the Saskatchewan Surgical Care 
Network to, and the surgical registry, around setting these 
priorities in a common way across the province that’s 
transparent, open. People can understand how it’s done, when 
you get into surgery, and especially on the things that are 
identified as non-urgent. 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

 

And we also have, as part of the Western Canada Wait List 
Project, we have a similar project that goes around the use of 
the MRI that we’re doing in conjunction with our neighbours 
around how you do the assessments of setting these kinds of 
priorities. 
 
And it’s often somewhat frustrating for patients because there’s 
a concern and there’s unknowns and things like that. And we 
end up . . . It’s trying to get that right balance. But we think that 
the services we’re providing in Saskatchewan are reasonable 
cost and that they . . . it is sort of more efficient use of our 
dollars to continue to provide those services in Saskatchewan 
rather than send them all to somewhere else. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you for the answer, Mr. 
Minister. In regards to this situation, you are so right that the 
physician at the time said he did not need or require an MRI 
immediately but needed an MRI. 
 
On the second thing, the neurologist said he needed an MRI 
very soon because of a head injury, and the MRI was to detect 
whether it was a brain tumour, a blood clot, or an aneurysm. 
The test that came back from Edmonton showed that it was not 
a brain tumour and that it was not a blood clot, but they did not 
do a dyed MRI, and the dyed MRI is the only way you can 
detect for aneurysms, and that’s what they feel he had. 
 
Now he’s fortunate enough that in the booking of an MRI 
through Saskatchewan, which is 12 weeks, which is . . . only 
leaves us eight weeks left, he will have that opportunity to have 
another MRI which we hope will be a dyed MRI which we can 
detect the outcome as far as aneurysms. Now eight weeks is a 
long time and with aneurysms he could die by then, and we 
pray to God that he doesn’t. 
 
But my main question is to you as the minister and to the health 
region. One doesn’t know what they’re going through with 
health unless you actually have this happen to your family 
members as itself. 
 
And all I’m saying to the minister and to your department is 
waiting 12 weeks for a head injury where an MRI is needed and 
specifically specified by a neurosurgeon . . . or a neurologist, 
why is a waiting list so long? What does it take for a person to 
have a head injury that possibly is serious to be up in the period 
where they only have to wait two to three days for an MRI 
rather than 12 weeks? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that further question. It’s 
not possible for me to talk about an individual, but once again 
I’ll talk about some of the concerns. 
 
As you know it’s interplay between the professional assessment 
of what’s happened and the capacity of the system. I guess what 
I would say is that the capacity, in other words the number of 
MRIs that we can do in Saskatchewan has increased quite 
dramatically over the last number of years. 
 
And to give you an example, in 1998-99 — so the period 
ending at March 31, 1999 — the total number that we did in 
Saskatchewan was 5,031; and they were all done in Saskatoon 

because that was the only place we had an MRI. As of March 
31, 2003 that number is 13,650 that we did in the province, so 
it’s about two and a half times as many that we do just over a 
four-year period. 
 
But one of the challenges that we have is that it’s a tool that’s 
used by the doctors and the specialists in many new ways as 
they figure out how to use it. And so it ends up being something 
where there’ll always be some kind of a list of people who want 
to use the service. The important part is to get the people who 
need it or have the most urgent needs in a very orderly and 
quick way. And that’s what we’re trying to do, working 
together with the doctors and with the people who are managing 
these systems. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Through you, to you to 
the members in the Assembly, I would like to take the 
opportunity to introduce a group of students that have travelled 
here from Macklin, Saskatchewan. They’ve been on the road I 
think for a number of hours already. There’s 35 students as well 
as three teachers that are accompanying them — Rob Kozinski, 
Audrey McDine, and Barb Legge — as well as six chaperones 
that have accompanied them as well. 
 
They’ve had the tour of the Legislative Building and I’m sure 
they’ll be visiting some other places in the community of 
Regina as well. And I’ll be meeting with them shortly after 
they’ve had some opportunity to observe the activity in the 
House here this afternoon. So if you can join me in welcoming 
the students from Macklin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, my 
final question to you today is . . . and you’ve just stated that 
there is an increase in MRIs in Saskatchewan and everybody 
knows that. Why doesn’t the government use out-of-province 
MRIs to relieve the pressure in Saskatchewan if there’s so many 
more MRIs they can place in Saskatchewan? And why doesn’t 
the government pay for MRIs out of the province of 
Saskatchewan when it costs less than here in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We do in fact have some patients, as I 
indicated earlier, go out of province for MRIs. The costs vary 
depending on the procedure, and so sometimes we end up with 
a higher bill, sometimes with a lower bill. If we do it through 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2003 

 

the reciprocal arrangement, the cost is the $655. But there are 
some other ones that in fact go out of the country because of 
whatever special circumstances there may be. 
 
So the presumption that every procedure would be the cost of 
one that you have referred to is not what the experience is over 
many years. And so the other part of that is that we need to have 
this capacity in Saskatchewan at a rate that provides for the 
needs of the people. And so one of the challenges is to look at, 
well do you do more of these procedures? 
 
One of the other challenges is that in the diagnostic imaging 
area, MRI is just one of a number of procedures that are done. 
And sometimes the MRI is the best one. Other times it may be 
one of the other newer technologies or even the old X-ray is 
sometimes that works the best. So it’s a challenge that way. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Through the 
Chair to the minister. Mr. Minister, I have a case that I’d like to 
bring to your attention. You may have some familiarity with it 
because my office has talked to your office a couple of times on 
various aspects related to this particular situation. 
 
I have a constituent that came to our office in September of last 
year because of a situation involving a condition of the lungs. 
This constituent is in the final stages of pulmonary fibrosis and 
a lung transplant is this constituent’s only hope of survival. 
 
Now part of the issue, I guess, that was raised at the time with 
our office, was the position of the Department of Health in 
terms of paying for pre-op and post-op medications and medical 
issues that needed to be attended to. 
 
My understanding is that if you are going to go into a heart 
transplant situation, the Department of Health pays for all 
pre-operative and post-operative costs associated with getting 
an individual up to good health and in good condition. There 
might even be a situation where dental work was required so 
that the fear of infection could be eliminated. When it comes to 
heart transplants those costs, in my understanding, are fully paid 
by the Department of Health. 
 
But in the case of my constituent who is on a waiting list, in 
very serious need of a lung transplant, those costs are not 
attended to by the department. Would the minister confirm that 
that is the department’s policy? And could he indicate whether 
or not that policy is under review and can we expect any 
changes in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the member 
for that question because it goes to the heart of some of the 
challenges of how you deal with specific cases that come up 
that don’t quite fit in with the general rule, the rules. 
 
Now basically what happens is that if you’re in hospital, the 
drugs are covered. But if you’re in the community waiting for a 
particular procedure, they’re not most of the time. And so when 
specific cases arise, it raises questions about the overall 
coverage of the drug plan. 
 
Now basically the drug plan is set up to cover catastrophic 
costs; they’re the ones that the costs are very large. And so 
often in . . . I think you referred to heart transplants. I think 

some of the kinds of drugs related to heart transplants, those are 
really expensive drugs so they would get some coverage there. 
And maybe even because they’re in hospital as they’re awaiting 
for the transplant, they would be covered under our obligation 
under the Canada Health Act. 
 
So it’s a bit hard to compare but we know that there are a few 
places where we have to continually examine how the drug plan 
works. And the most recent example obviously is after a 
number of years we’ve ended up expanding the drug plan to 
include diabetic supplies. And that would have been something 
that wasn’t there last year, and we continually examine these 
kinds of things and see whether or not that they can be included. 
 
So it may be that there is a place where we should do some 
further review around transplant kinds of drugs but one of the 
questions then becomes, well are . . . you know, at what point 
do you introduce this coverage? And I think that’s a valid 
community discussion. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, in my understanding and having 
talked to the constituent and his wife, the minimum cost for 
some of the drugs that will be required once the transplant is 
achieved will be about $1,500 — that’s one drug, and it’s a 
necessary drug — and I’m not sure what all the other costs are. 
And I think there has been some conversation with your office 
and with the drug plan administration directly over the 
suitability and the efficacy of the requirement for that particular 
treatment. 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, I don’t want to be seen as splitting hairs 
but when we talk about the significance as a health procedure of 
a heart transplant, is there any less significance in terms of the 
consequences of having a lung transplant? It seems that if either 
one of them are not achieved or if either one of them fail, the 
consequence is the same. The result is the same for either 
patient. And I’m just wondering if those types of major 
transplant operations should not be treated in a similar vein. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the member raises another 
aspect of this as a very tough question. And I would have to say 
that Mr. Romanow, Mr. Fyke, Mr. Kirby, all tried to address 
this exact question. And it relates to the Canada Health Act 
where very sick people used to always be in the hospital, and so 
therefore their drug coverage was included as part of their 
hospitalization. 
 
The world has changed in how medical treatment has 
developed, so that many times people are much more 
comfortable and thrive better if they take the medication, but 
they do it at home as they prepare for a very serious procedure 
like you’ve referred to. And you know, one of the 
recommendations — well I think recommendations from all of 
the different people who’ve examined this — is that the Canada 
Health Act doesn’t fully address this issue around catastrophic 
drug costs. 
 
And so in the premiers’ accord in February, part of the money 
that was included in that accord from the federal government 
was to address some of the catastrophic drug costs and that’s 
allowed us to examine anomalies or things that don’t quite work 



June 4, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

 

the way they did even 10 years ago, to see if we can’t expand it. 
 
It sounds to me like this whole area that you’ve raised is 
another one that I know we’re examining, but we need to take 
even a harder look at it. And as we get some more resources 
over the next two years, it may be one that we can figure out a 
way to do this because one of the things that we’ve done in 
Saskatchewan, and we did I think probably the first jurisdiction 
in Canada — or the first or second — which was to include 
cancer drugs for palliative care for people, even if they weren’t 
in the hospital. 
 
And that was a change then from the policy that in the hospital 
you had all of your drugs paid for. When you’re out of the 
hospital it wasn’t as clear. So if you’re a cancer patient, then 
you do get that kind of coverage. 
 
It’s hard to, on an evaluative scale, put a cancer patient over 
against a heart transplant, over against lung transplant, or many 
other serious kinds of things — and that’s really the tough 
question that you’ve raised and it’s a tough question for us. 
We’re trying to address it, and we appreciate your assistance in 
asking the hard questions because that’s how we’ll solve it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, thank you. You know, I do 
believe that this is a tough question and I understand the nature 
of the question. I’m wondering if there will be some 
opportunity for me to contact my constituent though and give 
him some sense of hope on this? 
 
Now if he has to wait two years for an answer, I don’t think 
he’s, frankly . . . Well he might survive that long, but his 
problem won’t be addressed in a timely fashion. 
 
So I guess I would ask whether the department can’t look at this 
specific type of case — I won’t ask for this individual case — 
but this specific type of case to be addressed as a priority in 
your considerations as to how to pay for those types of serious 
operations. 
 
This particular gentleman is on a waiting list. He’s a patient on 
a waiting list for this transplant in the city of Edmonton, at one 
of the Edmonton hospitals. I was just wondering if the minister 
could tell me, is that the preferred facility for this type of 
operation? Does the province of Saskatchewan, the Department 
of Health, routinely refer people for those major transplant 
operations to that facility in the city of Edmonton, or is it just 
that it’s the most convenient one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The question that the member raises about 
the Edmonton program, I think the information is that on the 
Prairies, there’s the Edmonton program and the Winnipeg 
program, and we have some that go to Edmonton, some go to 
Winnipeg. It’s often based on the professional referral 
relationships of the specialist in this field and who they’ve 
worked with before. 
 
And so it’s not something that we direct on the health system 
side. It’s really the professional advice from the doctors 
involved in consultation with the patients. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There are a number 
of questions I’d like to pursue on that particular line, but time is 

running short and I have some other issues I need to bring to 
your attention today. 
 
One of my colleagues earlier raised the matter of West Nile 
virus and the Department of Health has a program in place to 
help communities, I understand, to some extent as it relates to, 
not just education, but providing some remedial help in 
attending to West Nile issues in local communities. 
 
And I understand that there are a set of criteria in place that are 
going to sort of direct where the money will go and what the 
standards for participation in the program will be. But my 
understanding also, Mr. Minister, is that you have set a 
minimum population level as part of the requirements to 
participate in the program. Would you tell us what that figure is 
and how your department justified those figures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The question that the member raises 
around the West Nile virus funding program, we’re working 
and deal with this together with the Municipal Government 
people and Government Relations. 
 
Basically the rule of thumb is communities under 2,000 are 
asked to band together and bring an application as a group or 
. . . and that can include First Nations and the local community 
or other combinations. But I would say that in some areas of the 
province and I know that the area that the member represents, 
you have to cover a lot of miles to get 2,000 people together in 
some parts of that, and so we do consider applications on a 
case-by-case basis and obviously it relates to the sort of danger 
that’s assessed for a particular area. But if there was a problem 
in a particular area that didn’t meet the 2,000 population 
requirement, there’d be a way that we have in our process to 
evaluate that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m encouraged to 
hear that because the area I was thinking of in particular is in 
the Frontier area of the extreme south of the province. And with 
all of the people within a 40-by-40 square block, you couldn’t 
come up with 2,000 people. 
 
So I’ll take it from what you’ve said that the individuals that are 
responsible for mosquito control — and there’s a lot of water 
lying around down there after lots of flooding — those people 
should not hesitate to contact the Department of Health and you 
will look at their, their application as being extraordinary under 
the circumstances. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, that’s correct and this information 
was sent out in the letters that went to SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) when the program was 
originally announced. So it’s something that people know 
about. 
 
I’d like to thank the members for the questions this afternoon. 
And I’d like to thank the officials who are here, and I move that 
we report progress from this Committee of Finance and I ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1425 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1426 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1426 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1426 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1426 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1426 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1426 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1426 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Catholic Women’s League of Canada 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1426 
 Manitoba Election 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1427 
 The Sweet Shoppe in Landis 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1427 
 Saskatchewan Woodworkers’ Guild 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1427 
 Newsask Community Futures Youth Business Excellence Awards 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1428 
 Transportation Week 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1428 
 Ed Thoen Inducted into Baseball Hall of Fame 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1428 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Crown Corporation Accountability 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1428 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1428 
 Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan Investments 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1430 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1430 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Telehealth Network Expansion 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1433 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1434 
MOTIONS 
 Leave of Absence 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1435 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1435 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1435 
 Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1437 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1437 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1441 
 



 

 

 Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1442 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1442 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1443 
 Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1443 
 Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1443 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1443 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1444 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
 


