















































Hansard: May 05, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 875 
 May 5, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, please be 
advised that Mr. Speaker will not be present to open this day’s 
sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition that reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Saskatoon, 
Wadena, Margo, and Fosston. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
shocking lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from 
the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I have a petition today with citizens who are 
concerned about the exorbitant increase in the crop insurance 
premium. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from the 
communities of Viscount and Meacham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too have a 
petition today regarding the condition of Highway 47 between 
Estevan and Boundary dam resort. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, 
Torquay, and Kamloops, BC (British Columbia). 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once 
again I rise with a petition signed by citizens of southern 
Saskatchewan who are really worried about the lack of health 
care services. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this one is signed by people from 
Rockglen, Fife Lake, Killdeer, and Lisieux. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents from the 
Kindersley riding who are concerned with health care in the 
region. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks 
from the towns of Kindersley and Brock. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Marquis, Tugaske, Stewart 
Valley, and Central Butte. 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens opposed to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
2003 premium increases to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue and Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of constituents 
concerned with a section of Highway 22. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 13, 18, 36, and 40. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave of 
members to make an extended introduction today. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
thanks to members. And I expect perhaps the Leader of the 
Opposition, someone, will also will want to have a few 
comments I think about the introduction that I am making 
today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, across the province this year we are 
celebrating a number of 100th anniversaries. It’s the 100th 
anniversary of the capital city of Regina, the 100th anniversary 
of Moose Jaw, the 100th anniversary in Lloydminster and many 
other communities. 
 
Another important 100th anniversary we celebrate this year in 
this province and in particular in this city is the 100th 

anniversary of the Hill group of companies. And that is why, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my privilege to welcome to the 
legislature today representatives, many representatives, of the 
Hill family as with them today we celebrate the 100th 
anniversary of the Hill Companies. 
 
I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Regina, the 
capital city, one is hard pressed to think of any significant 
development that has happened in this community that the Hill 
family has not been involved with. The Hill family has played a 
critical role in this city and in our province’s history. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Hill company came into 
existence in the year 1903, the city of Regina at that time had a 
population of 3,000 people. And one of the early activities of 
the Hill company was to bring settlers from across Eastern 
Canada and from Britain in developing this community and its 
residential areas, including the Cathedral and Lakeview areas. 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it may not be widely known that 
Mr. Walter Hill sold property to the provincial government in 
1906 where this Legislative Building now stands. 
 
Of course much of the capital city’s downtown has been 
developed by the Hill Companies: the twin towers — the 
McCallum Hill Centre — the Bank of Montreal building, 
Crown Life Place, and the FCC (Farm Credit 
Canada)/Agriculture Place. But as we all well know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the company did not only contribute in 
bringing the buildings themselves, in one very important 
development the Hill Companies facilitated the move of the 
Farm Credit Corporation from Ottawa to Regina. 
 
Three generations of the Hills have also played a major role in 
the development of the insurance business in Saskatchewan. 
 
And of course one very, very significant event happened in 
1991 when Paul J. Hill spearheaded the acquisition of the 
Crown Life Insurance Company. And that transaction brought 
over 1,200 new jobs to the province and the city, and directly 
and indirectly expanded the GDP (gross domestic product) of 
our province by 2 per cent and the city of Regina’s GDP by 10 
per cent. 
 
Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it is well known, real estate and 
development, insurance, broadcasting, oil and gas — the list 
goes on and on — the scope of the Hill Companies’ 
involvement in the commerce of our province and beyond is 
truly astounding. And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may say, in 
spite of their many, many successes in business, one thing 
stands out about the Hill family’s contribution, and that is their 
commitment to this community and to this province. 
 
While the Hill group of companies have now grown and 
become international in the scope of their interests, this group 
of companies and this family have maintained their 
international headquarters here in Regina. And more, they are 
active, active players — companies and individuals — in the 
community, in the social, in the benevolent life of this city and 
our province. 
 
For 100 years the Hill group of companies have fulfilled that 
guiding principle which has been at the bedrock of all of your 
enterprise, that principle which is, and I quote: 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

 

Start with a foundation of solid values and stay true to the 
things that you believe in. 

 
Having done that, you have contributed enormously to the 
capital city of Saskatchewan, to the province of Saskatchewan, 
and if I may say, to the nation of Canada. 
 
And so I want to join, I’m sure, with all members today in 
welcoming the Hill family, the large number of the family who 
are here. We will want to congratulate the Hill family of 
companies on your 100th anniversary. And, I’m sure, to wish 
you 100 more years of success, and I would like to be here to 
see it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to introduce individually not 
all who are gathered today but certainly some who are with us 
in the gallery and perhaps, if I can ask the members of the 
family who I introduce, if you could perhaps stand or give us a 
wave. 
 
First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a recent winner, if I may say, 
of the Paragon Award for Lifetime Achievement, Mr. Frederick 
W. Hill. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Hill’s son, Paul J. Hill, and his wife, 
Carol Hill. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Paul and Carol’s daughter, Rosanne Hill 
Blaisdell, and her husband, Brad Blaisdell. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Paul’s son-in-law, Greg Southgate. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Paul and Carol’s son, Matthew Hill. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Paul and Carol’s daughter, January 
Yanko, and her husband, Scott Yanko. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Frederick’s son, Terrence F. Hill. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Frederick’s daughter, Marylyn Horsman, 
and her husband, Jack Horsman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Marylyn’s daughter, Andrea Horsman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Marylyn’s son, Jonathon Horsman, and 

his wife, Monica Horsman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may 
conclude by simply saying, those of us who have on occasion 
been happy to receive Christmas greetings from the Hills, 
we’ve met the big Hills, and there’s lots of little Hills around, 
and through you we would welcome the next, also, generation 
of Hills. 
 
Thank you, welcome to the Legislative Assembly, and now 
again I ask all members to greet the Hill families. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I too 
would ask for an extended period in which to bring greetings 
and welcome. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition we too would like to 
specifically congratulate the Hill family of companies and the 
members of the Hill family who were instrumental in their 
success over the past 100 years, to the Legislative Assembly 
today. A day of which I know the community of Hill companies 
are particularly celebrating their 100 years of active community 
involvement here in the city of Regina and in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and certainly beyond. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the company was born back in February 
of 1903 — that’s 100 years ago plus just a little bit — but it 
happened right here in the city of Regina when Walter Hill and 
E.A. McCallum formed a partnership and began the business. 
Eventually the Hill family took over the entire operation and we 
have three generations actively involved in the Hill family of 
companies — Frederick Hill, Paul Hill, and Rosanne Hill 
Blaisdell, and many other family members in the gallery 
representing the success of the family in our community and in 
our province over a number of years. 
 
(13:45) 
 
The Premier has touched on many of the facets of the Hill 
family’s companies and involvements. They are certainly 
impressive. He mentioned the fact the very property that we are 
currently on, with its rich history of almost now 100 years of 
being the centre of government for the province of 
Saskatchewan, was property that was sold to the province by 
Walter Hill back in the beginning of the last century. 
 
The Hill family is synonymous with real estate, not only here in 
the city of Regina but beyond. I remember a few months ago 
being in the city of Calgary and seeing a plaque on a very large 
building in downtown Calgary that said the Harvard family of 
companies. And I thought ah, this is wonderful, here we have a 
company headquartered in Saskatchewan that has property in 
the province to the west of us, Alberta, rather than vice versa, 
which is so often the case. 
 
Real estate and insurance has been the core businesses of the 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

Hill family and their businesses but they have expanded beyond 
that. They have been involved in the very life of this province 
— not only the business life but the cultural life, the spiritual 
life of the community and of the province. And they have made 
this province much richer as a result. 
 
The company has been involved not only in real estate and 
insurance but also in broadcasting, something those of us in the 
public life certainly are familiar with and usually very much 
appreciate. Through Harvard Broadcasting they have been 
instrumental in bringing many major businesses and entities to 
the city of Regina and to the province of Saskatchewan, 
including the Farm Credit Corporation, Crown Life. The 
company has also been involved in the city of Swift Current, 
bringing the Urban Forest Recyclers into that city and have 
hired many, many Saskatchewan people as a result of their 
efforts in that regard. 
 
I think that all of us who have had an opportunity to meet 
members of the Hill family would certainly want to on this very 
special day express our sincere appreciation for the 
immeasurable amount of good and benefit you have brought to 
the province of Saskatchewan. I’m sure that while residents of 
this province realize that it’s your companies and your presence 
here have played a huge role, probably not very many of us 
fully understand the many thousands of jobs you have provided 
for the people of Saskatchewan, the opportunities that you have 
afforded this province because of the belief in Saskatchewan 
and the commitment to Saskatchewan by the Hill family. 
 
Thank you very much. We appreciate you and we thank you for 
being present here in this gallery on this very special day — the 
celebration of 100 years here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

2003 McCannel Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Neil 
Richardson, P. Eng. has been named the winner of the APEGS 
(Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of 
Saskatchewan) 2003 McCannel Award. 
 
The McCannel Award was established in 1983 to honour 
service to the Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists of Saskatchewan and to the profession in general. 
The McCannel Award is named after Roy McCannel, a 
founding member of the association. 
 
Neil Richardson received his bachelor’s degree in civil 
engineering from the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon 
in 1972 and received his master’s degree in geotechnical 
engineering in 1975. 
 
Neil began his career with Saskatchewan Highways and 
Transportation in 1974. He has held the position of geotechnical 
engineer, district materials engineer in Swift Current and the 
Battlefords, and is currently senior environmental engineer in 
Saskatoon. Neil’s responsibilities include construction quality 
control. He has authored a number of publications on highway 
construction research. 

In addition to his work with Saskatchewan Highways and 
Transportation, Neil serves on the engineering advisory 
committee of the Meewasin Valley Authority and is active on 
the executive of the Saskatoon Geotechnical Group. In the 
community, he has been active in minor sports and in local and 
district levels of Scouts. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, congratulations to Neil Richardson, his 
wife, Marjorie, and their two sons on the occasion of Neil 
winning the 2003 McCannel Award. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Mental Health Week 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the Assembly today to ask all members of the House to 
recognize May 5 through 11 as National Mental Health Week in 
Saskatchewan and throughout Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be virtually impossible for any of us to 
say that our lives have not, in one way or another, been touched 
by someone suffering from mental illness. In fact one in five 
Canadians will personally experience a mental illness at some 
point in his or her life. And that will have a direct or indirect 
effect on those around them. 
 
One of the most startling facts about mental illness, Mr. 
Speaker, is that more than two-thirds of Canadians have had 
experience with depression or anxiety and one-third have 
actually suffered from it themselves. Another shocking fact 
about mental illness, Mr. Speaker, less than half of those adults 
suffering from depression seek care from a health professional 
which leads to increased isolation and loneliness. Professional 
and social support is crucial to recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the same week we recognize the achievements 
of our young people, we must also be aware of the fact that 
suicide is the major cause of death among this group. Of all 
deaths involving young people between the ages of 15 and 24, 
nearly a quarter of those were from suicide. Such tragic losses 
for families, for friends, for all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for this year’s Mental Health Week is, 
Respect, Don’t Reject. And we must all work hard to ensure 
that we are doing all we can to reduce the discrimination and 
stigma that is so often attached to mental illness. Individually 
and collectively we must encourage the kind of environment 
where resilience and recovery from mental illness will not only 
be accepted, but celebrated. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Forest Week 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This week 
is National Forest Week in Saskatchewan and traditionally the 
first day of forest week is Arbor Day. 
 
Here’s a bit of history for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Arbor Day 
began in Nebraska in 1882 because originally in that prairie 
state there were few trees for shade, fuel, or lumber. On the first 
Arbor Day, Nebraskans planted about one million trees. 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

 

The prairie half of our province has more than a little 
geographical similarity with the prairie state, and it is no 
surprise that we have adopted this holiday as our own. Our 
holidays remember what happened in the past. Arbor Day looks 
to the future, as we are encouraged to plant a tree today to bring 
pleasure for the people of tomorrow. 
 
And as everyone knows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, half of our 
province is covered by forest, a forest that is part of a diverse 
and crucial ecosystem, a forest that offers great experiences to a 
tourist, a forest that is crucial part of our economy providing 
over 8,000 new jobs in just the past few years alone. 
 
To begin forest week in Saskatchewan a tree planting ceremony 
took place in the Nisbet Provincial Forest near Prince Albert. 
The ceremony was hosted by the Saskatchewan Forestry 
Association and by Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our natural forests in the North and our 
urban forests in the cities, are gifts we dare not squander. 
During this week and on this day we should renew our pledge 
to protect and preserve this precious resource. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Family Celebrates 110th Anniversary in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 110 
years ago yesterday, May 4, Heinrich and Gertrude Adrian 
stepped off the train at Rosthern, Saskatchewan. It wasn’t 
Saskatchewan at that time; it was the North-West Territories. 
 
Rosthern was a drop-off point for settlers for a 30- to 40-mile 
radius. The Adrians had come from the village of Friedensfelt 
in Russia. Heinrich and Gertrude settled on a quarter section 
some six miles northwest of Rosthern. They built a soddie and 
began a new life in Canada. 
 
Shortly after, they and their neighbours built a school. They 
named the school Friedensfelt after the village they had left in 
Europe. Friedensfelt translated means field of peace. 
 
The Adrians had left Russia not for free land or the picturesque 
white house, red barn, and windmill; they had left Russia to 
seek religious freedom. The second year they were here one of 
the Adrian daughters planted a Russian willow — that willow, 
Mr. Speaker, at 109 years old, is still alive and well. 
 
Last week I had a picture taken beside the tree, of my grandson, 
Dylan, my son, Ken, and myself. Dylan Heppner is a great, 
great, great grandson of Heinrich and Gertrude Adrian. I am 
thankful to the Adrians for their step of courage and faith to 
come to Canada. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Husky Football Camp 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Last Friday morning I had the great, good fortune, along with 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview and the Minister of 
Industry and Resources, to attend a function that I have to say 
was a real dog’s breakfast. I’m speaking of course about the 

University of Saskatchewan Husky football team’s third annual 
fundraiser which kicked off their spring training camp. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bobby Jurasin, of Saskatchewan 
Roughrider fame, gave a moving and inspirational talk to over 
1,000 Husky boosters in attendance. He talked football, but he 
also talked about what a great place Saskatchewan is, about 
how well he was treated in his years here, and how proud we 
should be of our people and our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Husky head coach, Brian Towriss, also 
spoke. His team is coming off a very successful season, last 
year having made yet another trip to the Vanier Cup, the Holy 
Grail of Canadian college football. 
 
The U of S (University of Saskatchewan) Huskies have played 
in the Vanier Cup six times since 1989 and have won that 
coveted trophy three times. Coach Towriss also said that he’s 
extremely pleased with the Husky prospects for this year, and I 
don’t think I’d be going too far out on a limb to predict that the 
Huskies will be making a seventh appearance in that game this 
season. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to wish good luck to all the 
hopeful, young players who are trying out for the Huskies 
during spring training, and to all the players and coaching staff, 
good luck for a successful and rewarding season. Thank you 
very much, Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Youth Week 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in this Assembly today to ask all members of the House to 
recognize International Youth Week, a day we have set aside to 
honour the many incredible achievements of our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of us in this Assembly know that the youth 
of today are subject to incredible stresses and pressures that 20 
years ago we didn’t even begin to comprehend. The issues 
facing our young people are indeed challenging ones. And it is 
our responsibility to ensure that they have access to the 
education, training, skills, and resources to help them make 
informed decisions that will have a positive outcome to benefit 
them, their families, their friends, and society as a whole. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we may be a bit biased here, but I’m sure 
that all members of the House will agree with me when I say 
that Saskatchewan’s youth stand head and shoulders above the 
rest of those in Canada. Their enthusiasm, energy, talents, and 
ambitions never fail to impress us. 
 
Members on this side of the House know that Saskatchewan 
youth, Saskatchewan’s youth are born leaders and that’s why 
you’ll find them in top positions like president or CEO (chief 
executive officer) of this company or that company. Sadly, this 
means that many of our young people have moved to other 
jurisdictions because they didn’t see the opportunity here. They 
didn’t see a wide open future in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and they’re smart enough to know that it’s going to 
take more than a splashy promotional campaign to bring them 
back. 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan’s young people need access to resources, 
opportunities, and room for growth. Saskatchewan’s young 
people need a Saskatchewan Party government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Strengthening Our Circle 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
to bring to the attention of the Assembly the hard work and 
dedication of outreach workers involved in an ongoing project 
to promote respect and responsibility, as well as curb violence 
in Saskatchewan’s youth. The program is sponsored by the 
National Crime Prevention Centre and is entitled Strengthening 
Our Circle. 
 
It began in September 2002 and has since been introduced to 
the communities of Endeavour, Preeceville, Sturgis, Canora, 
Invermay, Norquay, Pelly, Keeseekoose, Cote, and Kamsack, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The initiative involves outreach workers engaging with students 
and their teachers in school settings. During classroom sessions, 
students explore the six fundamental pillars of the program: 
respect, diversity, communication, community and school, 
teacher supports, and shared values. In addition to classroom 
activities, students and teachers also attend workshops, 
motivational speakers, in-services, and dramatic presentations 
in an effort to foster community and environmental, global, and 
self-respect. As a result, Saskatchewan youth in the area are 
learning positive social skill developments, a major stepping 
stone in the prevention of violence and crime. 
 
I would like to commend the work of Joan Chernoff, the project 
coordinator, as well as the two outreach workers involved, 
Rachel Hudye and Karen Ochitwa, for the time, effort, and care 
they have put into this project. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Forest Centre 
 
Mr. Wiberg: —Mr. Deputy Speaker, earlier today the Industry 
minister announced a review of the forestry centre project in 
downtown Prince Albert. However it’s hardly going to be an 
independent review as the deputy minister will conduct the 
review, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The minister has already announced he’s in favour of the 
project. So what do you suppose his deputy minister is going to 
find? Mr. Speaker, if the minister truly wants a legitimate 
review of this project, why doesn’t he ask someone independent 
of government to conduct this review? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I made clear at the 
news conference, the mandate of the deputy minister is to do 

one thing — it is to talk to the board of the Saskatchewan Forest 
Centre, and the industry, and the community, to ask them, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for their views as to whether they support the 
development of the forest centre in its proposed location or 
whether they do not. 
 
And if they do not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be standing in 
this House, and I will apologize to this House, and we will 
change our plans. But if they do support the centre, contrary to 
what the opposition says, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and we’ll find 
out what the community and the industry say, notwithstanding 
their allegations — I want to know, will that member and that 
party stand in this House and apologize for their allegations, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the big questions 
seems to be around the location of the project. The 
government’s own report indicated many good reasons for 
building the forest centre at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) instead of in the downtown 
core. 
 
Will the minister’s review reconsider the location of the forestry 
centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a neat 
trick — it’s a neat trick if you can get away with it — to stand 
up in the House one day and say, industry does not support this, 
the board does not support this; and then the next day say, don’t 
go out and ask them what they think. That’s a neat trick if you 
can get away with it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But they’re not going to get away with it because we’re going 
to have a public report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we’re going 
to say the opposition has alleged that industry does not support 
this, that the board does not support this. And we’re going to go 
to the people that they’re purporting to speak for and we’re 
going to ask them what they have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And then we’re going to publish it. 
 
And if I’m wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the people do not 
support the development of the forestry centre, I’ll say what I’ll 
do. I want to know from that opposition, if they’re wrong, as 
they’ve been wrong time and time again, are they for a change 
going to stand up and apologize to the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, prior to deciding on the 
location of the Prince Albert forestry centre, the government 
commissioned a survey of key industry stakeholders to 
determine their preferred location. The final report from this 
survey said, and I quote: 
 

The parties interviewed were practically unanimous in 
favour of a SIAST location. The forestry centre is seen as 
more of a centre for technology transfer and industry, 
which is better suited to the technology and educational 
opportunities found at the SIAST site, as opposed to a 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

 

business or cultural centre which would favour a downtown 
location. 

 
So what did the NDP (New Democratic Party) do? They 
completely ignored the advice of the industry stakeholders and 
decided to build a downtown office building. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why did the NDP decide to build 
downtown when almost everyone was telling them to build at 
SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this is very interesting, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. On Friday we had that member standing up and 
saying, there shouldn’t be a Saskatchewan forestry centre. 
That’s what he said on Friday, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Today he seems to be backpedalling. Now he says, oh he’s just 
quibbling about the location of the forestry centre, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But now what we have, apparently, from the 
opposition, is a debate about where it should be located, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we’ve come full circle. They are now saying there should be 
a forestry centre developed in the city of Prince Albert. Well 
how things change in a few days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
things change. 
 
You know what it reminds me of? There’s never been a 
development in this province that’s had the support of the 
opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want to remind people 
in this province, so they can assess the credibility of this 
opposition, what the Leader of the Opposition said about the 
Lloydminster Upgrader when the Government of Saskatchewan 
declined to sell its interests. You know what he called it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? He called it a white elephant. That’s what he 
said about the Lloydminster Upgrader. Tell that to the people in 
Lloydminster, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the goals of the 
new forestry centre was to become the Canadian centre for 
testing forest fire fighting equipment. However the 
government’s own report notes that a downtown location was 
less than desirable for this purpose. Weyerhaeuser’s 
vice-president, Steve Smith, echoed this view. He said, and I 
quote: 
 

You couldn’t do that type of testing in the facility to be 
built in downtown Prince Albert. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, why did the NDP ignore its own report 
and build the facility downtown when that eliminates the 
chance to become the Canadian centre for testing and certifying 
forest fire fighting equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in case that member doesn’t 
know — and I believe it’s in his riding — there’s a new forest 
fire centre that has been built north of the city of Prince Albert 
in his riding which is the logical place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
have the testing related to forest fires. If the member doesn’t 
know what is in his own backyard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not 
hard to understand why the member doesn’t understand the 
importance of developing the forestry industry in this province. 
 

But I want to say to the people of the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the real problem here is we have an opposition 
that is all doom and gloom. They never recognize the good 
things that are happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They won’t say 
anything about the 8,000 new jobs in forestry in the last four 
years. They won’t say anything about the 300 companies 
working in forestry that are being built in this province. They 
won’t say anything about the fact that we’re building the 
world’s largest oriented strand board plant, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve got oil and gas drilling up 71 per cent in the last year. 
We’ve got forestry on a roll. And this province is on a roll. And 
it’s going to roll right over the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Canadian fire 
equipment test and certification facility was clearly identified as 
a key component of the new forestry centre. The government’s 
own report says, and I quote: 
 

This facility cannot be completely located at either site. 
However, much of it could be located at the SIAST site. 
 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all the stakeholders said they preferred 
the SIAST site. It was better suited to becoming the national 
centre for testing forest fire equipment. It seems to make much 
more sense to build a research centre at an educational facility, 
yet the NDP ignored all of this and decided to build a 
downtown office building. Why? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member 
says, this person said this; this person said that. I’ve already 
said to the members, we’re going to get a report about what the 
industry says in Prince Albert and about what the board says. 
 
Now the member says, well so-and-so said this several months 
ago. I want to know why is it that this member and the 
opposition are so agitated. They’re agitated, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, about the idea of us publishing what people have to 
say. 
 
Well I say to that member, who proposes to be a representative 
of the North, that he may not be interested in working with 
northern communities to build the forest industry or listening to 
what their views are, but this government is, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And that opposition can complain and criticize and bring about 
all the doom and gloom they want, but the people of this 
province, including the people of that riding and the people of 
Prince Albert, are going to keep building, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there seemed to be only 
one person telling the government to build downtown and that 
was the mayor of Prince Albert. 
 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

A report prepared by Innovation Place in December 2001 says, 
and I quote: 
 

Innovation Place believes the city of Prince Albert would 
charge a significant premium or otherwise impede approval 
of the project for any location other than the one in 
downtown Prince Albert. 

 
This appears to be why the NDP ignored all the stakeholders 
who were saying, build at SIAST. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when did the city buy up the downtown 
property that it subsequently sold to the province and when did 
the former minister of Industry first tell Don Cody that the 
building would be built downtown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I’ve said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government believes in working with communities. And when 
the Cornwall Centre was developed in downtown Regina, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that is an example of the province locating 
certain things like the SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) and the SaskTel building in a location to help 
revitalize an area of downtown Regina. 
 
And I am not ashamed to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government will work with other communities as well. This 
government will work with the city of Prince Albert to 
revitalize downtown Prince Albert. That’s what we’ve been 
doing with the location of the new court house, which could 
have been in the suburbs, with the performing arts centre, which 
could have been somewhere else, and with the forestry centre, 
subject to the review we have going on right now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But I want to say that it is clear, it is clear that there’s a 
difference between this government and the opposition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and it’s this. We will stand with and work with 
communities across this province. All they’ll do is criticize and 
complain, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister spoke about 
building an office building in downtown Prince Albert. There 
already is an office building in downtown Prince Albert that 
resembles . . . much like SaskTel and SaskEnergy. 
 
So when did the former minister first tell Don Cody that the 
building would be built downtown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the 
Cornwall Centre was developed, an SGI building was put there 
and the SaskTel building was put there. Guess what? The 
opposition of the day opposed it. They said, Allan Blakeney is 
erecting towers of gold down at the Cornwall Centre. But the 
government of the day said, no, we’re going to work with the 
city of Regina to revitalize downtown Regina. That’s what they 
did. I don’t think the opposition would oppose that. 
 

And no matter what you do, whether you’re working at the 
Lloydminster Upgrader, building a forestry centre, building the 
Cornwall Centre, the naysayers in any opposition will oppose it. 
 
But what we’re going to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is do what 
any responsible government would do, which is to work with 
communities to continue to develop the economy of this 
province. We’re going to do that at Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon, at the research centre in Regina, and with the 
forestry centre in Prince Albert. That’s our vision, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We have a vision, unlike the people over there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the earlier report we 
spoke about last week already talked about adequate, plenty 
adequate office space in downtown Prince Albert. There’s 
already empty space in the McIntosh Mall where the 
government leases space in downtown Prince Albert. So why 
did the minister first decide that they’re going to build a new 
building in downtown Prince Albert — an office building — 
and when did the former minister first tell Don Cody that the 
building would be built in downtown Prince Albert? When? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this is a bit confusing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. A few minutes ago the member was saying that it 
should be built at SIAST, as I heard him. Now is he saying it 
should be in the McIntosh Mall? I don’t know. He’s bouncing 
all over Prince Albert. If he doesn’t know that the forest fire 
centre is in his own riding, I don’t think he knows his way 
around the city of Prince Albert very well either. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what has really got 
this opposition agitated is this government has a plan and the 
plan is working, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have this year 12,000 
more people working in this province than last year. We have 
this year 4,700 more young people working than last year. We 
have this year 71 per cent more oil and gas wells being drilled 
than last year. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll never hear the 
opposition say anything positive about what any of the 
communities or businesses are doing in the province of 
Saskatchewan because they see their role as criticizing anything 
that might be proposed. And that’s all they’re doing today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to the 
Innovation Place report, the government had decided on the 
downtown location as early as December 2001. That report says 
because of the position taken by the city of Prince Albert, 
Innovation Place has directed the architects to focus on the 
downtown location. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the stakeholders are saying, build at SIAST. It 
made more sense to put a research facility at SIAST. The forest 
fire fighting certification facility had to go at SIAST. But the 
NDP ignored all of this and decided to build downtown. 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when did the NDP make this decision, and 
when did the former minister first tell Don Cody that the 
building would be built downtown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say, I 
think for the third or fourth time, I have asked the deputy 
minister to come forward with a report where the opinions of 
the stakeholders in the city of Prince Albert will be expressed. 
And we will be guided by those opinions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the opposition insists, well you have them already. The 
opposition is saying no, no, don’t ask anybody what they think, 
just listen to us. And for some reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we’ve moved to a position where the opposition is not saying 
the forestry centre is a bad concept. They’re quibbling over 
where it should be built, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the quibbling comes down to this. The quibbling comes 
down to whether they believe the province should work with 
the city of Prince Albert in determining the location or should 
put out some kind of diktat telling everybody where it’s going 
to go. 
 
Well we’re going to listen to the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We’re going to work with communities, and we’re going to 
keep building over the opposition of that party over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister has been 
dancing around the subject of where the Saskatchewan Party’s 
position is. But what we’re trying to find out on this side of the 
House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is where that government’s 
position is on the research and development centre in the city of 
Prince Albert. 
 
And we’re trying to find out, when did the former minister first 
tell Don Cody that the building would be built downtown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Minister, that 
nobody dictated to the city of Prince Albert where the building 
would be built, and nobody dictated to the Government of 
Saskatchewan where the building should be built. This decision, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, was made in partnership involving several 
players. 
 
I’ve already said to the House and that member, we’re going to 
have a report about what the stakeholders think of this project, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re going to be guided accordingly. 
 
And anyone watching this exchange, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will 
know by now that it really doesn’t matter what the position of 
the Government of Saskatchewan is, and how many jobs are 
being created, how many jobs in forestry are being created, how 
many companies are operating, how many oil and gas wells are 
being drilled. It doesn’t matter what the government does. It is 
the job of those men and women over there to paint the picture 

as bleak as they can, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s what 
they’re trying to do. 
 
But what they cannot do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they cannot 
undo the facts, and the facts are these: that there’s more 
investment, more jobs, and Saskatchewan is moving along, 
notwithstanding the doom and gloom over . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister has said no 
one pushes around the city of Prince Albert and no one pushes 
around the province of Saskatchewan. However the report done 
by Innovation Place indicated very clearly that because of the 
city . . . position taken by the city of Prince Albert, Innovation 
Place has directed architects to focus on downtown Prince 
Albert. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that sounds to me exactly like the 
province being pushed around by the city of Prince Albert. 
 
So when did the former minister first tell Don Cody that the 
building would be built in downtown Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— I’ve done the best I can to answer the questions of the 
member opposite. But the member gets up and keeps repeating 
his scripted questions. 
 
But what I want to say to the people of the province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is this government has a strategy to build the 
economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want the people of the 
province to know that four years ago we set out a plan to build 
the forestry sector, over the opposition of the opposition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And since that plan was laid out, there are 
8,000 new direct and indirect jobs in forestry — 8,000 new 
jobs. 
 
And I think what that member from the Saskatchewan Rivers 
riding, which includes the forestry industry, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, should be doing is going out and talking to people that 
are actually doing the work building the forestry industry. And I 
think in a positive and proactive way, he should join with this 
government in trying to get more people employed in 
Saskatchewan instead of doing absolutely nothing positive and 
just constantly complaining about any development, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to information 
handed out by the minister on Friday, we now know that the 
government had no business plan for this project as late as May 
2002. That’s why they have no First Nations investors. That’s 
why they have no private sector investors. And the decision to 
build downtown had already been made previously. 
 
The NDP claims they came up with a business plan later. But 
they refused to show it to potential investors. That doesn’t make 
a lot of sense. Mr. Deputy Speaker, why was the NDP putting 
the cart before the horse? Why did they decide to build 
downtown and eliminate the potential of private sector or First 
Nation investment even before they had a business plan? 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I find it, I find it interesting, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the opposition refuses to recognize one basic fact. 
And that basic fact is this: that since 1978 the Government of 
Saskatchewan has worked with people in Saskatoon to invest in 
Innovation Place so that Saskatoon can have a research park 
specializing in agriculture biotechnology. Since the early ’90s, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has 
invested in a research park in Regina at the university for oil 
and gas, for petroleum research, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I don’t hear the opposition saying we shouldn’t have 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon. I don’t hear them saying we 
shouldn’t have petroleum research centre in Regina. And my 
question to the opposition would be this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
what on earth does the opposition have against the city of 
Prince Albert, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What do they have against 
the city of Prince Albert? Because unless they’re opposed to 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, for some reason the NDP 
rushed into this project. They had already decided on the 
downtown location by December 2001, even though it was not 
supported by the stakeholders, even though they had no 
business plan, even though they had no private sector 
investment, even though they had no First Nations investors, 
even though they had no chance of getting the forest fire 
fighting certification facility, and even though it just seems to 
make a lot more sense to build at SIAST. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what was the rush? Why was it so 
important to take this property off of Don Cody’s hands? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 
anyone watching the proceedings of the legislature will know, 
any time . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Hon. members, I’m 
having difficulty hearing the speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure 
that when the Hill family sold this land on which this building 
is built, to build the Legislative Assembly, there were people 
like the opposition, Mr. Speaker, who opposed the construction 
of the Legislative Building — people like members of the 
opposition. 
 
Because the folks watching this on TV, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
know that any time you have builders — people who are 
positive and who are building something — you will have 
naysayers. But they also know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s 
the job of builders to lead and to govern. It’s the job of 
naysayers to be negative and to be an opposition. So those 
people over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are exactly where they 
belong. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Provincial Youth Advisory Committee Launched 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to tell you that on Saturday I had the privilege 
of officially launching the new Saskatchewan Provincial Youth 
Advisory Committee. And this committee will focus on key 
priorities such as promoting and enhancing Saskatchewan 
opportunities for young people. 
 
Their mandate has several key focuses, Mr. Speaker. One is to 
make recommendations to government on issues of concern to 
youth or to respond to priority concerns such as how to ensure 
that youth know about their opportunities in Saskatchewan; the 
second is to enhance government’s opportunities to take youth 
views into account in agenda setting and decision making; and 
third, to provide new leadership positions for youth to support 
the passing of the torch from one generation to the next. 
 
And I’m confident, Mr. Speaker, that the committee will 
produce concrete proposals to enhance and promote 
opportunities for youth, including the launching of a new 
youth-focused Web site. We had some opportunity on Saturday 
for discussion and already people were generating many helpful 
ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes that Saskatchewan’s 
young people have insight and drive to make huge contributions 
to this province. The Provincial Youth Advisory Committee is 
part of the overall plan of this government, Mr. Speaker, to 
produce workable, sustainable ideas for attracting and retaining 
Saskatchewan youth, attracting youth from out of province, and 
for ensuring youth voices are taken seriously. 
 
The Provincial Youth Advisory Committee is composed of 19 
youths from across the province, ranging in age from 14 to 29. 
And it also provides an opportunity for these young people to 
develop their leadership skills and to work with a diverse group 
of youth from other backgrounds around the province because, 
Mr. Speaker, developing a network of young people who are 
getting things done is also important. 
 
The committee members were selected from those youth who 
had expressed involvement in other initiative such as Leaders of 
Tomorrow, the Action Committee on the Rural Economy, and 
the northern community vitality project, as well as the 
committee that reports to the children’s ombudsman. All of 
these youth have been nominated and have been identified as 
leaders in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee is co-chaired by two members, 
Amy Sandeski and Matthew Dunn, and I have every confidence 
that they will lead the committee in its work with vision, 
creativity, and skill. 
 
And for young people interested in future appointments to the 
committee, some additional positions will be filled once we 
receive these. This is available on-line from Culture, Youth and 
Recreation Web site as of May 12. The address is 
www.cyr.gov.sk.ca. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And thank 
you, Madam Minister, for taking the time to provide us with 
some detail about your government’s most recent initiative 
regarding Saskatchewan’s young people. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, our congratulations and 
best wishes go out to all 19 young people who are involved in 
this endeavour. We sincerely hope that you will be given the 
necessary tools and resources that will enable you to achieve 
the goals and objectives that have been outlined. We know that 
your creativity, skills, talent, energy, and enthusiasm will 
certainly be put to good use as you help prepare yourselves and 
others for the roles that await you. 
 
When it comes to Saskatchewan’s youth, members on this side 
of the House are always encouraged with any kind of initiative 
that focuses on attracting and retaining this key demographic. 
We are all very aware of how vital our young people are to 
growing Saskatchewan. The tool for economic and social 
success must be in place, be recognized and believed in by all 
of us, but this is especially true for our youth. It is their 
commitment to the future that will ensure Saskatchewan’s 
future. Their success is our success. If they do not see 
opportunity, leadership, vision, or the possibility for growth, 
they will not stay. It’s a pretty basic formula, and one that has 
been proven thousands of times over in this province. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will not only watch 
the actions and activities of this new advisory committee, but 
also the subsequent actions and activities of the government that 
appointed it. The members opposite have given this group of 
young people an extremely challenging and valuable directive 
and we are looking forward to the recommendations of this 
committee. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, The 
Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Rosthern on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — To ask permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
at this time to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of this House, a young gentleman sitting in your gallery. His 
name is Ben Fehr. 
 
And I’m going to be very interested in seeing how he enjoyed 
this because I think he came here — and he’s going to spend 
today and tomorrow around the legislature — because he felt he 
was very interested in what happens in the legislature and what 
politics is all about. So now that he’s looking at it in the 
nitty-gritty of it we’ll see a little later on how he enjoyed that. 
 
So it’s going to be good to have him around the legislature for 
the next two days. And I would ask the members to join me in 
welcoming Ben Fehr to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina 
Elphinstone on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, two individuals seated in the Speaker’s gallery. The 
first is Noah Evanchuk, if you could please stand up Noah. And 
the second is Anna Marie Kowalsky. And with names like 
Evanchuk — or as might be said Iwanchuk — and Kowalsky, 
I’m sure you can imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what their 
interest in this place is. 
 
And in fact, in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re quite active in 
the politics of this province and indeed of this country. And of 
course with fine names such as these, they’re active in the NDP, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would like to urge all members to join with me in 
welcoming in to this place, and I’m sure that with a good round 
of applause we can give them a proper welcome, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am extremely 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and table 
responses to written questions 155 and 156. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the Minister of Justice to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today, 
sitting to my left, is Mr. Doug Moen, who is the deputy minister 
of Justice and Deputy Attorney General. To his left is Ms. Betty 
Ann Pottruff, who is the director of policy planning and 
evaluation. To my right is Mr. Murray Brown, the acting 
executive director of public prosecutions. Immediately behind 
me is Mr. Gord Sisson, the director of administrative services. 
And immediately behind Mr. Moen is Ms. Elizabeth Smith, the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister. 
 
And also in the room, I believe at the back, are some other 
officials. And I’ll maybe introduce them if we bring them on to 
the actual floor during the course of the proceedings. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And good 
afternoon to the minister and his officials, and I thank you for 
being here today to answer questions from a number of us in the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to just start today by asking whether or 
not your department has taken further consideration of placing 
rave legislation for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We do not have any intention of bringing 
in such legislation during this session of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right. Mr. Minister, I was just wondering if 
there’s . . . I had taken quite an interest in that, as well as a 
number of stakeholders throughout the province whom I had 
spoken with last year. And I’m wondering whether or not 
you’re still hearing from those stakeholders — I’m sure you 
heard from them also — on whether they are concerned about 
raves and the need possibly for rave legislation in order to 
regulate the raves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We certainly have a concern with respect 
to the safety and security of young people who attend raves. But 
I do want to say that this is a very complex matter, Mr. Chair, 
and there is no province in Canada that has come up with 
legislation to regulate raves. 
 
And we are in a position where we have a concern. We want the 
police to exercise the jurisdiction that they have under the 
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act to enter premises to check 
for drug use or drug trafficking. We want the police to use their 
other powers if appropriate. We also want the industry, the 
people who sponsor raves, to act in a responsible manner. 
 
But no province has brought forward legislation with respect to 
what is a fairly complex area, and at this time we are not 
proposing legislation either. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: Mr. 
Minister, I’m wondering if you could, I guess just as a matter of 
information for the people of the province, if you could maybe 
outline some of the complexities that make this a difficult 
legislation to bring forward? 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well some of the complexities, Mr. Chair, 
I’m advised would involve the question of what activities 
should be regulated. For example, one could regulate something 
called raves. Well, one would have to say, what is a rave, in 
legislation? Well one might say it is a late-night dance party. 
Well what kind of late-night dance party? 
 
There are private establishments where, late at night, people 
dance. Is that covered by any kind of regulation? There are 
community events, wedding dances, private affairs where 
people get together and dance late at night. There are activities 
that involve young people. 
 
How do you draw the line between activities that should be 
regulated by the government and activities which should not be 
caught by the legislation? It’s hard to define. So that is one of 
the complexities. 
 
Another complexity is that the federal authorities have 
jurisdiction over criminal law. They have jurisdiction over drug 
. . . controlled drugs, prohibited drugs, narcotics. The province 
has let . . . jurisdiction over things like health and safety 
matters. Where do you draw the line as between the jurisdiction 
of the province and the jurisdiction of the federal authorities? 
 
What is the intent of regulation? Is it to stop the illicit use of 
drugs and the danger that that can pose for young people? If so, 
is that something that the province can legitimately and legally 
control through provincial legislation? Or is it a matter for 
enforcement by the federal drug police officers, which there are, 
and drug prosecutors, which there are? 
 
So those are some of the complexities. There are others. 
 
And I want to say we share the member’s concern with 
activities that may pose a danger to the health and safety of 
young people in particular. But at the same time in looking at 
this, my officials advise me, in talking to the police, talking to 
other authorities, we see a lot of complexities. 
 
And we’ve found talking to other provinces that no province 
has been able to come up with legislation that would be valid 
for a provincial government to do and that would be effective in 
terms of doing what the member would want and what we 
would want, which is to keep young people safe. 
 
And so those are the kinds of problems we have. I’m advised 
there was one private member’s Bill introduced in one of the 
legislatures — I believe Ontario — but it was withdrawn. I 
don’t know why, but presumably because someone may have 
pointed out that, well here are the problems with your 
legislation. 
 
So the ability of the province to pass legislation in this kind of 
area is constrained because we have authority over some things 
but not others. And then as a practical matter, the matter of 
regulating activity of people who are entertaining themselves is 
difficult because you’re trying to regulate some activities but 
not others. 
 
And there may be human rights and other issues that may be 
brought to the forefront if you say well, I’m going to legislate 
that if you’re under 18, you know, we have these rules — well 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

 

we do have alcohol rules obviously — but rules in terms of 
whether you can have a certain activity whereas if you’re over 
18 maybe you have a different set of rules. 
 
(14:45) 
 
So it is fairly complex. We don’t have an easy answer for how 
to regulate this other than to say that we are continuing dialogue 
with the police authorities in terms of trying to regulate or make 
sure that the police attend these events where there are certain 
problems. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that some of the problems that we 
seemed to have in the news a few years ago have not been in the 
news lately. And of course there was one very tragic result at 
one rave — I believe in Saskatoon — and so it is hoped that 
people are acting responsibly in light of some of the problems 
there have been at the events known as raves. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for those answers. I was very curious about the status 
of looking into the possibility of legislation regarding raves. 
 
And I would agree with you, it’s very difficult to be able to 
define raves and there is a whole gamut of things that goes with 
it. But I do think that the concern of our citizens of this 
province is a valid concern and that there may be some avenues 
that may be pursued by Justice that could assist in making sure 
that the venues that raves are at are certainly providing, I guess 
. . . well it’s a safe environment, as safe as can possibly be. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a variety of questions. I’d like to move 
now to the results of the legislation that was enacted last year at 
this time, as a result of the Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade, and the 
legislation I’m referring to is the seizure of cars of people that 
have been charged or are suspicious and taken into 
impoundment. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I did a question to your department the 
other day. I phoned and found out that there have been 95 cars 
seized in the last year in conjunction with this legislation. 
Eighty-one were released back to offenders after successful 
completion of john schools, seven released back by the courts, 
one was sold, one is still impounded, and five are outstanding, 
still before the courts I guess. There were three convictions and 
two seizures that have involved child victims. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I stood in the House just last week and I 
was talking to the minister of Social Services during estimates 
about the effectiveness of this legislation. And I certainly feel 
that it has been effective from what I’ve heard from some of the 
citizens of Saskatoon, as far as there being less activity on the 
streets and that kind of thing. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when I look at these stats provided by your 
department, two seizures of vehicles that have involved child 
victims. The rest of those seizures, which are 95 in total in the 
province, I take it were obviously seizures of cars of people that 
were pursuing women or men in the sex trade that were over the 
age of 18. 
 
And so it leads me to wonder whether or not this measure alone 

is quite enough. I believe it is a good measure. I think it has 
positive outcome to a degree but two seizures only that have 
involved child victims. I ask the minister today whether you 
think that this legislation is effective in addressing the 
exploitation of children in the sex trade? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I thank the member for the question. In 
answer to the part of the member’s question where she said, I 
think correctly . . . well she said that this measure of the seizure 
of vehicles, would it alone be effective in stopping the sexual 
exploitation of children? I would said no, it alone would not. It 
has to be part of a comprehensive strategy. 
 
And it is . . . The member indicated that most of these seizures 
of vehicles have involved adults but it has not resulted in the 
identification of children being sexually exploited in the 
vehicles, and that’s not a bad thing. 
 
There are a variety of things being done to try to reduce the 
sexual exploitation of children. This particular measure of the 
seizure of vehicles was designed to curb the activity of adults 
who are driving around residential areas wanting to find persons 
in the sex trade and in particular wanting to find children who 
may be susceptible to sexual exploitation by adults. 
 
And it was felt by the committee, which the member I think was 
a member of and knows much about it, and the legislature, it 
was felt that it was appropriate to have legislation that would 
say that if you are habitually driving around an area known to 
be a place where children are being picked up and sexually 
abused and you have no purpose there — you’re not going to 
your residence, you’re not going to a business there; you just 
seem to be driving around and around — that that’s a bad thing 
for the children who may be exploited and for the residents. 
 
So it gave the police the authority to seize that vehicle if you 
engage in that kind of activity. And curbing that kind of activity 
will in and of itself be one part of reducing the sexual 
exploitation of children. 
 
Also, whether or not one’s activity is curtailed, when you have 
these kinds of law in place, it prevents people from engaging in 
this kind of activity in the first place because there’s a deterrent. 
And one of the things we know, we know that seizure of 
vehicles does get the attention of people. Sometimes if they 
don’t pay maintenance that they’re supposed to pay, their 
driver’s licences are taken away so they can’t drive, and it gets 
their attention. 
 
And I think it’s part of this, that if you are driving around areas 
known to be the stroll and you know your vehicle can be seized, 
maybe it’s going to prevent you from doing that in the first 
place. So that’s why. And I think it is effective. 
 
It’s difficult to measure program success in ways that are easy 
to quantify because one thing we see, the police report in the 
major cities, they have noted a significant decrease in vehicular 
traffic and sex trade workers in those areas known to be 
frequented by prostitutes and child victims and their customers 
since program implementation. 
 
So in other words, there’s a number of people whose vehicles 
have been seized, but then we think there are people who aren’t 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

going there any more in the first place. And perhaps that’s even 
more important because the police in the major centres say that 
there are fewer sex-trade workers and children out there, and 
fewer cars driving around. 
 
The decreases have been particularly dramatic in Regina where 
policing priorities have enabled the police service to dedicate 
significant personnel resources to program enforcement. In 
other words, where they’re doing this a lot they find that the 
cars aren’t coming around like they used to. 
 
So it’s successful and it’s a good thing. It’s not a complete 
answer. It’s one tool in really an arsenal that is necessary to take 
on the issue of child sexual exploitation. 
 
And we have a comprehensive strategy — not just one thing — 
but a comprehensive strategy that first of all recognizes that 
children exploited in the sex trade are victims of sexual abuse 
and need protection; secondly, that of course expresses 
society’s condemnation of that activity, wants to hold the 
people that would exploit children in that way accountable 
through the law; and wants to provide, thirdly, services to those 
children, residential services and other services, through a 
variety of government departments, and to try to work with 
those children to get them off the street and out of that 
exploitation. 
 
So I’m sorry for the long-winded answer but it is a complex 
question. But yes, it’s effective. No, it is not a complete answer. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, you made a statement in your response 
to my question that is obvious — and it was obvious to the 
committee when we went throughout the province speaking to 
people in different communities, people that have worked with 
children on the streets, law enforcement officers, emergency 
medical technicians, everybody that was interested and cared 
about children — that we need a comprehensive strategy. 
 
So that is a known factor. What is not happening right now, Mr. 
Minister, that concerns me is, because it’s so important that 
there is a comprehensive strategy, the fact of the matter is there 
is not a comprehensive strategy in place right now. 
 
We have the legislation which is beneficial. But in speaking 
with some of the stakeholders, for instance in Saskatoon and 
Regina, their question is: good, now we have this legislation in, 
this is going to be a deterrent to the johns and those people that 
would exploit children, but what happens to the kids? For 
instance, if a car is stopped by the police and the police 
determine that there is suspicion, there is really good reason to 
believe that this person is out to exploit children, and they seize 
his vehicle or in fact sometimes they charge — depending on 
the circumstances — but there’s not really any, any part of the 
strategy that addresses what to do with the children at that time. 
And so that’s a great concern as I’ve mentioned. 
 
Mr. Minister, what does happen? According to what your 
officials might be telling you or what the police have indicated 
to you, what happens if children are under the age of 16, 17 
years old — particularly under the age of 16 — and they are in 
the car, what happens when the officer charges or takes the 
driver of that vehicle to the police station or whatever and the 

car is impounded? What happens to the child? Does the child 
just walk back into the night? What strategies do we have in 
place to ensure that there is an assessment done of that child’s 
needs at that time, or where that child is, the status of the child? 
And I’m wondering if the minister could brief me on that. 
 
And in addition I have one more question because I’m going to 
ask you to respond to that, and I’d like to know how many 
emergency intervention orders have been placed before the 
courts prohibiting some of these people that have gone through 
john school from having contact with children that are in the 
sex trade? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I can advise the member, in response to the 
last part of her question, seven applications have been made 
under The Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual 
Abuse and Exploitation Act to mid-February, I am advised — 
so seven up until then. Now that is between, the proclamation 
was October 1, and mid-February — so seven up until that 
point. 
 
I want to say in answer to the member’s question, she said that 
there was not a comprehensive strategy. Now I want to say 
there is a comprehensive strategy. The member may disagree 
whether it’s comprehensive enough, that it should go further, 
but there certainly is a comprehensive strategy. And I want to 
describe some of it. 
 
The member has quite rightly I think asked, well what if there is 
a child in a vehicle that is stopped and the police have reason to 
believe that this child is being sexually abused or may be in 
danger of being sexually abused? And the answer is that the 
police have the authority under the legislation to apprehend the 
child as a child in need of protection. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And then I was saying that there is a need for a comprehensive 
strategy which I believe we have been developing. I indicated in 
my previous answer that we have certain principles that guide 
the strategy. I’ll go on to say that to date we have developed 
police and prosecution protocols — in other words, what should 
the police do, what should the prosecutors do — training; 
intervention committees for local service coordination; funding 
for programs for at-risk youth in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert, and La Ronge; and safe houses in Saskatoon and soon in 
Regina. 
 
Sexually exploited young people have complex care and 
treatment needs of course and 26 spaces in our specialized 
residential and group home programs have been prioritized for 
these young people. In other words, if you have a young person 
who’s apprehended or found to be in need of protection, there 
are 26 spaces for the young people to go to. 
 
Intervention committees have been established in Regina, 
Saskatoon, and Prince Albert to coordinate emergency outreach 
and support services to sexually exploited youth. As well, First 
Nations operate a safe house in Saskatoon and a second house 
will soon open in Regina. In addition we have implemented 
several pieces of legislation that together hold accountable and 
deter those who would exploit children for sexual purposes and 
strengthen protections and support services for victims. 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

 

In particular, legislation has been enacted to provide police new 
investigative and tracking tools to enhance the detection and 
prosecution of perpetrators, protect victims, and deter offenders. 
Examples include The Emergency Protection for Victims of 
Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act, which has been 
passed by this House, and two sets of amendments to The 
Highway Traffic Act which enable the police to deal with 
people driving around with the purpose of picking up young 
people. 
 
Prostitution offender intervention programs are now delivered 
by community-based organizations in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, 
and Regina. In other words, what is commonly referred to I 
think as john school, where if you have adults who are engaged 
in this activity or may be suspected of such, that, you know, to 
have them go to john school and have them confronted with the 
reality of what their activity may mean in terms of harm to 
children and families. 
 
We have suggested amendments to the Criminal Code to the 
federal government to improve the tools available to prevent the 
sexual exploitation of children. 
 
And based on the reports that we’ve received, we believe that 
all of these things that we’re doing are having a positive impact 
on protecting children and youth from commercial sexual 
exploitation. 
 
We’re also continuing a public education campaign to pursue 
. . . or to convey the pointed message that exploitation of 
children and youth through the sex trade is child abuse and will 
not be tolerated. And we continue to work with the police, with 
First Nations, Métis, and community-based organizations to 
reduce sexual exploitation of children and youth. 
 
So we are doing a variety of things. We have passed a variety of 
legislative amendments and we’re trying to provide a variety of 
services, and also take steps to prevent the sexual exploitation 
of young people. 
 
And I would agree with the member that, have we done 
everything we could do? Probably not. Are there more things 
we should do? Probably so. Do we need to develop and enhance 
this fight against child sexual abuse as we move along? Yes, we 
do for sure. And this is a topic where I invite the member’s 
comments and we have to co-operate, as we have in the past, in 
terms of coming up with these strategies because it’s too 
important a subject to be political about. 
 
So we’re taking some good steps; there’s probably more that 
could be taken. But I think we do have a comprehensive 
strategy which, probably like everything else in life, could be 
improved upon somewhat and we need to try to do that as we 
move forward. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, 
Mr. Minister, for those comments. Mr. Minister, again in your 
comments you indicated to me that police can apprehend a child 
from a vehicle if they have probable and good reason to believe 
that the child is in danger of being exploited or has been 
exploited. 
 
Mr. Minister, are the police obligated under the law to take that 

child and to place them in a safe house or a place where they 
can be assessed? I ask you that today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The obligation of the police would be to 
turn that child over to the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So then, Mr. Minister, I take it that because you’re 
part of the government that has these number of departments, 
which most governments do, that you would have some 
information on what the process is from that point on, as to 
when the child is turned over. How are we ensured that the 
child is safe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The Department of Community Resources 
and Employment would do an assessment with respect to each 
individual child, and what they would do would depend upon 
what they found. 
 
Each child is different. The needs of each child might be 
different. The danger that the child may be in will vary from 
child to child. They may find that the child is a child in need of 
protection and some kind of court order to place the child in 
protection. They may find that the child can go home; that the 
child needs some kind of help, counselling, some resources but 
is not . . . does not have to be taken into custody by the state, if I 
can put it that way. 
 
What the child will be provided with or the intervention of the 
state will depend upon the needs, the level of needs as found, as 
the people who are trained to work with children and youth in 
this situation do an assessment of what the needs of that 
particular child will be. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, most of this 
activity takes place in the evening or the wee hours of the 
morning, at night, on the streets, when it is happening on the 
streets. 
 
Mr. Minister, the department that used to be called Social 
Services, that is now community services, I don’t believe has 
24-hour services for . . . If a child is deemed to be in danger by 
the police and the workers for that child are not around, the 
department workers, because it is the middle of the night, do the 
police have other recourse? 
 
Because if they have to wait until the next day or a couple of 
days before they present the child to the department for 
assessment, that child could be long gone. It’s very difficult to 
track. And so I believe that it’s really very important to have an 
avenue in place where that child can be assessed immediately or 
to have a worker with him immediately. 
 
Now to my knowledge Saskatchewan doesn’t have a 24-hour 
service by the department in order to provide for that kind of 
immediate response to a child’s needs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment, formerly Social 
Services, has contracts with mobile crisis services in the major 
centres so that they provide 24-hour service, and that most of 
these situations do arise in the larger centres. And while it’s true 
that in the smaller centres they will not have 24-hour coverage, 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

they also don’t have the same type of problem. But if they did 
have that type of problem, there would be someone perhaps that 
would be on call for the department, as I understand it. But that 
really the problem is in the urban centres where they contract 
with the mobile crisis units to provide services in the off-hours. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, mobile crisis, to my 
knowledge, doesn’t have adequate human resource capacity in 
order to deal with this issue. And I wonder whether or not there 
is physical capacity in order to keep a child for a while until 
assessment is done. And I’m wondering, too, is it up to mobile 
crisis then to determine whether that child, for instance, has an 
addiction problem and for them to refer the child on to some 
addiction services — which I believe there’s very little of also 
in Saskatchewan for youth. 
 
But nonetheless, from that point, I’m thinking that mobile crisis 
is basically to contain the child or keep the child there until the 
department can do a further assessment. If that’s true, I know 
that mobile crisis is certainly suffering, at least that’s what I 
hear, from not having adequate human resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’ll just say that if there is an emergency, 
and the mobile crisis centres will prioritize what is the worst 
emergency, the contract between Community Resources and 
Employment and mobile crisis centres will be that they are to 
provide the assistance. And I’m sure that if I spoke to the 
Department of Social Services or the mobile crisis people — do 
you have enough resources? Do you need more people? — I 
think the answer’s always: no, we don’t have enough resources 
and yes, we need more people. 
 
But the member asked if there’s a system for the off-hours. I 
said yes there is a system for the off-hours. I’ve described it. 
 
In terms of the level of resources, whether the system has the 
right number of people, the right number of resources, that is a 
question that could be put to the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment in estimates, in terms of the level 
of resources. 
 
And I’m not saying that there couldn’t be more. In fact, I think 
I’ve been responsible in some budgets of increasing personnel 
for agencies like that and have been criticized for that by those 
who say we shouldn’t hire more people. So you get into that 
kind of debate as well. 
 
But I’m sure the member isn’t one that would criticize more 
people being hired in sectors like that, and I appreciate her 
advice that we need to look very carefully at the level of public 
expenditure that may be needed in this area. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. I guess 
it’s how resources are used and I think most of the people in 
Saskatchewan have that as their concern. We want to make sure 
that the monies that we’re putting towards resources is done 
wisely and that the resources, both human — well mostly 
human that we have out there — are directed as to how to do 
their job effectively and efficiently. 
 
Now I could be wrong in this but the last I did hear, Mr. 
Minister . . . And I know that this may be a question for the 
Minister of Community Resources. But I’m concerned that the 

children, in the state they’re in when they’re taken to mobile 
crisis, that there is a workable situation going on there in order 
to address the needs of that child in an emergency situation that 
they’re in. 
 
For instance if the child has been beaten, obviously there’s 
always physical harm, but if the child, for instance, has been 
beaten or is traumatized, are there resources at mobile crisis in 
order to deal with that? 
 
I don’t believe there is right now. I’m not sure mobile resources 
— I’m sorry, mobile crisis — was set up for that reason. And if 
mobile crisis is going to be used in that capacity, then there’s a 
whole lot more that needs to be considered at those places. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I mean these are situations where if a 
child is picked up in these circumstances, it’s obviously a crisis 
in the child’s life and it needs to be dealt with. If the child is in 
need of medical attention, the child will be referred for medical 
attention to the health care system. 
 
But I want to say that we do make provision for dealing with 
problems that children in this position may have. In particular, 
in Regina there is over half a million dollars per year allocated 
to three projects — $223,000 to the Regina Mobile Crisis 
Service to run a safety service mobile outreach van; and the 
Action Committee for Children at Risk to provide 
family-centred intervention with families who have children 
involved in the sex trade; and $300,000 for the development of 
a safe house with a target opening date of . . . well actually this 
month. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So in other words there is over half a million dollars allocated 
in Regina alone, so that if a child is in need of intervention the 
services are there to try to intervene. 
 
In Saskatoon there is budget of $316,000 on four projects in this 
area — $31,000 to Egadz for outreach services; $74,000 for 
Operation Help, which is a Saskatoon peer support group of 
sexually experienced youth for enhanced outreach and follow 
services; $186,000 to the Saskatoon Tribal Council to operate a 
safe house and satellite home; and $25,000 to Communities for 
Children to develop a community awareness campaign. 
 
And in Prince Albert-La Ronge, $228,000 on two projects — 
outreach and youth-focused activities at the Youth Activity 
Centre in Prince Albert and the Kikinahk Friendship Centre in 
La Ronge. 
 
Saskatchewan Justice will spend about $238,000 to support 
programs in three centres. In Regina, $65,000 to support 
cultural, recreational, and educational programs provided by the 
Rainbow Youth Centre for at-risk youth; and $11,500 to 
support family healing programming provided by the Regina 
Indian Metis Christian Fellowship. 
 
In Saskatoon, $63,000 to support the Saskatoon safe house, as 
well as $14,500 to support Operation Help. And in Prince 
Albert, $98,000 to support life skills, decision-making, and 
conflict resolution programs offered by the Prince Albert Youth 
Activity Centre. 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

 

So I’m just making the point that there are a variety of things 
that we do to get money into the communities to work with 
young people who are at risk. If the member asks me well, you 
know, are we possibly doing everything we possibly could do 
and spending all the money we could possibly spend to meet 
every possible need, I’m sure that we’re not. I’m sure that, like 
everything else, there are priorities and you’re trying to deal 
with the youth that are most at risk. And we’ve taken a lot . . . a 
large number of steps forward in terms of services and funding 
that are provided in the last few years that were never there 
before. 
 
We’ve got legislation in place to try to reduce the number of 
people driving around picking young people up. We’ve got 
legislation in place to place children in need of help in places 
where they can be helped. 
 
We’re trying to do the best we can to deal with a very difficult 
situation. In part, some of the ideas have come from the 
opposition. We’ve tried to work together to do that, so we’re 
making some progress. There’s undoubtedly more to be done, 
but there are many things that are being done because, like the 
member from the opposition, we’re all very concerned about 
the sexual exploitation of young people and we want to 
condemn it, and we want to stop it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, during the committee’s proceedings, talking with 
people of the province it had come to our attention that a large 
number of people felt that if johns are sent to johns schools as 
part of their, basically punishment, I guess . . . That’s a pretty 
. . . not enough as far as I’m concerned. But nonetheless if 
they’re . . . done that, that the cost of that johns school should 
be $1,000 and that the money from that should be returned so 
that this money can be put towards recovery services for the 
youth that had been exploited and offended. And I don’t think 
that your government has taken that measure, and I’m 
wondering why not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to introduce to the 
House, sitting right behind me is Ms. Jan Turner, who is the 
executive director of community justice. And while I’m doing 
that I should also indicate that there are other officials present in 
the House, Susan Amrud, the executive director of public law; 
Rod Crook, the executive director of courts and civil justice 
division; Keith Laxdal, associate deputy minister of finance and 
administration; and Gerald Tegart, executive director of the 
civil law division. 
 
In answer to the question, I can indicate to the member that I’m 
advised that when someone goes to johns school they do pay a 
fee of $400 to the program. And that money is used to pay for 
the program and goes back into the program to keep paying for 
the program. And I suppose . . . The member says, well why 
isn’t it $1,000? Well the committee recommended $1,000. I 
believe that what it was intended to be was a balance between 
an amount that would be a serious matter for people, which they 
thought $400 would be, and not so high that it would be 
prohibitive for some people to be able to be go to johns school, 
which is an alternative measure, in which case they might 
instead of getting, hopefully, rehabilitated, they might simply 
end up in court or in jail. That was the thinking. 
 

It is attempting to strike a balance. There are people in our 
community that, albeit they may be guilty of driving around the 
stroll in a vehicle, and their vehicle may be seized and they can 
pay $400. But there may be people that simply don’t have 
$1,000 to pay. And so it’s that kind of thinking and that kind of 
balancing. 
 
But I think that certainly we can look at the amount in the future 
but it was thought that $400 would be a sufficient penalty. And 
hopefully the seizure of a vehicle or the embarrassment of 
having to go to a johns school would also be a penalty in 
addition to any monetary amount that would be paid. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, to the minister and his officials, I 
welcome the opportunity to discuss an issue that’s very 
important to me and I think it’s very important to many people 
in this province. 
 
In the last year or so we’ve talked a lot in this House about 
people that have been afflicted with a condition or disadvantage 
because of a condition that’s beyond their control and that is 
fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect. 
 
And in the last while we’ve seen a lot of judges in the courts 
talk about the incarceration rate of people that do have this 
condition, the fact that they are put into an institution that is 
really not rehabilitating them because it isn’t working for them. 
It’s a system that isn’t . . . The people that are afflicted with this 
condition cannot be helped by being incarcerated. Each one of 
the young people or people that are in this . . . are in jail right 
now really have been . . . They have been disadvantaged in 
many ways, and this is just further, this is further 
disadvantaging them because they’re not going to be able to be 
helped. 
 
The statistics across Canada are 1 in 1,000 children are born 
with FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) or FAE (fetal alcohol 
effects) and in Saskatchewan we have startling numbers that 
could be as many as 10 times that many people that actually 
have this condition. And in our jail system right now, upwards 
of 70 per cent of the people that are incarcerated actually are 
afflicted with the condition. 
 
So my first question to you is, what is . . . Have you been 
listening to the judges in the court system and what is your 
department doing to deal with people that have been afflicted 
with FAS or FAE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I thank the member for the question. 
And I do want to say that this is largely a matter of corrections 
policy in the sense that the treatment of people who are found 
guilty of various offences, various circumstances, will fall 
under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety. I’m not saying that the Department of Justice is 
uninterested in the topic — we are concerned about it, certainly, 
as is the Department of Health — but some of the detailed 
questions may be addressed to the Minister of Corrections and 
Public Safety in his estimates. 
 
But I do want to say to the member that one thing about 
FAS/FAE, which we’re taking some steps to try to prevent, is 
that it is extremely variable, in that one of the problems is that it 
impacts different individuals in different ways. There are many 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

degrees of the effect of FAS/FAE so that what may be 
appropriate as a defence, say, for one person or a mitigation of 
sentence, may be inappropriate for another person with FAS or 
FAE, in the same way that many people will have mental 
disabilities, but the degree of their mental disability or the effect 
of it will vary quite remarkably and the treatment that they need 
will vary remarkably as well. So it’s very difficult to come up 
with a system of just saying, this is how we should treat FAS 
and FAE individuals because they in fact need individualized 
treatment. 
 
Having said that, I would say in a general way that, yes, I have 
actually . . . I’ve spoken to some of the judges, some of the 
police, and my own officials in Justice about this in a general 
way and sometimes more specific. And there is a feeling that it 
is sometimes inappropriate to have a person who really has this 
kind of problem — not all people with this problem but some 
people with this problem — going through a court system that 
they don’t understand, being incarcerated or treated in a 
correctional centre that they don’t understand, and the purpose 
of what’s happening in the court and the correctional system is 
questionable in the sense that we don’t know if that’s the most 
effective way to deal with that person. 
 
So we need to seek out in the courts, with the police and the 
courts — which by the way are under the jurisdiction of the 
Department of Justice — and also in the correctional centres, 
well are there different ways that different people need to be 
dealt with? And of course this is a problem that is being worked 
on across the country and perhaps in other parts of the world 
even as we speak, that people are trying to develop knowledge 
as to how these people should be dealt with. 
 
So we’re committed to trying to work with the police always to 
find alternative ways of dealing with people, to divert them 
away from the justice system. That’s quite common already in 
Saskatchewan but we think we need more of that. 
 
We need to work with, after the police are involved we may 
need to work with prosecutors and the courts and other 
personnel to divert people away from the court system — 
mediation diversion type approaches. And finally in 
Corrections, which the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety can address, there may be a need for adaptation there. 
 
But the answers are not easy because, as I’ve said at the outset, 
each individual may be different — may be different — and so 
what is appropriate for one may be in fact inappropriate for 
another. 
 
Finally I just wanted to say that the sad and tragic part of 
FAS/FAE is that it is a 100 per cent preventable condition, as 
the member knows. And what we need to do as a society is drill 
into everyone’s head that it is just wrong, you know, to drink 
while pregnant. It’s just wrong because of the devastating 
impact it can have. And so that’s the first objective, to try to 
prevent. 
 
But of course the member’s question is right. We haven’t totally 
prevented it, so how to deal with it? And in particular, she asks, 
are we considering it? Do we talk to the judges and other people 
about it? Yes, we’re considering it. Yes, we talk to people about 
it. 

Do we have all the answers worked out right now? No, we 
don’t. I don’t think anybody else does either but we’re 
searching for better answers and better ways to deal with people 
who have this condition. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. You’re 
quite right. Everybody who has been inflicted with this 
condition are unique just like every individual. And then when I 
talk to the parents and the people who are dealing with FAS and 
FAE, people describe them as snowflakes because every one of 
them is very unique. And of course there’s not such a thing as a 
one size fits all. 
 
But I’ve been watching with increasing interest the number of 
judges who are talking about incarceration and the fact that they 
are reluctant to give a sentence to someone who has this 
condition. They know that putting them into that system is not 
going to help them at all. 
 
The minister indicated that they are doing some things to divert 
people from incarceration. Could you explain what you’re 
doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I should, I should indicate to the 
member that some of the people that are, I’ve use the word, 
diverted from the system will never end up in front of the 
judges to begin with because they’ll just be diverted. Now what 
do we mean by that? 
 
For adult offenders and young offenders sometimes somebody 
is charged with an offence but it isn’t a very serious offence let 
us say, and it makes more sense to just get them sitting down 
with their victim and you know talking it out and trying to 
resolve it and maybe having them make restitution. And 
Saskatchewan is in fact a leader in diverting people away from 
the justice system. We divert more young people away from the 
formal courts and incarceration than other places do. But I’m 
sorry to say we still have more young people going through the 
courts and jails than other people . . . other provinces do. So it’s 
we divert a lot but we still have a lot of problems. 
 
I’m advised that with respect to the FAE/FAS people, that the 
most important thing that they need is some structure in their 
lives, and that there are a variety of things that can be done 
through family conferencing and counselling to bring about 
structure in their lives. 
 
Sometimes the problem will be what they really need is to be 
helped get some kind of education or training and get a job, 
that’s what they need in their lives. And the focus of the new 
federal Youth Criminal Justice Act is in part, to do just that; to 
take, in this case especially young people, and concentrate on 
their needs and whether some structure can be put into their 
lives which will get them off the path of offending, while at the 
same time, if society is in need of protection, dealing in a 
punitive way, punishing people that need to be punished and put 
away because they could be harmful to other people. 
 
So what we’re trying to do is seek ways to divert people away 
from just getting them through court and putting them in jail. 
We want to say to the person well, what is your problem? I 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

 

mean is your problem a lack of support at home? Is your 
problem a lack of education? Maybe the person can’t read. And 
that’s what needs to be done. 
 
And we are engaged in work with communities right now to 
help build a network of instructors across the province in every 
community, that will be available to work with . . . I should 
have said a network of structures, not instructors, that will be 
available to deal with young people who find themselves in 
trouble with the law. 
 
The Youth Criminal Justice Act is quite new. And we’re 
developing a network of structures across the province to try to 
intervene and find people, find young people especially, the 
resources that they need in order to stop offending. 
 
And as I say, it may be they need to learn how to read in some 
cases. That’s very basic. It may be they need some training; 
they need a job; they need some kind of counselling for some 
addiction problems they have. It could be a variety of things. 
 
But we’re going to do that. We’re doing that quite a bit now. 
We’re going to be doing it more so under the Youth Criminal 
Justice Act. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’m well aware that prevention is, of course, what 
we’re all looking for. That involves education. But with people 
that are already . . . have this condition, I know that there are a 
number of government departments that are dealing with them 
right now. We have Corrections, and Justice, the health care 
system, and Social Services. 
 
Each one of these departments is spending some money on the 
programs. And it seems to be a piecemeal attack at an issue 
that’s growing in Saskatchewan. I’m going to be asking every 
one of these departments, as they come up, how much money 
they are spending on the issue. And so I’m going to be . . . I’ll 
ask you to answer that question as well. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, what we need is a comprehensive 
plan, something where we know that your government is 
looking at this issue as something that’s affecting not only 
every department but most of the Aboriginal people — the fact 
that we need some coordination between the FSIN (Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) or their government and our 
government. We need to ensure that people are looked at as 
individual and their needs are looked at. 
 
So besides telling me how much money you are spending 
within your department on this issue, could you also tell me, 
between your various departments, who keeps track of the 
number of people that you’re actually diverting away from the 
justice system through other initiatives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I can advise the member, Mr. Chair, that 
we agree that a coordinated strategy is needed and we have an 
interdepartmental committee working together. We have 
representatives from the departments of Health, Learning, 
Justice, Corrections and Public Safety, and Community 
Resources and Employment, sitting down to try to coordinate 
all of their efforts so that we can have a coordinated strategy. 
 

In answer to the question, how much money do we spend on 
FAE/FAS, all of our efforts throughout the department are 
dedicated to, among other things, FAE/FAS. But it’s impossible 
to say, well this much is spent on FAE/FAS, in the sense that 
we know that we need to work with police and so police are 
provided by communities, with some support from the 
province. But police don’t just work on FAE/FAS; they work in 
other areas as well. 
 
And generally speaking for all of the programming, whether 
mediation-diversion, youth workers, etc., they’re dealing with 
FAE/FAS and other issues. So I can’t say that, well this much is 
spent on FAE/FAS. Everything we do has to be geared toward 
dealing with that problem and other problems. But we have 
people working with . . . working on a variety of issues and 
problems at the same time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I am quite happy to hear you say 
that there is sort of an intergovernmental department that’s 
actually dealing with the issue. You’re sitting down with 
various stakeholders and talking about what can be done. 
 
So can you please outline for me the structure of this 
committee. When do you meet, how often do you meet, and 
more importantly, what are your goals and your outcomes? 
How are you measuring them? How are we going to know what 
you’re actually learning and where you’re going and what 
you’re going to be deciding to do in the next short time to be 
dealing with this huge issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The committee is chaired by someone from 
the Department of Community Resources and Employment. 
They have been meeting for over two years, I am advised, and 
they get together every few months and discuss the progress 
they’re making. 
 
In terms of their overall goals and plans, each department 
publishes a strategic plan each and every year now where they 
set out their goals, things they want to achieve. And certainly 
reduced crime and incarceration would be amongst the sorts of 
goals they would set out. And we will report to the Legislative 
Assembly on an annual basis as to how the departments are 
doing with respect to their goals. 
 
I do want to say to the member that . . . Now these figures are a 
bit dated so they would be higher today. But for the year 
2000-2001 — so these figures are actually a couple of years old 
now — 2,312 Saskatchewan youth were referred to alternative 
measures programs. And in that same year 2,227 Saskatchewan 
adults were referred to adult alternative measures programs. In 
other words — and those figures would be higher now — that 
thousands of people are referred to appropriate programs to get 
them some help and away from the justice system. 
 
Those numbers are . . . Well for youth in that year it would be 
higher now. It was 242 youth referrals for 10,000 youth in the 
province, which is much higher than the national average which 
is 98. So we do have a lot of programming but undoubtedly 
much more is needed. 
 
But we’re trying to get the people from the various government 
departments together — well we have got them together — to 
try to talk about how we can coordinate our efforts to do even a 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

better job. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is the report that this integrated 
group has worked on, has it been finished for the last year, and 
is that report public domain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that the committee came up 
with some preliminary recommendations, ideas, that they 
thought were appropriate. They have been consulting with 
people in the outside communities, outside of government. And 
that consultation process concluded in one sense — I mean 
there’ll always be ongoing consultation — but this idea of 
consulting in a formal way concluded on April 30. 
 
The committee will provide a report internally to government as 
to the public service saying, these are the things that we should 
do. Whether or not the report will be a public document, I don’t 
know whether it will be prepared that way. But certainly once 
we get the report and we know what is recommended, we’ll of 
course be discussing what steps we’re going to take as we move 
along. 
 
But we’ve had the people working at it quite diligently to try to 
come up with a coordinated response. They’ve been consulting 
with the community, they’re coming up with a report to advise 
the government, and the government will then have to make 
decisions in terms of what steps we should be taking. And of 
course when we make decisions and take steps, those have to be 
made known to the public at large, and we want them to be 
known to the public at large, so we’ll be discussing it further. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, if the report is just finished, I 
guess a week or so ago, that’s encouraging to hear that there is 
actually something written down, something that’s been 
decided. But I would think that if it was done by people that 
work for the province of Saskatchewan it should be public 
domain. It should be something that should be available to the 
large group of people who are interested. 
 
I imagine you’re aware, Mr. Minister, of the number of 
conferences that are taking place — Yellowknife and British 
Columbia and here in Saskatchewan next week — on fetal 
alcohol syndrome. And it seems to me that there are a very 
large number of groups and organizations and even bands that 
are holding conferences to determine what they can be doing 
about this issue. But everybody seems to be doing it in 
isolation. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And whenever I look at the conferences I don’t see the 
opportunity to see the goals and the go-forwards that we should 
be working on. And it’s disappointing to see the government 
not there to actually talk about what their plans are. If you’ve 
got the opportunity, if you’ve got the reports that your people 
have worked on to say that they have got ideas, are those ideas 
going to be brought forward so we don’t try and reinvent the 
wheel whenever people get together to talk about FAS and 
FAE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I should clarify for the member that 
there isn’t any report as such that was completed a week ago, 
and I didn’t mean to suggest that. The departments have been 

working on a strategy, they’ve been consulting with 
communities, they’ve put questions out to communities, they’re 
getting feedback from communities. Then they . . . That will 
assist them in recommending to government certain policies. 
And that’s simply the job of public servants — they look into 
serious matters, they obtain information, they come up with 
ideas, and they advise government what steps should be taken. 
And they’re earnestly trying to come up with the most 
important priorities for government to take. 
 
And there may be some conferences that they’re going to or not 
going to. They can’t go to every conference that occurs. 
They’ve got their jobs to do and work to do at their offices and 
so on. But I’ll just say that they are diligently trying to work 
and they’re dedicated people trying to come up with solutions. 
And that’s what they’re doing. 
 
And I’m not concerned about whether they’re attending some 
particular conference or whether they’re publishing some 
particular report. I’m concerned about whether they’re doing 
their job, which is to figure out what to do, and then advise 
government what they think government should be doing as we 
move forward. And that’s what we’re doing and I support it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me then what is your 
plan and your goal for outlining some solutions to the situation 
that we have? You’ve got departments working on it, you’ve 
got information coming back to the people in your department, 
and into . . . and through various government departments. Is 
there one comprehensive plan and is there a time frame that you 
plan to bring forward to the people of Saskatchewan to deal 
with FAS and FAE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I will advise the member, Mr. Chair, that 
actually it was several years ago that the Government of 
Saskatchewan, through the Department of Health, working in 
conjunction with the Saskatchewan Institute for the Prevention 
of Handicaps, came up with the most important plan to deal 
with FAE/FAS. And that was a plan to educate people and to 
try to prevent FAE/FAS. That’s the number one thing we need 
to do. 
 
I have said in my answers to the member’s questions today that 
with respect to people who have not been prevented from 
having FAE/FAS, that we seek in government appropriate ways 
to deal with those people to provide them with services to deal 
with problems they may have in order to keep them out of the 
justice system. 
 
I have advised the member that there are thousands of people 
that are being diverted away from the justice system as we try 
to, as we try to deal with their problems, and that we will seek 
ways and are actively seeking ways to find out how we can 
enhance effective services to get people out of the justice 
system and to keep them from reoffending. 
 
That is our plan; that is what we’re working on. In terms of a 
timetable, it’s an ongoing plan. We’ve been working on it up 
until now. We’ll continue to work on it in the future, and we’ll 
try to do a better, more effective job each and every year as we 
move forward. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Minister, I have a 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

 

few questions that deal with highway speed limits and rules of 
the road and enforcement and so on. We’ll shift it to that area of 
Justice. 
 
I’ve had a number of people ask me about the amber speed 
signs that are posted around . . . usually they’re in conjunction 
with amber flashing lights, usually before you approach a fairly 
busy intersection. There are a number around the city and 
they’re usually posted fairly high. And citizens have asked me, 
do these, does that speed . . . Like quite often it’ll be like on the 
ring road around Regina where the posted speed limit is 100 
kilometres an hour, and then as you approach a busy 
intersection there are these smaller signs posted that indicate 80 
kilometres in conjunction with amber flashing signs. And 
people have asked me whether they apply to trucks or do they 
apply to all vehicles, and so I thought I would ask and get 
clarification on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to be helpful to the 
member with respect to what is a very good question but that is 
a question that is a question for the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. It is not a question for which the Department of 
Justice has responsibility. And so I would suggest the member 
might want to ask those questions when the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation is up for his estimates. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. And I certainly will ask the 
Minister of Highways. 
 
A question I have for you today is the number of RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) officers that are part of the highway 
patrol. How do the numbers that we have today in the province 
compare to the number we had five years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have the numbers of the 
RCMP of five years ago with respect to traffic enforcement. 
And we will answer the question; we will get back to the 
member within the next few days with the answer. 
 
But I can tell the member that the total number of police 
officers, I believe, RCMP today is 1,089 in Saskatchewan. Of 
course there are non-police personnel that work with them too, 
but I won’t go into that. And then municipal police officers in 
the municipalities that have their own police forces, there are 
another 874 officers. So 1,089 RCMP, 874 municipal. This 
would be as of right now, I would think — yes, as of right now. 
 
And the numbers from five years ago, I will undertake to get 
those numbers both for the RCMP and the municipal to the 
member. Whether or not we have it broken down how many are 
on the highway patrol and how many are not, I’m not sure. But 
if we can break that down to the extent that we can, we will as 
well and we’ll answer that in written form. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, did I hear you correct in saying that you 
don’t have the breakdown as to how many of those 1,089 
RCMP officers are devoted to highway patrol? I understand, 
I’ve been told, that the number is somewhere around 60. Now I 
just wanted you to . . . I’d like you to confirm that number. 
 
And then I guess the second part of my question is: are there 
any plans in the immediate . . . to immediate term future to 
increase the number of officers whose duties are highway 

patrol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that although I 
don’t have the figures in front of me, that the number of about 
60 RCMP assigned to traffic patrol would be accurate, that it 
must be about that. 
 
And in terms of plans to increase, I would say that it is a 
question of prioritization, that the RCMP and the government in 
consultation must decide every so often what is the most 
important thing to do. Is it traffic patrol or is it drug 
enforcement or is it violent crime, that kind of issue. 
 
And it may be that the number of traffic officers has gone down 
in the last number of years but the number of officers assigned 
to other things like violent crime may have gone up. And we’ll 
endeavour to get more information to the member about what 
has gone down, and also what has gone up, because that then 
reflects the prioritization and . . . Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, one final question along this subject. I 
wonder . . . You may or not have these numbers at your 
fingertips — perhaps your officials may have them — but I’ll 
ask the question anyway. 
 
The cost to the province for a RCMP officer out on highway 
patrol, what is the total cost? And I don’t know . . . I’m not sure 
if there is a cost sharing between two levels of government. If 
you could provide that, the information as far as the total cost 
and the cost to the province, I would appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The average cost of a police officer in the 
RCMP to the province would be about $80,000 per year, but 
that would not be the total cost. The province pays 70 per cent 
of the costs and our share would be $80,000. So then you’d add 
another 30 per cent on top of that. And it’s because you’re not 
just looking at the salary of the police officer but also the 
vehicle, the detachment, the administrative support, the radio 
system, and so on. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I understand that we’ll be . . . the 
House will be moving on, so I want to thank the members of the 
opposition for their questions today and the very cordial manner 
in which we’ve had this exchange — which of course for me is 
how I always like to have exchanges. And also I want to thank 
my officials for their very able assistance, not only today but 
indeed every day throughout the year. 
 
So with that I move that we report progress, and thank you very 
much. 
 
(16:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

my left is Angie Gelinas, deputy minister. To her left is David 
Debono, president and CEO (chief executive officer) of SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network). To my right is 
Dawn Martin, executive director of culture and heritage. 
 
Directly behind me, Chris Martin, director of corporate 
services; and beside him Dylan Jones, executive director of 
strategic policy and youth. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And thank you, 
Madam Minister, for agreeing to do this this afternoon, and also 
to your officials. I’d like to welcome you all here and extend 
my thanks as well. 
 
The line of questioning I have today, Madam Minister, is 
regarding the announcement you made this morning on the 
Provincial Youth Advisory Committee. And there’s just a few 
things I’d like clarified with that. 
 
And could you give us some background details about this 
advisory committee and what components are involved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, if I could go back to the history of 
this. We used to have a body called Youth PACE (Provincial 
Action Committee on the Economy), which was intended to be 
largely dealing on economic issues and advisory to the 
ministers of Economic Development and Learning — 
Education as it was called at the time. And what happened is 
that particular group evolved. 
 
The young people gave us feedback that they felt that their 
participation was too narrow in the sense that it was directed at 
the economy. But also it was . . . They wanted to have a larger 
role in setting the agenda for the discussions and wanted to be 
able to spend more time in discussion of decisions before they 
were made, not so much as dialogue about decisions that had 
been made. And so what we decided to do, with their 
concurrence, was to shut down that committee. 
 
But in the meantime there had been two or three other 
significant youth bodies in the province who had submitted 
reports to the province. One of them is the advisory group to the 
youth . . . I’m trying to remember just the right . . . well the 
ombudsperson. And the other two were the northern community 
vitality group that had done a considerable amount of work, 
sponsored by Cameco, on what would meet the needs of youth 
in the North. And the Mind The Gap report, and as well the 
youth ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) report 
which were the young people that were involved in the ACRE 
report generally, but as the youth component of it. 
 
And basically all of them said that they would like to have more 
involvement in decision making. I think the way it was put by 
the Mind the Gap group was probably the most significant. It 
was, don’t talk about us without us. And so we felt that to take 
in mind what those youth were saying . . . And one of the very 
specific recommendations they made was the creation of a 
youth Web site, which is why that was chosen as one of the first 
things that we’ll be putting on the agenda for this advisory body 
to give advice on. 
 
The fact is, we were getting some pretty strong messages from 
youth that they wanted more concrete involvement but also 

wanted to have more role in setting the agenda. So this group 
was constructed by trying to find a representative group of 
youth across regions, across gender, across diversity, across 
interests. And all of the youth that have been selected are in 
their own areas, either already have a track record in terms of 
youth leadership, and are high-achieving youth. 
 
So we are still leaving some positions vacant for people to 
apply directly and be considered — to add some appointments 
midsummer to bring the number up to about 25, I think is the 
thought. And they met this weekend to talk about how they’re 
going to keep in touch and how they’re going to communicate 
with each other. 
 
So we don’t know exactly all of what will come out of this but I 
know even in the informal discussions that we had on Saturday 
certainly they were already starting to focus on some things 
they thought were particularly worth looking at. 
 
So if you have additional questions, certainly we’re willing to 
answer them. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now I understand 
that the youth on this committee were nominated by community 
leaders and such as that. How were the community leaders and 
just the general public, how were they made aware that this 
advisory committee was ready to accept nominations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Over 1,000 letters were sent out to 
youth organizations and youth groups, and as a result of that, 
people’s resumés came back and they were looked at again for 
the factors that I mentioned earlier — regional balance, gender 
balance, etc. So these were solicited in a very open way from 
the community. And actually I think there was only one or two 
youth on the committee I’ve ever met before but I think they 
did a very good job at going through all the applications and 
selecting this group. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, were there any notices of 
nominations put in local newspapers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, but the intention is to, you know, 
get them off to a start. Like I say, five more will be done 
through the open process, and then one of the things that we 
will be asking them to be involved in is making a 
recommendation of how we would then put people on to a body 
like this in the future. 
 
And their terms of appointment are staggered with one-year and 
two-year appointments so that there will be continuity but also 
opportunity to renew, bringing new people on to the committee. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — What would determine, Madam Minister, 
whether you have a one-year or a two-year appointment? Is it 
just certain areas of the province, those coming from perhaps an 
odd number RM (rural municipality) will be on for a two-year 
term, or just . . . Could you explain to me how that will be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I am myself amazed at how fair 
all of this is. The ones who have been involved in the previous 
committee — I guess you’d call it the continuity members — 
and as well ones that have had more opportunity to do this, only 
have the one-year appointments, and the ones that are brand 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

 

new have the two-year appointments. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Any idea when 
the first meeting will be? And also, will the meetings be taking 
place throughout the province or will they be just set in 
Saskatoon and Regina? Could you enlighten me on that, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — At this time one of the things they 
discussed at their first meeting on Saturday was the matter 
you’re raising. And they decided that they’d like to alternate for 
the moment between Regina and Saskatoon, although they may 
decide to go further afield. But they’re going to be setting up a 
way of communicating with each other on a, you know, a 
listserv or a Web-based connection of some sort. 
 
And as well they’re hoping I think to have their second 
meeting, I would think, sooner rather than late, but I would 
suspect likely in August other than the contact they’re going to 
have by other mechanisms. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you. Madam Minister, I certainly hope 
they do go out into the rural areas and not just stick to Regina 
and Saskatoon because sometimes the people in rural 
Saskatchewan feel that they don’t have quite the advantage that 
you do in a larger centre. And, you know, I think they need to 
be given a little bit of an extra incentive for reasons to stay in 
the province. So I think if the committee, without, you know, 
telling them what to do, if they would, you know, take the 
committee and travel out into the rural areas, I think it would be 
a very, very wise move on their behalf. 
 
Now could you tell me the estimated annual cost of 
administering this committee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — At the moment it’s 6,000. And I mean I 
suppose in the future one could look at other suggestions but 
you’d want to have something to support why that was 
necessary to spend more. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Now do the members of the committee receive 
a per diem or is it strictly voluntary from their perspective? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we’re having this little debate just 
to see if we can be sure what the exact amount is. But it’s the 
Treasury Board minimum allotment for per diems. But they do 
receive that in addition to their expenses. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I note that there 
are 19 young people comprising your new advisory committee 
and that the individuals range in age from 14 to 29, and you 
have said that you hope to have probably six more people 
appointed to this board. Now already 19 seems like a fairly 
large number and I would just like to know why you chose to 
go with that number and possibly 25? 
 
And do you feel that that will lead to some scheduling problems 
as, you know, the more people there are the harder it is to get 
them all in one place? Or do you plan to have subcommittees? 
Or how are you planning on organizing that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Actually I’d already had a bit of a 
discussion with them on Saturday that if they find in fact that 
there’s three or four that are interested in one thing, and two or 

three that are interested in another thing, they may decide to do 
some subgroup work. 
 
So I think what having a larger committee like that does is give 
you a range of skills and interests to draw on. And I think that 
was why it was harder to make it smaller, was in order to get 
the broad representation of both interests and regions and 
whatnot, it just seemed that you needed a larger number of 
people. 
 
But my hope would certainly be that they wouldn’t try to have 
everybody discuss everything, other than reporting to each 
other, but that they would maybe pursue their interests a bit in 
smaller working groups. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The age range 
also seems fairly extensive and . . . like it’s 14 to 29. I have a 
hard time imagining that a 14-year-old is going to have the 
same interests and same views or even interest in the same 
category as someone that’s 19 or, pardon me, 29 years old. Why 
did you strike the committee up with such a wide range in ages? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it’s just, I guess six of one, half 
a dozen of another. It was an attempt to have a bit of continuity 
towards people that are moving forward in their education, in 
their choices about education, work, families. And as we’ve all 
noted, it doesn’t take very long to move through the various age 
groups. 
 
And I think because of the maturity and the skill levels of the 
particular youth that are chosen, I don’t think it’ll be as much of 
a problem as it might be if you had I guess a less carefully 
selected group of youth. This is a group of youth who are 
already demonstrated a fair bit of self-discipline and focus and 
whatnot in what they’re doing. So I think they’ll have more in 
common than you might normally think from a group that wide. 
 
However, if some are more interested in issues that might affect 
young parents and some have other issues, again I think if they 
adopt working in a bit of a subgroup type of model, they’ll be 
able to accommodate that range of difference. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — From your answer, Madam Minister, I take it 
you’re saying that you don’t see any problem in the 
reconciliation of difference with the different age groups? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. We hope they’ll be like every other 
large family that has lots of age groups and work it out. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In your news 
release, you indicate that the committee will: 
 

. . . focus on key priorities such as promoting and 
enhancing Saskatchewan’s opportunities for young people. 
 

You also stated that: 
 

The mandate of the . . . Committee will include making 
recommendations to the government on issues of concern 
to youth, producing concrete proposals to enhance and 
promote opportunities for youth, and launching a new 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

youth-focused website. 
 
Madam Minister, when I look at this focus and the overall 
mandate, I can’t help but think that it sounds very much like 
your job description, and isn’t that already the responsibility of 
your department under your direction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll use the same example actually I 
used when I was speaking and hope that no one’s offended by 
it. They, because of the very fact of being young, will receive 
information we don’t receive because we’re older; they’ll 
receive information from people who are targeting that age 
group. 
 
And one example I would give, I had an e-mail from a young 
man who . . . his fiancée and himself were both graduating and 
they were hoping to get employment in Saskatchewan but they 
wanted to convey to me the experience they had with being 
recruited. 
 
Without mentioning the field they were being recruited for, I 
will just say that three months before they graduated, they had 
had . . . or she had had contact from Alberta, a personal phone 
call asking if she might be interested in working in Alberta, and 
actual — over the course of the three months before she 
graduated — she actually had three personal phone calls 
recruiting . . . trying to recruit her. 
 
And the Saskatchewan employer waited until she had 
graduated, sent a letter, didn’t phone, and basically invited her 
to a mass recruitment session. So this very different style of 
recruitment even is sending very different messages to these 
youth. 
 
And obviously the recruiter from out of province I think was 
being much more aggressive in their attempts to connect with 
this youth and to encourage them to leave than we were — and 
when I say we as being Saskatchewan we because it wasn’t the 
government in this case that was the employer — but certainly 
making an effort to get that young person to say that, well 
here’s somebody who’s obviously interested in me and really 
wants me to work there and I think that’s where I’ll go. 
 
So that kind of stuff even can be very helpful, and we wouldn’t 
necessarily know that if someone didn’t tell us that. And I think 
the same thing happens in the area of scholarships and other 
things. Those are the kinds of things young people have 
mentioned to me that, again, when you’re older, you might not 
know that because I’m not the one they send a letter to. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, but does your department not 
have a policy and development people already in place for 
programs such as this? Was there really a need to strike a 
committee? Couldn’t people that are already existing within 
your department manage this job? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Let me put it this way. My goal is not 
to build a huge . . . a bureaucracy of professional youth whose 
job it is to be youth. I think this is an appropriate role for an 
advisory committee from the community. Because very quickly 
too, once you’re part of an organization, it’s different than 
being out in the community. So I think it’s important that these 
youth are speaking from a position of being out in their 

communities and not necessarily employed by the department. 
 
We do have young people in the department and we do have 
people who are responsible for these issues, but I think the best 
kind of research you can get is to talk to thoughtful people who 
are out there doing the things that we’re wanting to, I guess, 
have added intelligence about. I think in this particular instance 
this is the right way to gather this information. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m just going to 
ask a couple more questions, Madam Minister, and then I’m 
going to turn it over to my colleagues. 
 
You’ve been quoted as saying that your government has, and 
I’ll quote here: 
 

. . . has several plans for young people in the future, 
including naming them to the boards of Crown 
corporations. 

 
Now, when we’re talking about youth here — and again it’s a 
very broad range, 14 to 29 — can you tell me in what capacity a 
16-year-old, for example, might serve on a Crown corporation 
board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The age groups for Crowns is 
designated at 18 to 29. And I actually think that’s quite suitable 
because there’s not many youth past the age of 18 who aren’t 
users of some Crown corporation services, and even some 
under that age. And so I think it’s important also to get people 
who have a customer perspective. 
 
But there also there is a learning exercise and to hear the 
discussions, to be part of those discussions, and to become 
prepared, I guess from a point of view of succession planning, 
to become thoughtful; hopefully some of the areas that’ll relate 
to their area of career study, and they will then be able to 
assume leadership roles as they get older. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, were there any specific roles 
you had in mind for young people to serve on a Crown 
corporation board, keeping in mind that these positions can 
often be challenging, that require extensive knowledge in the 
subject area, and the commitment of making one’s self 
available for meetings and other events? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m not imagining that that would be a 
problem because I think the youth would not say yes unless 
they were able to carry out their job as it’s described. 
 
And as on any board, people may take on specific 
responsibilities on the board but other board members are 
essentially members at large whose basic role on a board is to 
read the materials, listen thoughtfully, and then using their own 
experience, background, and common sense, ask those 
questions that will create the accountability and good thinking 
that moves a board forward in its decision making. 
 
And all the boards also receive training. In fact our Crown 
corporations received an award for their board training 
processes — a national award. So I’m confident that they would 
have the supports they need to do this work. 
 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, did I hear you correct? Did 
you say that they would be members at large on the boards . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m sorry. Could you just clarify 
that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, I said on any board of directors you 
have board members who take on specific responsibilities and 
others who act more as members, board members at large. So 
for example, if you had a young person whose background was 
financial administration, they may well take on a specific role to 
be concentrating on some of the financial aspects of the board 
work. But you wouldn’t know that until they were actually at a 
meeting and they were working on dividing up board 
responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Minister, last time 
we were discussing the spending estimates of your department 
in the Assembly, I had asked you some questions with regards 
to the Community Initiatives Fund and how those funds were 
allocated. And you’d indicated that there were a number of 
local committees that allocated funds for human services type 
programming, but there was also a provincial fund consisting of 
eight people for . . . that allocated funds under the capital grant 
program. 
 
My question to you is how many of these local committees are 
there in the province? And what . . . I’m assuming that there 
may be a standard number of members on each committee. If in 
fact that isn’t the case, could you indicate the makeup of these 
as an example, give me an example of the makeup of a local 
committee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’re going to bring back the answer 
for you on exactly how many RICs (regional intersectoral 
committee) there are. The reason that it’s a little bit tricky, 
they’re a little bit like REDAS (regional economic development 
authority), where a RIC will get active somewhere there hasn’t 
been one before and then the work just gets divvied up to that 
area. So we’ll find out exactly for you. 
 
But as to the number of people, again it varies on who’s willing 
to sit in the local area and the range of specific priorities there. 
It’s usually about 8 to 15. And you know it’s possible that they 
can add people or not as they need them to represent an area. 
 
But these committees, these RICs were really the coming 
together of the people in health, social services, education, 
justice, the United Way and so they have representatives from 
all those broad kinds of social envelopes. I know sometimes the 
Multicultural Council will be represented on a body like that. 
So it’s really, I guess, who the local social development movers 
and shakers are in a particular region. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, each local committee would administer 
funds within a given area or region, is that what you’re saying? 
And each committee would then have a budget that they would 
allocate over the course of the fiscal year? 
 
And I guess further to that, under the CIF (Community 
Initiatives Fund) fund I see there’s about approximately $8.6 
million allocated. I wonder if you could provide me with a 
breakdown as to how much of that 8.6 million is allocated to the 
local committees and how much is allocated to the provincial 

committee? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What would happen is the projects 
from an area would come into the RIC that covers that region 
and, like I say, if there was only one RIC covering a larger 
region they may at some point end up having more localized 
RICs. But at this point they would look at those. But they don’t 
actually make the final decision. They priorize them and then it 
goes to the CIF board of trustees who gives final approval to the 
projects. 
 
So largely they make the recommendations. And I would 
imagine that their recommendations would be followed more 
often than not unless someone had a compelling reason why an 
organization had not been responsible or something. 
 
So about 2 million of the dollars would be done in that 
particular way. About $1 million goes directly to the hospitals 
foundation and to problem gambling. And then about another 
1.25 million would be the money right now that would be going 
under the infrastructure fund directly to the small eight-person 
board that would be making decisions about the infrastructure 
money. 
 
So that would be basically the breakdown of the parts that the 
Community Initiatives Fund people are involved in and that 
central decision-making body. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So if I understood you correctly, Minister, you 
said about $2 million go to the local committees and they aren’t 
the final authority then. They make a recommendation to the 
board of trustees. Is that a provincial body? And if so, how 
many members make up that board of trustees? 
 
And then if I heard you correctly, you said about $1 million 
goes to the hospital foundations . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Problem gambling. And then one and a quarter million to an 
infrastructure program. 
 
That still leaves over $4 million. What is the rest of the money 
used for? And who allocates that and who administers it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well we’ll keep going. We’re chipping 
away at this here. 
 
Four hundred and eighty-five goes directly, based on 
agreements, to exhibitions who had funding displaced as a 
result of the casino development. 
 
You would have heard the announcements recently as 
centennial initiatives: the In Motion fitness program which is 
1.792 million; the Aboriginal participation in sport, culture, and 
recreation initiative which is 1.833 million; the initiatives for 
the centennial which is in total, let’s see, three, five, six, seven, 
eight, a thousand . . . or 1 million and 83 dollars in total. 
 
So those are particular amounts that are sort of targeted for 
goals that we hope will be achieved by the centennial. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, the million dollars . . . or one and a 
quarter million dollars for infrastructure, that would be 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

administered by the provincial committee that it’s made up of 
eight people? Is that the total budget for that particular 
committee, of which I believe, as I indicated in the last time we 
discussed your department’s spending estimates, $491,500 went 
to Aberdeen. So are you saying that almost half of the 
infrastructure money went to one community? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The money that Aberdeen got was 
under the Centenary Fund. I don’t know if you’ll remember, 
maybe you will, but there was one year when we had a bunch of 
surplus money because we did very well in oil and gas. And at 
that time 120 million was allocated to the Centenary Fund 
which was divided up into five areas: municipal, housing, you 
know, education infrastructure, community infrastructure, etc. 
So that was the program under which the Aberdeen thing was 
done. 
 
This is a new amount of money and the amount you’re looking 
at is one year. The maximum people can apply for is 120,000 
on this particular program, and it’ll go over several years for a 
total of 5 million over three years in that particular fund. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I’m a little confused. I’m looking at the 
news release and it says that the money came from the 
Community Initiatives Fund. Now it may have come out of last 
year’s budget, and you’d indicated that this year’s budget for 
infrastructure is $1 million, and this announcement was made in 
January 25 of this year. So it doesn’t say anything about coming 
out of the centennial fund. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Aha, there was one more fund that I, 
myself, was not clear on. So I’ll have to thank you for your 
investigative reporting work here today. 
 
But there was, previous to this particular new infrastructure 
money for the centennial, there was 6 million over three years 
previously that was not part of the centenary money but was 
actually the predecessor of the 5 million that’s coming through 
the pipe this time. 
 
And one of the reasons why Aberdeen probably got as much as 
they did was because the Centenary Fund took a lot of pressure 
off of funding requests. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well I’m not sure, Madam Minister, if I’m any 
clearer on this. So what you’re saying is that there was this 
Centenary Fund and it evolved into the Community Initiatives 
Fund and so on. I think maybe what we need to do is have a 
flow chart of where these monies came from and how they 
ended up in these various funds. And perhaps you may want to 
give us an undertaking that you would provide a schematic and 
a diagram as to how these funds all . . . where they came from 
and what funds they ended up in. 
 
I’m looking at the, as I’d indicated earlier, the total funding 
under the Community Initiatives Fund and in the estimates 
document it says it’s based on a share of the net profits of the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. Is there a formula that’s 
used to establish this fund? And if so could you explain exactly 
what the formula is and how it’s applied? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The CIF receives 25 per cent of the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation’s profits, and that would be 

now entirely from the casinos in Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Hart: — You said it’s based on the profits of the two 
casinos in Regina and Moose Jaw. And I’m sorry I didn’t hear 
whether you said it’s . . . whether you said there was a 
percentage of the profits. What is the percentage? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m happy to repeat that. The 
percentage is 25 per cent. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks to the 
minister and her officials for coming in today. I wanted to start 
a question with regards to the subprograms outlined in the 
budget on page 44, specifically with regards to the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board. I was hoping the minister could give 
me kind of an outline where this $3.7 million is spent, what 
kind of programs. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, we’re cooking here. There’s the 
artist in residence grant programs which you may be familiar 
with in your community. Quite often there’s artists that come 
and reside in communities and provide arts programming and 
services. The artist in residence grant program is 300,015 for 
nine resident artists. 
 
There’s the gallery grant program that supports small local 
galleries. The grants were 152,500 to support the operations of 
11 not-for-profit art galleries. 
 
The global grants program tends to support the arts 
organizations that are the foundations of our arts operation in 
the province — people like the professional theatres, Globe, 
Persephone, 25th Street Theatre; the publishers Coteau and 
Thistledown; the Regina and Saskatoon symphony orchestras; 
film co-operatives; there’s some periodicals; galleries such as 
the Mendel Art Gallery and the MacKenzie Art Gallery — in 
total, 1,866,433 to 36 arts organization under the global grant 
program. 
 
Under the individual assistance grant program — this is sort of 
the R&D (research and development) of arts and culture — it’s 
81 grants totalling 550,000 to individual artist projects. 
 
There’s a project assistance grant program which is short-term 
specific activities which benefit the arts or artists. That was 46 
grants and a total of 141,645. 
 
Then there was the provincial cultural organization global grant 
program. Now you would be familiar that under the Sask Sport 
lottery there’s three globals: there’s SaskCulture, Sask Parks 
and Recreation, and the sport area. And they administer . . . The 
total there is $1,615,340. 
 
And then there’s the permanent collection of art that we have 
and the . . . I don’t quite know how to express that financially. 
I’m looking at the value of the collection, but in fact they do 
generate revenues out of that area through the Arts Board art 
rental program which if you take advantage of that program in 
your office, you’ll have some very beautiful works by 
Saskatchewan artists. Little bit of a plug there. 
 
And then there’s consultation and advisory services that they 
pay for as well when they’re involved in partnerships with, for 



May 5, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

 

example, tourism or museums or other people. 
 
So that gives you broadly — now we can get into more detail 
— but that gives you broadly the areas of funding. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With regards 
to the money that comes from the lottery for cultures, you said 
it was a little more than $1 million. Could you tell me where 
this money goes, to which arts boards, and how it’s determined 
where it goes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I just want to be clear. Your 
question is which money from the lotteries goes to the 
provincial cultural organization grant program — is that your 
question? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — No, Madam Minister, you outlined before in 
your answer that it went to three different places. There was 
part for sport, part for parks, and part for culture. It was with 
regards to the aspect that goes to culture, which I think you said 
was one point something million dollars, is how . . . Where that 
money goes specifically, does it go to boards, and how it gets 
allocated was my question. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now why I took a second on that was I 
was trying to . . . Because I know this can be tricky when you’re 
first trying to figure this stuff out, what the organizational 
structure is. 
 
We’ve got the lotteries, which is Sask Sport lottery, and 
underneath all the different people they fund. There’s the three 
PCOs: (provincial cultural organization) Sask Sport, Sask 
Culture, Sask Parks and Rec. But then the arts part is a separate 
stream because it’s the professional arts. The Sask Culture is 
more community arts. 
 
And the Arts Board has 2 million that goes towards the 
provincial cultural organizations that are at the level, I guess 
you’d say, the fine arts. Provincial cultural organizations, the 
artist in residence program, and the gallery grants would be the 
three main things that they’re involved in. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Actually again 
I’m interested in the community cultural programs, so with 
Sask Culture and how the money is allocated and where it goes 
to. If there’s divisions for example around the province, 
different community arts boards, what the allocation is and how 
that’s determined. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The Sask Culture portion of those three 
globals gets 35 per cent of the overall money. And they get that 
by, every three years we sign an agreement with them as to 
what portion of the lotteries money they’ll get, what the licence 
fee is, etc. And they get 35 per cent of the total amount of the 
agreement. 
 
Now they have an elected board that’s elected by their members 
and they create an annual spending plan, which they would be 
responsible for doing their own audited financial report and 
whatnot. And as well they elect a Cultural Advisory Committee, 
which actually adjudicates the grants. So they have two elected 

boards. The one that runs the whole operation and develops the 
budgets and whatnot, and the one that actually looks at grants 
and decides who gets it. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With regards 
to the 33 per cent that it’s going to receive this year as opposed 
to last year, would you be able to comment on the fluctuation 
between — this money is coming from lotteries — what the 
fluctuation would be from one year to another in, just in a broad 
percentage? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is actually . . . You’ve cottoned on 
to one of what the discussion points always is in the lottery 
agreement, is whether they want a fixed amount or whether they 
want a percentage. And they’ve chosen, themselves, to stay 
with a percentage because they feel that if they do better 
marketing, they have a chance of making more money and 
thereby increasing the amount of money that they get. 
 
So even though they could bargain for a fixed amount, they’ve 
tended to want to have a more open-ended amount where their 
own marketing efforts can produce a higher result for them. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Turning to 
youth now, I have some questions with regards to the special 
youth advisory committee the minister has just entered into. 
And I have some questions with regards to members that could 
possibly be appointed to Crown corporations to sit on there. 
Could the minister confirm that it would be possible that youth 
from the age of 18 to 29 would be potentially able to sit on 
Crown corporation boards in a full capacity as a voting board 
member? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, you’re right. That is what’s 
contemplated. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Madam Minister, how would these 
individuals be chosen? What qualifications would they require 
to be sitting on such a board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, basically I think with any board 
you try to look at the mix of skills on the board. But I think that 
you would have to be a pretty exceptional youth — which we 
have many — to be on a board because you know there’s only 
going to be one youth member per board and you would want 
someone who can, I guess, hold their own in the discussion. 
 
But you’d be looking for youth with a high level of educational 
achievement, you know, probably likely have won awards in 
different areas, active in the community. You’d be looking for 
all those things and then looking at a mix that complements the 
existing skill base on the board. So I think we would likely see 
. . . And also youth for whom likely whatever experience they 
gain here would be taking them in a career direction as well, 
because I think you want people who are leaders in your 
community not just for the short-haul but for the long haul. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Madam Minister, as you alluded to, and I 
agree, we have many talented youth in our province. Would it 
be possible for a youth to be appointed to more than one Crown 
corporation board? Would it be possible or is it anticipated that 
a youth could or would be appointed to more than one board, 
that could sit on multiple boards? 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2003 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think that would be unlikely because 
there are so few opportunities you would want to spread them 
around. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The next 
question I would ask was with regards to youth sitting on 
Crown corporations boards, would their remuneration be 
equivalent to what everyone else would be receiving? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes it would. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Further to 
that, would the youth have full voting rights on that Crown 
corporation board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, they would. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — It would be possible then, Madam Minister, 
that a larger board that votes on hundreds of millions of dollars 
that we had . . . A Crown, at the end of the day, a vote could 
pend on an 18 year old’s appointment to the Crown. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well let me put it this way. There’s no 
point giving someone power unless it’s real. And so, yes, they 
would have real power and authority. I would suspect there 
wouldn’t be very many situations where that would be that one 
member’s vote that would make or break the day. I would hope 
that decisions are a little more clear than that. 
 
But at any rate, I would just say that we anticipate them being 
completely full-fledged members of the board. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Minister, with regards to the nine artists in 
residence, I was wondering if the minister would be able to tell 
me how the nine artists in residence throughout Saskatchewan, 
what their geographic disbursement would be and, secondly, 
how they’re determined. How is artistic merit rated so that 
they’re actually appointed to be one of the nine? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, the artists in residence, the 
different communities apply, they get approval, and then they 
go through a hiring process at the local level and they pick the 
person they want. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................875 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................875 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................876 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................876 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................876 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................876 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................877 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................885 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................885 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 2003 McCannel Award 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................878 
 National Mental Health Week 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................878 
 National Forest Week 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................878 
 Family Celebrates 110th Anniversary in Saskatchewan 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................879 
 University of Saskatchewan Husky Football Camp 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................879 
 International Youth Week 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................879 
 Strengthening Our Circle 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................880 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Forest Centre 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................880 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................880 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Provincial Youth Advisory Committee Launched 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................884 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................885 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................885 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................885 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Justice — Vote 3 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................886 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................886 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................891 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................894 
 General Revenue Fund — Culture, Youth and Recreation — Vote 27 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................895 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................896 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................899 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................900 
 
 


	GOVERNMENT ORDERS
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS

