















































Hansard: May 06, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 903 
 May 6, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from people who are concerned 
about Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in the area. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington 
and Nut Mountain. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of the Moose Jaw area 
concerned about the lack of hemodialysis services. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

The signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are 
mostly from the city of Moose Jaw, but also from Caronport. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I stand on behalf of constituents of the Cypress Hills area 
that have concerns about the government’s plans as it relates to 
renewal of Crown grazing leases. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
communities of Leader, Prelate, and Empress. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the incredibly 
uncaring lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 

district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens all from the city 
of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of my 
constituency with deep concerns regarding the condition of 
Highway 47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan and 
Bienfait. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from the citizens of rural 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about access to adequate 
health care. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Rockglen, 
Fife Lake, Killdeer, Coronach, Lisieux, and Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine who are 
concerned with health care in the west central region. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from Kindersley 
and the town of Kerrobert. 
 
I so present. 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
opposed to Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 2003 premium 
increases to farmers. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Eatonia and Laporte. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. 
 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Frenchman Butte, from Loon Lake, and St. Walburg. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 13, 18, 19, 27, 36, 90, and 100. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 38 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

How much money did the government spend on The Future 
is Wide Open television advertising in the month of April 
2003; and what percentage of that advertising was inside 
Saskatchewan; and what percentage of that advertising was 
outside Saskatchewan? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other questions that I will also 
present regarding The Future is Wide Open advertising 
campaign. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
seated in your gallery are two gentlemen that I’ve known for a 
very long time. They’re both residents of Regina. One is a 
constituent and neighbour. Both are gentlemen that have been 
very actively interested and work in the areas of health care, 
promotion of better health care for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I should like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members, and I would ask you to welcome, John Bryde and 
Don Wiks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to join with the member opposite in inviting these 
two gentlemen to the Assembly today. As many members of 
this Assembly know, both of these individuals are passionate 
proponents of chelation therapy, and I think most of us have 
had the opportunity of meeting with these individuals from time 
to time. 
 
It’s a pleasure to see them in the Assembly today. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to the other members of the House, a personal 
friend of mine in the west gallery, Brendan Pyle. Brendan is a 
lawyer with the Merchant Group and he’s here to observe some 
of the proceedings today. And I’d like to welcome him and 
have other members join me welcoming him also. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Badge and Shield Awards 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last Friday, May 2, I was very pleased to be able to attend the 
2003 Badge and Shield Awards dinner in Saskatoon. The 
awards are presented each year by Saskatoon Fire & Protective 
Services and Saskatoon Police Service to community heroes in 
recognition of their voluntary service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Donna and Bill Rodway received the Saskatoon 
Police Service’s Community Volunteer Badge Award for their 
work with the victim service unit since its inception 10 years 
ago. And the Corporate Badge Award was given to Canadian 
Heritage for its support in assisting police embrace community 
diversity and creating multicultural partnerships. 
 
The Fire and Protective Shield Award went to community 
volunteer Geselle Doell. The executive director of the 
Friendship Inn has made contributions with various non-profit 
organizations and charities. And, Mr. Speaker, the Corporate 
Shield Award went to Saskatoon Co-op Home and Agro Centre, 
a long-time sponsor of public events staged by the Fire & 
Protective Services and supporter of campaigns like Fire 
Prevention Week. 
 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in addition this year marks the 100th 
anniversary of the Saskatoon Police Service, and on behalf of 
the official opposition we would like to extend our 
congratulations and commendation for their many dedicated 
years of service to Saskatoon and district. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Polonia Dance Ensemble 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 
pleasure to attend the 15th annual Polonia in Concert 
performance at the Performing Arts Centre in Regina here on 
Saturday evening, Mr. Speaker. This yearly concert of the 
Polonia Dance Ensemble of Regina demonstrates the rich 
cultural heritage of Polish Canadians. 
 
Over 350 people attended this exciting performance which 
featured the junior and senior dancers from Regina, and guest 
performers, the Polonez Dance Ensemble from Edmonton. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Polish.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Polonia Dance Ensemble and its related 
organization, the Polish Canadian Cultural Club of Regina, and 
St. Anthony’s Parish, have a well-deserved reputation and 
tradition of community activity and involvement here in the city 
of Regina. 
 
The annual concert coincides with Constitution Day, a national 
holiday in Poland that is celebrated in Polish communities 
throughout the world. The holiday remembers the constitution 
proclaimed by the Polish Sejm, or parliament, on May 3, 1791 
that attempted to reform and reorganize the old commonwealth 
of Poland-Lithuania. 
 
Congratulations to the Polonia Dance Ensemble on another 
successful concert. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Polish.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
the privilege to attend the Youth Business Excellence Awards 
last Saturday evening in North Battleford at the Tropical Inn. 
Also attending were members from Redberry Lake, Shellbrook, 
Spiritwood, and North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, YBEX (Youth Business Excellence) provides 
young people with an opportunity to explore and experience 
entrepreneurship. Since 1997, 342 students have competed in 
YBEX. YBEX is an annual event hosted by Northwest 
Community Futures to encourage youth entrepreneurship in 
west central Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the competition is open to regional students 
attending educational institutes or home school in grades 6 to 
12. Submissions are accepted in two categories: the 

development of a business idea and the accomplishment of the 
youth business venture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young entrepreneurs develop business plans, 
cash flow statements, profit and loss statements, business 
studies, as well as logos. 
 
This year there were 42 projects submitted with 76 participating 
students. Business proposals ranged from sports and leisure 
wear, delivery services, waste management services, escape 
spas, horsemanship, retractable paintbrushes, and on to ongoing 
laundry services, and many more innovative ideas. 
 
All students, educators, and mentors enjoyed a complimentary 
dinner and a fun-filled evening with youth entrepreneurs 
through exchange in new merchandise and certificates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the imagination and spirit of youth of these 
young entrepreneurs, Saskatchewan has a very bright future. 
The Saskatchewan Party is ready to be working with these 
young people to grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in the 
next 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, join me in congratulating the YBEX winners and 
all young entrepreneurs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North American Occupational 
Safety and Health Week 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 4 to 10 is the 
seventh annual North American Occupational Safety and Health 
Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week reminds us all of the critical importance 
of workplace safety. Every year thousands of Saskatchewan 
workers are injured in their workplaces or contract work-related 
illnesses. Tragically, every year Saskatchewan workers die from 
work-related injuries or illnesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all need to work together to increase public 
awareness of workplace injuries and how they can be prevented. 
For our part, we will continue to support employers and 
workers to reduce hazards through a system of shared 
responsibility. We will continue to enforce health and safety 
standards through workplace inspections, focusing on higher 
risk industries. We will continue to provide technical support to 
workplaces to address emerging issues such as SARS (severe 
acute respiratory syndrome) and West Nile virus. And we will 
continue to provide young people with information on health 
and safety practices before they reach the workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 30 years ago this province pioneered 
occupational health and safety and we know that it works. We 
also know that workplace health and safety is everyone’s 
business because when it breaks down, everyone pays the price. 
And that is why I ask all members of this Assembly to join me 
in supporting North American Safety and Health Week. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

(13:45) 
 

People of Swift Current and Area 
Replace Stolen Bicycle 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Late last month in The 
Southwest Booster, on April 26, young Alex Isinghood, 11 
years old, of Swift Current wrote a letter to the editor that goes 
as follows. He said: 
 

To the person who took my bike: 
 
I’m 11 years old and I worked very hard for a long, long 
time to save money for my new bike. 
 
Please will you return it to my house or to the police 
station. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

If you need a bike that bad, I can help you fix my old one 
and you can buy it cheap. 

 
He also says: 
 

It makes you feel good to have something honestly. It 
doesn’t when you steal. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the local morning show on the FM 
(frequency modulation) station in Swift Current, Kim Johnston 
and Jon Keen at the Eagle 94.1 saw the letter and took up the 
cause and promoted this young fellow’s case to the whole 
community and to the region. And wouldn’t you know it? The 
people of Swift Current and area responded by raising money to 
replace young Alex’s bicycle and in The Southwest Booster last 
week his mother wrote a letter thanking the Eagle 94.1 morning 
show, Kim and Jon, for their efforts, as well as Mike Kanopic 
from Canadian Tire for his help. And she concluded her letter to 
the editor with the following, Mr. Speaker. She said: 
 

To the thief, I hope you’re enjoying your new bike. My son 
has something much greater — a sense of the kindness and 
love the majority of the people in this area possess. And 
that cannot be stolen (Mr. Speaker). 

 
So thank you to the folks at the morning show at the Eagle 94.1. 
I know all of the members in the House will want to thank them 
and all of the people of Swift Current who contributed to restore 
back to him this young man’s new bicycle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women Entrepreneurs Week  
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a line from a 19th century 
book review by a man about a novel by a woman, quote: 
 

It raises the standard of what is to be expected of women 
. . . We know all about the female heart; but apparently 
there is a female brain, too. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was then; this is now. I would hope that this 
startling revelation in the 19th century is commonly accepted 

knowledge in the 21st century. And as one indication of change 
over the years, I point to the women entrepreneurs of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, while some politicians go about 
the province saying that women do not like conflict, 
Saskatchewan women entrepreneurs have quietly gone about 
their business of becoming a major driving force in our 
economy. They are using their brains and their hearts. 
 
Today 30 per cent of all businesses are owned and operated by 
women, employing 90,000 people across the province. Women 
operate home-based businesses, they serve in the corporate 
boardroom, and they have moved into the international 
marketplace as well. And our government’s Small Business 
Loans Association has provided over $11 million to women 
business owners and entrepreneurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, May 4 to 11 is Women Entrepreneurs Week, a 
time to recognize that women entrepreneurs have indeed come a 
long way with no limits to how far they can go. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Outlook Firefighting Expenses 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with concern that 
I rise in the Assembly today to talk about an issue which has 
been unresolved for nearly a year now. 
 
On two occasions last summer, June 25 and July 18, the town of 
Outlook fire department responded to field fires which had been 
started as a result of the malfunction of SaskPower equipment. 
First there was a fire in the meter box on a SaskPower 
transformer pole; then there was a downed power line which 
ignited a grass fire. 
 
The town of Outlook fire department responded to these fires 
and did an excellent job of putting them out. The town of 
Outlook then logically billed SaskPower for the services costing 
$1,400. Since then SaskPower has refused to accept any 
responsibility for these costs. 
 
I received a letter from the town of Outlook asking for my 
assistance. In January I sent a letter to the Minister of Crown 
Investments outlining the situation and asking for a solution to 
this issue. On January 17 I received a response, not from the 
minister himself but from the president of SaskPower, who 
again repeated that SaskPower is not responsible for the 
firefighting costs. 
 
Our rural communities cannot afford to be out of pocket for 
these expenses. This NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
clearly has no interest in helping these communities, nor taking 
any direct responsibility for the financial well-being. 
 
It is only logical the fires caused by SaskPower equipment 
failure should be the responsibility of SaskPower. The minister 
responsible for SaskPower and the president of SaskPower are 
willing to stick the town of Outlook for this large expense. 
Clearly the NDP has abandoned rural Saskatchewan in every 
way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investment in Minds Eye Pictures 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
In 2001 the NDP decided to get the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
into the movie business, so the government bought 15 per cent 
of a Regina movie company called Minds Eye entertainment for 
$4.5 million. Mr. Speaker, in the most recent Crown 
Investments Corporation annual report, the value of that 
investment, of that NDP investment, is now recorded at, now 
written down to $500,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister answer to the people of the 
province what happened to the $4 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first of 
all, let me point out that Minds Eye is a renowned 
Saskatchewan film production company that’s been in business 
for some 15 years. 
 
The member is correct, Mr. Speaker. The investment . . . By the 
way, the approved investment is six and a half million dollars 
and it’s been written down by 4 million as he indicated, for the 
year-end 2002, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say that it is an important investment, Mr. 
Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we 
think that it is an investment that will pay huge dividends for 
the people of Saskatchewan because Crown Investments 
Corporation believes in investing in Saskatchewan industries as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we know 
that in July 2001 the Crown Investments Corporation did invest 
4.5 million taxpayers’ dollars into this movie company and they 
bought 15 per cent of this particular company. But it doesn’t 
stop there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On December 18, 2002 the NDP cabinet approved further 
government financing for Minds Eye to a maximum of another 
$2 million. And just 13 days later — the end of the reporting 
year, the end of December of last year — 13 days after they 
approved up to $2 million, they wrote the investment off from 
4.5 million down to $500,000. They wrote off 4 million 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in light of that write-off, in light of that 
write-off, will the minister tell the House and the people of the 
province why they’d approve another $2 million to the same 
company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if the 
member from Swift Current had listened to my answer, I 

answered that question in the first answer when I said that the 
approved investment was six and a half million dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second, the second allotment of the $2 million, 
as was indicated in the order in council, Mr. Speaker, was 
subject to partnering with other private sector partners, Mr. 
Speaker. And the funds would only be advanced when there 
was other partners, Mr. Speaker. And that has been the case. It 
shows that the private sector has, and is, and will continue to 
express confidence in an industry that has tremendous potential 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the question wasn’t 
what was the total approved investment that this government 
was prepared to make in this company. That wasn’t the 
question. The question was simple. 
 
At the very time, at the very time that the cabinet, that the 
minister opposite, approved up to another $2 million investing 
in this company, at the same time they were doing that, they 
were writing off 4 million of their $4.5 million original 
investment in this company, Mr. Speaker. They wrote off $4 
million at the same time that they were going to put in another 
$2 million. 
 
And the question to the minister is simple. Why would the 
government, in the process of writing off 4 million of a $4.5 
million taxpayer investment, why would they approve up to 
another $2 million in this company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well let me get this straight, Mr. 
Speaker. That Sask Party member now opposes a strategy that 
would leverage private sector money, Mr. Speaker, that would 
support an industry that has gone, Mr. Speaker, from in the 
1980s, $5 million in production to $50 million, Mr. Speaker — 
$50 million. It supports some 700 jobs in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would he be opposed to a strategy that would 
leverage private sector money, Mr. Speaker? Answer that 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what the taxpayers 
would be very concerned about — what they would be opposed 
to, Mr. Speaker — is a government, an NDP government, who 
has already lost $4 million of their $4.5 million that they’ve 
invested on behalf of the taxpayers, and then in response to that 
loss approve another 2 . . . up to $2 million more. That’s what 
they would be opposed to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the coverage of this particular 
development in the Leader-Post not . . . just a few months ago, 
the president of Minds Eye also told the same daily newspaper 
that his company will need more government money in 2004. 
That’s what Minds Eye is currently saying. 
 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

Will the minister please outline for the House how much more 
money is the NDP government prepared to pour into Minds 
Eye, based on the comments of this company official? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do want to 
— before I answer the question again, Mr. Speaker — I do want 
to point out that as we speak, Mr. DeWalt is actually speaking 
with, meeting with Minister Sheila Copps, discussing the 
industry here in our province. And I think the federal 
government is interested in what’s transpiring here in 
Saskatchewan as well. 
 
And by the way, may I say as an aside, I do want to 
congratulate Mr. DeWalt on his recent election as president of 
the Saskatchewan Film Producers Association. So 
congratulations to him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the strategy that was employed in last year, at the 
end of the year, when we agreed to advance the additional 
funding, Mr. Speaker, was that we would only advance funds as 
they were partnered with by the private sector, Mr. Speaker. Is 
there anything wrong with that; anything that would leverage 
private sector money to enhance the film industry here in our 
province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the president . . . the article I was 
referring to in the Leader-Post dated January 17 of this year 
says, and I quote: 
 

DeWalt also said Minds Eye will likely approach its 
investors, including CIC, for more money in 2004. 

 
How much more money is the government prepared to put into 
this company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
answer to the question is that we have said that we would 
partner with people right across our province, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’ve done that, Mr. Speaker, in many sectors. 
 
And we’ve shown, Mr. Speaker, on this investment portfolio — 
to the year-end last year, by the way — in addition to creating 
all of those jobs, we produced for the people of Saskatchewan a 
profit of $11.6 million that we can return back for services here 
in our province, Mr. Speaker. You compare that to any 
investment portfolio that largely, I would speculate in most 
portfolios, lost money last year. So in addition to making 
money for the people of Saskatchewan, we created jobs. 
 
The answer to the question is, any proposal that comes forward 
that will create jobs in our province, Mr. Speaker, that makes 
sense, we will absolutely give it serious consideration. What we 
will not do though, Mr. Speaker, is give consideration to any 
more music halls of fame, Mr. Speaker, in Swift Current, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister made the 
announcement, when the minister made the announcement of 
the original investment, here’s what he said, and I quote: 
 

We expect . . . to benefit Saskatchewan people through 
both a good financial return, and more jobs . . . 

 
That’s what the minister said. The minister was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, members. Order, please, 
members. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, when the announcement 
of the original investment was made on behalf of taxpayers by 
this NDP government, the minister was more than happy to get 
involved with the announcement. And he indicated, and I quote: 
 

We expect . . . to benefit Saskatchewan people through 
both a good financial return, and more jobs . . . (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
Well fair enough. Now it’s time for the minister to weigh in 
again on another important issue with respect to Minds Eye 
Pictures. Minds Eye Pictures officials are saying they will be 
going to the government for more money in 2004. How much 
more is the government prepared to pour into this company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, we have a vision for this province and this vision, 
this vision includes being proud of the stories that our producers 
tell, that our actors, our writers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, 
anybody who would take the approach the opposition has taken 
would not know what a huge contribution Minds Eye Pictures 
has made to the development of film production in this 
province. There would likely not be this level of a film industry 
to even discuss if it were not for his significant efforts around 
the world on Saskatchewan’s behalf. 
 
I have in my hand news story after news story about film 
production in this province. That’s because strategic 
investments have been made in a good company. And I’d add, 
Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t a place in the world where film did 
not suffer a downturn from September 11, and this company is 
not exempt from what happened to every other producer in the 
world. 
 
This is a good company. Quit ragging on our investors and start 
being proud of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that minister, that minister that just 
stood up to answer, was asked about the investing of taxpayers’ 
dollars in this particular money-losing venture. And here’s what 
she said last January. That minister told CBC (Canadian 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

 

Broadcasting Corporation), and I quote: “. . . to ask a business 
about what they plan to do in the future,” Mr. Speaker, she said 
that wasn’t any of her business. 
 
She said it’s not her job, it’s not her job to ask, quote, “to ask a 
business about what they plan to do in the future.” 
 
Right at that time she knew, Mr. Speaker, that the Government 
of Saskatchewan had already written off 4 million of a $4.5 
million investment on the taxpayers’ behalf. And even though 
they had done that, they’d approved another 2 million more. 
 
So has the minister changed her opinion? Does the minister 
now believe that it might be a wise thing to do, to ask a little bit, 
ask a few questions about multi-million-dollar investments they 
make on taxpayers’ behalf? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that this 
company and these projects have had more business plans and 
scrutiny than the Country Music Hall of Fame that the member 
opposite was responsible for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — All that being said, I agree with some 
of the things that the Hill family said last night at their event, 
the 100 years of being in business. They said, you have to keep 
your eye on the long term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is an industry that in each and every year has been on a 
trajectory of growth, producing more jobs, more investment, 
more people who know about Saskatchewan, and more local 
work for our cultural workers, our producers, and our 
technicians. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re behind this industry 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the fact that the 
government has already written off $4 million, we know that in 
December last year they approved another $2 million, up to $2 
million more, for this particular investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: will the NDP 
government receive more equity in Minds Eye for its $2 million 
if all of that is needed? Will the $2 million going to Minds Eye 
be a loan? Which is it, Mr. Speaker? Will the minister answer 
that question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I think 
I’ve answered this question. They’re just going to keep asking 
it, Mr. Speaker; it doesn’t matter how many times you answer 
them. 
 
The approval for the additional $2 million, Mr. Speaker, was 
subject to — I repeat, subject to — partnering from the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker. Some of that has now received partnering 
from the private sector, Mr. Speaker. None of the money will be 
released until there is partnering from the private sector. But 
this is a good thing that you can leverage private sector money 

to continue to build an industry that’s gone from $5 million to 
$50 million, Mr. Speaker, and employs some 700 people in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. We ask a 
specific question to that minister and that minister answers; and 
then we ask a specific question to that minister and that minister 
answers, Mr. Speaker. We ask the Premier, through you, just 
someone answer the question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If that minister is prepared to get up and now get into the debate 
again, I’ll go back to the question with respect to the 
government’s intention in 2003-2004. The president of this 
company has said they’ll need more government money. Will 
the minister tell the Assembly and the taxpayers how much 
more of their money is he prepared to risk on this venture this 
year and next? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess 
we thought if we had two ministers up answering questions at 
least one of us could explain to them, Mr. Speaker, what the 
answer was, Mr. Speaker — and they might understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again, any proposals that come forward to 
this government and to the CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) board, Mr. Speaker, any 
proposals that come forward, we will give consideration to. Any 
proposal that’s going to create jobs and has a sound business 
plan . . . (inaudible) . . . we will give consideration to. 
 
It’s an important industry. It now has some 700 jobs. We’ve 
gone from $5 million to $50 million in productions. Last year 
was a down year, as was explained, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation as a result of 9/11, 
Mr. Speaker. But we will absolutely give consideration to 
further proposals that are brought forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Insurance Program 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the Minister 
of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, after two years of a severe drought 
in our province, many farm families are being hit with a triple 
whammy by crop insurance. 
 
First, there’s a 52 per cent premium hike. Second, many are 
seeing their coverage levels reduced because the long-term 
average yields have fallen after two straight years of a drought. 
And third — and here, Mr. Speaker, is what came as a big 
surprise to a lot of the producers — is that some farmers are 
being hit with a significant premium surcharge because they 
had big claims in the last couple of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the reason for the surcharge? Why are 
farmers being penalized for making crop insurance claims 
during the last two years of drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, if the member knew 
something about crop insurance, she would be able to know the 
answer to this. But the reality is, is that the member opposite 
knows very little about crop insurance. Because it’s the member 
opposite who said, Mr. Speaker, that you should be amortizing 
crop insurance out over a period of nine years to protect farmers 
in Saskatchewan and load up the premiums for producers to a 
far greater degree than they are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the crop insurance program today what 
happens, Mr. Speaker, is if in fact you have a . . . You have a 
premium discount. If in fact you’ve had a claim against your 
crop over the years, the premium discount kicks in, and you’re 
seeing this year, Mr. Speaker, a reduction in the premium 
discount for some of the producers. That’s what the member’s 
going. 
 
She should know something about that, Mr. Speaker. But when 
you talk about farm policy and you talk about agriculture safety 
nets and you talk about programs, she speaks on behalf of her 
leader, Mr. Speaker. And every time she speaks on behalf of her 
leader, she costs Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers money, 
Mr. Speaker, every time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of humorous that that 
minister keeps on talking about how he has all the answers for 
agriculture. Maybe he should check the polls and see if the 
producers think that he have all the answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, recently the minister would 
have received an e-mail from a Wakaw area farmer who calls it 
a double kick in the head. He says, the premium are up by 85 
per cent this year and it includes a 26 per cent surcharge for the 
claim that he made in 2001. And he says, and I quote: 
 

This tells me I must be responsible for the weather and 
must have caused the drought since I’m being penalized for 
having to use my policy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why is the crop insurance program that is to be 
enhanced, penalizing the producers who need to use the 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ve already answered the question to the 
member in terms of the premium discounts. And that would 
apply also to the member, Mr. Speaker, is that . . . or applies to 
the member from Wakaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite and to this House, Mr. 
Speaker, every time that the member gets on her feet on behalf 
of the Saskatchewan Party, they talk about not . . . talk about 
issues. And I want to say here, Mr. Speaker, on the 
Saskatchewan Party opinion, on The StarPhoenix of 
Wednesday, April 26, Mr. Speaker, and what does the member 
say? And here’s what, I quote, it says: 
 

. . . while Hermanson’s Saskatchewan Party hasn’t exactly 

articulated . . . (any) detailed . . . (cohesive) platform . . . 
 

No platform, Mr. Speaker, on agriculture. Never mind anything 
on education or health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For the member opposite to stand up today and articulate any 
kind of issue around agriculture, Mr. Speaker, the media and the 
members opposite and the farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, would say that there is no plan from the Saskatchewan 
Party. There is no farm policy, Mr. Speaker, on agriculture. And 
every time they get involved in a debate in agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, they take money out of Saskatchewan producers’ 
farms. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the 
minister can recognize that the opposition party stands up and 
talks about issues, when all they do is stand up and talk about 
rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the surcharge seems very 
unfair. The NDP can continue to tell farm families that the main 
farm safety net program is crop insurance. Yet when we have a 
drought and they wind up making crop insurance claims, they 
end up getting penalized in subsequent years with a premium 
surcharge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that this surcharge probably exists to 
penalize poor farming practices. But drought is not a poor 
farming practice, Mr. Speaker. It’s a problem that hit nearly 
every farmer in Saskatchewan at least once, and in some areas 
twice. And this is all on top of a 52 per cent premium hike, Mr. 
Speaker. Why are the producers being penalized for two straight 
years of a drought that was out of their control? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
should know that when in fact you have two years of 
consecutive drought like we had in the province, that somebody 
needs to pay the premium. And the premium is paid, Mr. 
Speaker, by an injection of $150 million from the federal 
government, brand new money, of which we found, Mr. 
Speaker, an additional hundred . . . and $100 million from the 
provincial government, and an increase in the premium charged 
for the producers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because insurances work that way, Mr. Speaker. When in fact 
you pay out the premium, you have to collect it back. And the 
member from Canora should know that, Mr. Speaker, having 
been in the business of selling insurance, Mr. Speaker. When 
insurance claims are higher in the private sector, what happens? 
The premiums go up to recover the costs, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what happens in agriculture as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you should just read, you 
should just read the debate of which the member from Wilkie 
said, Mr. Speaker. Because their agenda, as the member for 
Wilkie says, is that we should be selling the crop insurance 
agency, Mr. Speaker, and having the private sector sell 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

 

insurance in Saskatchewan. That’s what the member from 
Wilkie said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Response to Excess Rainfall in Wadena Area 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, we all know that 
weather-related problems have caused much upheaval in the 
agriculture sector over the last two years in particular, and for 
some areas that problem is continuing. Mr. Speaker, the 
Wadena area received in excess of 2 feet of rain last fall. That, 
combined with early frost and snowfall, caused significant crop 
damage and conditions that made harvesting impossible. Now 
there’s heavy spring rains in that area and it’s still hampering 
efforts to get the crop off, let alone let the farm families get on 
with the business of seeding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning the RM (rural municipality) of 
Sasman No. 336 declared itself in a disaster situation because of 
these problems. How does the minister plan to deal with the 
RM and the farm families that are in a disaster situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’ll continue to do what we’ve been 
doing for Saskatchewan agriculture and Saskatchewan farmers, 
Mr. Speaker, and speaking out on their behalf in full force as 
we have over the last several years, Mr. Speaker. Because it’s 
this government that, on this side of the House, where we got 
the additional $600 million for farmers for Canada. And we get 
$183 million this year and last year. That’s happened because of 
our work here, Mr. Speaker. We got additional increases to the 
crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker, this year taking the 
federal amount from $100 million to $150 million to have a 
larger, larger package for Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
And we got some trade injury money, Mr. Speaker, for 
Canadian farmers and for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be there for farmers who experience 
drought like we did last year, and we’ll be there for those 
farmers, Mr. Speaker, who experience flooding this year. 
Because on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re building 
farm agricultural programs for the betterment of agriculture in 
Saskatchewan, Canadian farmers, while on that side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, every time they get involved, they cost 
farmers money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what farmers in Saskatchewan 
know is that for two years in a row this government has cut 
spending to agriculture. Mr. Speaker, crops that could not be 
harvested last fall have suffered significant wildlife damage, 
and now they’re starting to sprout. The fields are too wet to put 
machinery on, and it’s going to take at least a week’s worth of 
hot, dry weather before that can be attempted. The crops are 
literally worthless and the losses for these farm families are 
significant. 
 
(14:15) 
 

Mr. Speaker, farmers with crop insurance presently can’t 
receive payment for their crop losses until the harvest out in the 
field is picked up. Given the circumstances and the field 
conditions, is Crop Insurance considering any flexibility in 
dealing with the farmers in this situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we already have within 
the crop insurance program capacity today to provide for 
farmers where they don’t seed because it’s too wet or we have 
reseeding programs where it’s too dry, Mr. Speaker. We’ll have 
additional support for farmers under the crop insurance program 
if in fact they aren’t able to seed this year — and because on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we have articulated a 
variety of different options for Saskatchewan producers on 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, this is what the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 
says on Wednesday, April 16, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 
difference between us on this side of the House on agriculture 
policy and theirs. Where the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, and this 
is what the quote is, Mr. Speaker, and it says this: 
 

(Mr.) Hermanson’s Saskatchewan Party hasn’t . . . 
(actually) articulated a detailed or . . . (cohesive) platform 
on agriculture . . . 

 
Because they don’t have one, Mr. Speaker. And they recognize 
that. 

 
And in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, and the Leader-Post says 
this, Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday, April 16. The Leader-Post 
says this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The relatively low support from Mr. Hermanson suggests 
that people don’t really know where they stand (Mr. 
Speaker), on health care, on education, on agriculture (Mr. 
Speaker), because they have . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order. 
Ministerial statements. Order, please, members. Order. Order, 
please, members. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
beginning of my statement, with leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to introduce a person who really needs no introduction, but 
is a guest here in this legislature today, Michael Jackson, chief 
of protocol for the province of Saskatchewan. 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

Now Michael not only makes sure we put our best foot forward, 
but makes sure we put the correct foot forward. And he helps to 
create an exciting and enjoyable event for the whole 
Saskatchewan community when we have a royal visit. 
 
So please join me in welcoming Mr. Jackson today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Visit to Saskatchewan by His Royal Highness 
the Earl of Wessex 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, last December the 
Premier announced that Their Royal Highnesses, the Earl and 
Countess of Wessex, would visit Saskatchewan in June of this 
year to help us celebrate some of the significant anniversaries 
and take part in a number of special events. 
 
This morning it was announced by Buckingham Palace that the 
Earl and Countess of Wessex are expecting their first child in 
December. And I’m sure all the members will join me in 
congratulating the royal couple on this very happy news. 
 
Now we have been advised by the private secretary to the Earl 
and Countess of Wessex that Her Royal Highness will not be 
able to join her husband on the visit to Saskatchewan in June. 
And while we are obviously disappointed by the change in plan, 
we think Saskatchewan people will understand. 
 
It’s now my pleasure to announce the itinerary for the royal 
visit as agreed today with the office of the Earl of Wessex. 
 
The program of the first day, June 19, will be in Regina. The 
visit begins with a public welcome in the morning in the 
legislative grounds during which the Earl of Wessex will turn 
the sod for the Golden Jubilee statue of the Queen on her 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) horse, Burmese, and 
inaugurate the Prince Edward meeting room in the Legislative 
Building. 
 
At noon the Earl will celebrate Regina centennial at city hall, 
followed by a civic luncheon. In the afternoon the Earl will tour 
the Regina Sound Stage. In the evening he will attend a special 
performance at the Globe Theatre. 
 
We can all be proud that since 1992, Prince Edward has been 
the royal patron of the Globe Theatre — the first, and to date, 
only patronage that His Royal Highness has granted in Canada. 
 
On June 20, the Earl of Wessex travels to Lloydminster to mark 
the city centennial and attend a civic luncheon. 
 
The next stop is Prince Albert where His Royal Highness will 
officially open the E.A. Rawlinson Centre for the Arts and 
participate in Urban Treaty Days. 
 
The other engagement of the day is at Melfort, also celebrating 
its centennial, where the Earl will inaugurate Prince Edward 
Park. 
 
In Regina on June 21, National Aboriginal Day, the Earl takes 

part in the official opening of the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College at the University of Regina. Prince Edward 
will then present the Duke of Edinburgh Gold Awards to young 
people from Saskatchewan and other provinces. In the evening 
the Lieutenant Governor hosts a dinner for the royal visitor at 
Government House. 
 
The Earl of Wessex will spend June 22 in Moose Jaw. After 
attending Sunday service at St. John’s Anglican Church, he 
participates in a military ceremony with the Saskatchewan 
Dragoons, an army reserve unit. 
 
The Premier and Mrs. Calvert then host a provincial luncheon 
in Moose Jaw. And during the afternoon, the Earl will open the 
city’s cultural centre and take part in Moose Jaw’s centennial 
celebrations in Crescent Park. The last engagement is a visit at 
the Moose Jaw fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a busy program, and we are grateful to the 
Earl of Wessex for responding so generously to our invitations, 
and I know that the people of our province will extend a very 
warm Saskatchewan welcome to our royal visitor. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition I would like to join with the minister in 
congratulating the Earl and Countess of Wessex on the happy 
news. We understand the importance and the benefit of children 
and that it is children that make a family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are pleased to see that Prince Edward will continue his visit 
to Saskatchewan to participate in events across Saskatchewan, 
including Regina, Lloydminster, P.A. (Prince Albert), and 
Melfort, Mr. Speaker, as well as back in Regina again. The 
people of Saskatchewan I know are looking forward to this 
visit, Mr. Speaker, and are disappointed that the Countess will 
not be able to attend, because I know that a number of people 
across the province were looking forward to the opportunity to 
meet both Edward and Sophie when they visited Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look forward to the excitement of the royal 
visit and the visit to Saskatchewan, and I know that 
Saskatchewan people will open their hearts to Prince Edward 
when he is here. And I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, to extend an invitation to Prince Edward, to Sophie, 
the Countess of Wessex, and to their new family, to visit 
Saskatchewan as soon as is possible. And we look forward to 
this visit and to their next, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Water Quality Recognition Day Act 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 202, The Water Quality Recognition Day Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and respond to 
written questions no. 157 through 183 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 157 to 183 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Non-Confidence Motion 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think, 
having listened through question period today and the evasive 
answers that we’ve been receiving from the government, it’s 
certainly appropriate that we have this motion brought forward 
before the Assembly today. 
 
And I’d like to begin by reading a quote, and this is the quote. It 
says: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to provide ample time for others to 
enter into this debate and so let me conclude with what I 
believe is my central point. My central point is that we have 
a crisis of confidence in the province of Saskatchewan, 
(and) that we have a government that has been stripped of 
its credibility, a government that has no longer the 
confidence of the people, a government that no longer 
seems to have a vision or a clear direction; in short, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I believe, a government that has lost the 
capacity to govern. 
 
And in a democracy — (and) I repeat — in any democracy 
. . . in any nation, in any nation when a government has lost 
the confidence of its people, when a government is stripped 
of its credibility, when a government has no vision, then it 
is time to defeat that government and give another group of 
men and women the opportunity to govern. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this quote comes out of Hansard, March 27, 1990. 
It was given by the current member for the Saskatoon 
Riversdale riding and, Mr. Speaker, I agree wholeheartedly with 
that member’s viewpoint. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that what we are 
seeing today, we are seeing a government that is in disarray. We 
see a government that doesn’t have a vision for the province of 
Saskatchewan. We see a government that is stripped of its 
credibility. We see a government that it’s time for that 
government and indeed this Premier, Mr. Speaker, to call an 
election. Because, Mr. Speaker, I’m not exactly sure if we’ve 
seen a period in time when the province and the people of 
Saskatchewan have not been waiting for and expecting an 
election in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the members this 

afternoon and the questions that were being placed by my 
colleagues and the responses being given by the ministers in 
this afternoon’s question period, one has to really ask 
themselves . . . In fact, I would say you don’t even have to ask 
yourself whether or not we need an election. I think it’s very 
obvious. We need an election because there is a lack of 
confidence. 
 
And even on the backbenches of this government, I sense that 
there’s a sense and a feeling of unease. And I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that is why this Premier has decided that it would be 
inappropriate to call an election at this time in his mandate. 
 
Well I reserve that, that it isn’t his mandate. This Premier was 
elected as the Leader of the NDP of Saskatchewan in 2000, Mr. 
Speaker, and this Premier really does not have the confidence of 
the people of Saskatchewan to be the Premier because he’s just 
filled the chair. He has not been willing to call the election to 
give the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to determine 
whether or not they want this Premier to fill the Premier’s chair 
in the province of Saskatchewan, or whether or not they would 
prefer to have the opposition leader move across the aisle and 
give a sense of direction and vision for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so . . . Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there are so many reasons why the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking forward to an election. And in fact, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you talk to people across this province 
and as you — in fact you don’t really have to talk to people any 
more; you just go and start visiting with people, and it doesn’t 
matter what community, you don’t have to be in your 
constituency — as you walk into a community and people 
would see you coming down the road or the street and they 
recognize you, and the first question they ask is when are we 
going to have an election? 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, right 
across the city of Saskatoon you’re finding people asking when 
are we going to have an election? When is this Premier going to 
screw up his courage and call an election? We went into the city 
of Prince Albert, Mr. Deputy Speaker. People are asking when 
will this Premier call an election, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Or, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if you go into the city of Moose Jaw, people 
are asking — and I’m sure the member from Moose Jaw South 
is getting the question — when are you going to call an 
election? Or Moose Jaw North, pardon me, Moose Jaw North, 
pardon me, and Moose Jaw South as well — I’m sure both of 
them are getting the same question, when are you going to call 
an election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe they’re aware of the same 
issues that the opposition members are aware of. They’re aware 
of the fact that there has been so many situations arise in their 
backbenches, in the front benches, in their leadership or lack 
thereof, that to call an election today would be folly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I happen to have been here in the late ’80s 
when a number of members that are sitting currently on the 
government side of the House . . . And I’ll give you credit, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you weren’t sitting here at that time so you 
weren’t part of the action. However, a number of members who 
are sitting on this side of the House basically declared in the 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

late ’80s that they were going to make this province 
ungovernable. And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just showed 
an irresponsible attitude. However, I think they did a very good 
job of making the province ungovernable. 
 
(14:30) 
 
However, since their election in 1991, I’ve yet to see where 
they have given a clear and concise direction and vision for the 
people of Saskatchewan, or indeed for people who have left this 
province to look at Saskatchewan as a place to come back to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have so much to offer. We all agree 
with that. We have so much to offer in this province, and yet 
people continue to leave the province of Saskatchewan. They 
go to our universities. In fact the number of young men and 
women entering our university campuses in this province, 
entering SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), continue to increase as young men and women 
realize the benefits of furthering and enhancing their education. 
And so they enter our universities and colleges, only to find in 
recent surveys that over 50 per cent of them, before they even 
graduate, have made up their mind to leave the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we need young men and women living in the 
province, earning good salaries, and helping the rest of us pay 
taxes so that we can provide educational opportunities, we can 
provide the health benefits for the men and women and the 
seniors of our province down the road, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
But unfortunately the direction that this government is giving us 
is sending the wrong message. 
 
There are a few issues that I think I would have to suggest are 
. . . have been positive moves. But by and large, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I speak this afternoon, there’s a number of issues 
that I want to raise as to why we should . . . this Premier and 
this government should call an election today. 
 
But let me just give a couple areas that I believe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the government has shown that they have a bit of 
sense where they should be going on issues such as highway 
construction. Well there’s some major work that needs to be 
done in the area of the Moosomin constituency and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we will continue to hammer on that. 
 
The facts are the government finally in . . . two years ago 
realized they had to begin to put more money back into the 
highways budget. And as a result of that, we see an expanded 
role of twinning the No. 1 Highway and twinning the 
Yellowhead highway from Saskatoon through to the Alberta 
border, and then with the federal government coming forward 
with additional spending, expenditures this year, expanding that 
twinning process. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people across this 
province appreciate that, especially when we look at trade and 
we look at tourism. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, tourism just doesn’t depend on 
a traffic flow east to west, from the Manitoba border to the 
Alberta border, or from Brandon, Manitoba through to 
Edmonton, Alberta. Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk tourism, 
we talk of people coming from the south of us, our neighbours 

to the south coming to our province. And we talk of individuals, 
we talk about people coming from Eastern Canada and from 
Western Canada and we want them to stop in the province of 
Saskatchewan as they’re driving through. As we look at 
twinned highways and an upgraded twinning system and a 
better highway mechanism to flow east and west, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we want people to begin to stop and visit 
Saskatchewan because we do have a lot to offer. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we continue to see not only our 
young people leaving this province and walking with their feet 
. . . speaking with their feet as they leave the province, we also 
see the fact that people just drive through our province, rather 
than taking the time to experience the benefits in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area — and I’ll give some credit to the 
member from Moose Jaw North — is some of the changes that 
have been made in the area of community and resource 
development, the formerly . . . the minister of Social Services. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are a few issues there that I believe 
the government has been on the right track. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon we heard the Minister of 
Agriculture lamenting the fact that the Sask Party has not laid 
out its agricultural guidelines. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the 
Minister of Agriculture wants to see the Saskatchewan Party’s 
farm policy, he can turn to his colleague to his right and ask 
him to call an election and he will get the Saskatchewan Party 
agricultural policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will give . . . One other 
bouquet I’ll pass to the government — before I move on and get 
into the litany of debacles that have happened within this 
government — is the fact that in 1999 the Saskatchewan Party 
spoke about a speed limit of 110 kilometres on all our divided 
highways, and we’ve been speaking about that for a number of 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And lo and behold, lo and behold, 
while the Minister of Highways and while this government has 
continually said no, we will not increase our speed limits, I 
believe the public of Saskatchewan must have . . . their voice 
must have been, become loud enough. And then, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the fact that the Saskatchewan Party stood on 
increasing speed limits. And coming close to an election — and 
it would seem to me the announcement on the 110 kilometre 
speed limit came very close at a time when the province of 
Saskatchewan was certainly looking at calling an election and 
they were trying to salvage some of the ridings — that they’re 
trying to hold on to in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy if this government is really serious about their 
vision, about their plan, about how they’re going to grow this 
province, then why don’t they go to the people of . . . the 
public? Why don’t they call an election and let the people of 
Saskatchewan determine whether or not they have that plan, 
that vision? 
 
If this Premier believes he has a mandate, if this Premier 
believes he knows where he’s going, if this Premier has 
something to offer the people of Saskatchewan, then call the 
election. But I suspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Premier has 
gone over the same comments he made in 1990 and he’s looked 
at it, he said, oh my gosh, oh my gosh. What I said in 1990 
about a government being stripped of its credibility — that’s us; 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

 

a government that has no longer the confidence of the people — 
that’s me; a government that no longer seems to have a vision 
or a clear direction — that’s us. 
 
And I believe as the Premier today is looking back over some of 
his former comments and saying hmm, based on what happened 
in 1991, maybe we need to ride this out a little longer. Maybe 
we need to carry on this debate a little longer so that the people 
. . . Hoping the people of Saskatchewan will forget about all the 
issues that have arisen over the last little while and the reasons 
why. If this Premier would screw up his courage and call an 
election today, that this . . . many of the members on that side of 
the Assembly would find themselves sitting on this side of the 
Assembly while the rest of them would not be back in this, in 
this Legislative Building. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I are going to take some 
time today and give this Premier all the reasons why he should 
call an election. I suspect however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s 
not going to accept our reasons for calling an election at this 
time. And I suspect that, because of the fact that the polling that 
the NDP is doing right now probably isn’t much different than 
the polling that the Saskatchewan Party continues to do or even 
the polling that the Leader-Post and the major newspapers have 
done in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people in 
Saskatchewan do have a long memory. The people in 
Saskatchewan remember back to 1991, and the people in 
Saskatchewan remember that they voted in 1991 for a change. 
And the people in Saskatchewan at that time thought they were 
getting a real change. They didn’t realize when they went to the 
polls in 1991 . . . The agriculture community didn’t realize 
when they went to the polls in 1991 that the agricultural safety 
net or the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program of 
that day, which had been implemented, which was being 
worked on to simplify and to address some of the major issues 
with it, would be soon unilaterally changed and done away with 
— ripped out from underneath their feet. 
 
And the agriculture producers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have not 
forgotten that; 12 years later they have not forgotten that. And 
they look at this Minister of Agriculture and they look at what 
this Minister of Agriculture has done, and the Minister of 
Agriculture says they love him. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
glad to see that he thinks that because if he goes out and talks to 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan, he’ll find that there 
isn’t a lot of love lost between the farmers’ agriculture 
community of Saskatchewan and this Minister of Agriculture 
who even in this year’s budget has removed another 41 or $51 
million from agricultural spending in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at the budget that’s been laid 
out, one has to ask themselves exactly what pull this Minister of 
Agriculture has even in this budget, allowing his budget to be 
decimated at a time when the farmers of . . . agriculture 
producers in Saskatchewan have been facing such a difficult 
time in their history. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t have to go too far. We see some 
of the difficulties. If you left the city of Regina and you drove 
up through Fort Qu’Appelle and through Melville and up into 

Yorkton and to the Canora area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you 
look at the acres and acres of unharvested crop that is still 
sitting out in that area. 
 
And my colleague, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, 
today spoke about the difficulties farmers in her area are facing 
as a result of the excessive moisture they had last fall. And 
don’t get me wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there aren’t many 
farmers who will complain about moisture because we’ve seen 
such a large area of the province over the past two years in a 
devastating drought. And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some 
areas are still facing that. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you have conditions that 
you have no control over, you look to government to give some 
direction through policies to help you address those shortfalls so 
that you can continue to survive. And when we talk about 
insurance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not talking about 
government putting up all the money, we’re talking about 
farmers working hand in hand with provincial and federal 
governments to ensure their livelihood. And in many cases the 
insurance they’re carrying barely covers their costs but at least 
it gives them something to work with, something to build upon 
for looking forward to a new future. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, springtime is a time of hope. For 
many producers in the province of Saskatchewan even this year, 
despite the areas that have gotten more moisture, are feeling a 
sense of doom and just really trying to come to grips with how 
they’re going to address their farming situation. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of the fact that 
there’s crop, acres and acres of crop that continue to, or need to 
be harvested before producers can even think of putting crop in 
the ground. So it’s going to impact significantly their seeding 
intentions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, and as a result of that . . . And when I 
think about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you think of some of 
the crops out there, canola for example, I’m not exactly sure 
that there’s going to be a lot left in that swath. Most of that 
swath’s going to have shelled out, and actually very little . . . 
other than you have to do something with it to get it off the 
field, as you can see, but as you put your machine through it it’s 
an expense for a very little return. 
 
And I think it’s time the crop insurance came up with a policy 
whereby its adjusters could go out and look at a crop — 
basically we had it back in the mid-’80s — where the adjusters 
could go out and look at a crop and basically say, you know this 
crop really is valueless, there’s nothing here. 
 
It’s not just the oil seeds, the canola, Mr. Deputy Speaker; it’s 
the cereal grains. Some of the individuals . . . In fact my 
colleague was talking about his brother taking off 160 acres of 
barley. And what he had left in his hopper, Mr. Speaker, was a 
measly pittance of what he would have expected to harvest last 
fall, but most of it was only 38-bushel barley at best, plus 
excrement from wildlife damage, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it seems to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of the day, 
crop insurance is still going to be making out fairly significant 
payments to a lot of producers. And you would begin to think 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

that maybe it’s time we had a policy where we could identify 
what is worthless and not worth the effort of harvesting, write 
that off, pay out the crop insurance program that is needed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and get on with putting the crop in the ground. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture doesn’t 
want to see that. He wants people to expend more money, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So it just . . . What I’m saying, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, people across this province are just becoming fed up 
with the lack of direction and lack of vision that the province 
has. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about agriculture and we talk 
about GRIP. What about the urban community, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP Party was elected government in 
1991. And I remember a by-election in 1989, a by-election in 
the Shaunavon area where the NDP Party of the day sent out a 
letter to the people of the constituency and said, if you elect a 
Conservative MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) — 
at that time it was a Conservative government — you re-elect a 
Conservative MLA, they will close the five hospitals you have 
in your constituency. So vote for us, because we won’t close 
them. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And yet, what happened after the 1989 election? Well yes, the 
people of Shaunavon sent a Conservative MLA to the 
Legislative Assembly. In 1991, the people of Shaunavon 
decided however that they would send an NDP MLA to the 
province of Saskatchewan to be part of the Roy Romanow 
government. 
 
And guess what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Those five hospitals that 
they accused the former government of closing weren’t closed. 
Very shortly after they were elected, they closed most of those 
hospitals. In fact, not just in Shaunavon, but they closed 
hospitals across the province of Saskatchewan. I think at the 
end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some 53 hospitals were 
closed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if you think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people have 
forgotten about the legacy that this government has undertaken 
since it was elected in 1991, think again. Many, many people, 
people on waiting lists — waiting to see specialists, waiting for 
surgery, having to deal with painful health experiences while 
they wait for an opportunity to see a doctor to have their 
situation addressed — have not forgotten the legacy that this 
province . . . that this government has put on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I find very interesting . . . And we’ve 
certainly over the . . . Through the ’90s, we’ve given the 
government some credit for their ability to manage the economy 
of the province of Saskatchewan. But as I look at the 
government’s own financial documents that were received most 
recently in the budget speech, what I found very interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that the gross debt of this province . . . And I 
believe back in 1991, when the government was elected, the 
gross debt of the province was in the neighbourhood of just 
over $12 billion. Today that gross debt in the province of 

Saskatchewan is over $13 billion. Some 11 years later, while 
we were supposedly seeing reductions in the debt in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we’ve actually seen a growth in the 
debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not going to just use the 
government’s own document — although the government’s 
own document certainly proves that it hasn’t been as open and 
honest with the people of Saskatchewan as they’re trying to tell 
us they are — but I’d like to, I’d like to look at the auditor’s 
statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When you look at the auditor’s 
statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a line in here that shows 
the budget estimates and the expenditures of government 
regarding the government’s management of the economy. And I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture would 
like to get into this debate and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will 
certainly give him the opportunity. I just wanted to let the 
Minister of Agriculture know as well that there will be ample 
time in the debate because this debate can go on to infinity as 
we debate the issue of why the government should call an 
election. 
 
But I’d like, and I’d like to point out a couple things here. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the auditor’s Fall Report Volume No. 1, the 
auditor gives a broad picture of the expenditures of government 
from 1991 through to November of 2002. And what does the 
government point out? The government . . . The auditor points 
out that in 1991 the accumulated deficit at the end of the year 
was 7.89 . . . eight seven nine billion dollars . . . $7.879 billion. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you follow that, if you follow that line 
across the page, what you see today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
accumulated deficit at the end of the year for 2002 is $8.708 
billion. Mr. Speaker, almost a billion dollars of growth . . . of 
debt, growth in the debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And another issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think the people 
of Saskatchewan need to know about, and I’d just like to point 
out to the people of Saskatchewan, and I think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what caused the public sector to take the government 
to task is the issue of unfunded pension liabilities in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the unfunded pension plan in the province 
of Saskatchewan in this . . . since 1991 has . . . In 1991 the 
unfunded pension liability was $2.7 billion; today that unfunded 
pension liability is over $4 billion, Mr. Speaker, over $4 billion. 
And you have to ask yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here are . . . 
There’s every reason here why the people of Saskatchewan are 
calling for the opportunity to go to the polls and have an 
election. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the former minister of Finance could 
argue about how well he had done at balancing the books of 
Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker, pardon me, 
Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is look at the auditor’s 
statements, look at the auditor’s documents, Mr. Speaker. You 
just look . . . have to look at the government’s own financial 
documents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you have to ask yourself, 
exactly what has this government done to create any confidence 
for the people living outside of this province — even former 
Saskatchewan residents — to look at moving back to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

 

I’m going to look at, over the past month we’ve had a number 
of headlines have hit the paper about this government. In 
January, and I believe maybe back in January we had the former 
minister of Justice decided it’s time to pull the pin. Mr. 
Speaker, was it because that member started looking at where 
this government was going and that member decided that he 
didn’t have any confidence in his Premier any more or in his 
cabinet colleagues and decided that it might be better to get on 
with life and move into the private sector? Is that why this 
member decided to pull the pin — a lack of confidence in his 
cabinet colleagues? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that when Mr. Axworthy 
decided to pull the pin he was showing that he didn’t have a lot 
of confidence in the leader of this, the NDP Party and the 
Premier of this province to lead this province into the future 
with a vision for this future that, whereby this province would 
be able to grow. I’d like to quote a little bit from this article. It 
says: 
 

Just as the federal NDP was too idealistic for Chris 
Axworthy to stay on as a federal MP, the (Lorne Calvert) 
government was too interested in making sure government 
is part of the solution to every problem in society. 

 
And he says: 
 

In spite of the government’s brave words about how rosy 
the NDP’s chances are in Saskatoon, you have to wonder if 
Axworthy knows something about public opinion that we 
don’t (Mr. Speaker). 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that I think says it very well, that sentence 
that you have to wonder if Axworthy knows something about 
public opinion that we don’t. I think, Mr. Speaker, the recent 
opinion polls are showing that Mr. Axworthy must have been 
reading the same opinion polls that my colleagues and I and 
certainly that the major newspapers across the province of 
Saskatchewan have been coming out with. 
 
The article goes on to say, talking about Mr. Axworthy: 
 

He is too polite to say so, but it’s a safe bet the 
government’s direction over the last two years in 
Saskatchewan would have been very different had 
Axworthy won the NDP leadership at the end of January 
2001. 

 
And I would think, Mr. Speaker, probably the sentence that 
expresses it all is: 
 

Above all else, Axworthy is interested in winning. Given 
that the NDP very nearly lost the last election on a much 
less interventionist course than the present one, Axworthy 
had lost a lot of his curiosity about what the outcome of the 
next election might be. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks volumes as to why the former 
minister of Justice decided to pull the pin — not only a lack of 
confidence but a lack of ability, the ability of this government 
to govern. 
 
And I think in view of the many issues that have arisen since 

the former minister left his position as Justice minister, have 
probably . . . Over the past few days or the past few weeks and 
months, the former minister is thinking, thank you, Lord; thank 
you, Lord, for leading me in a new direction and I don’t have to 
be here with this government trying to defend the policies of 
this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were called to session in late February, 
mid-February, and the government came forward with the 
Throne Speech. And a Throne Speech that most people were 
expecting would give a real vision for the province of 
Saskatchewan, but a Throne Speech that, Mr. Speaker, many 
editorials across the province of Saskatchewan talked about a 
lack of vision, a lack of confidence. 
 
In fact in the Leader-Post in March 19: 
 

We all know that throne speeches are banal by nature. (But) 
more to the point, they seldom reflect the climate of a 
legislative session. 
 
But you’d think that Calvert and his government would be 
eager to shake up the status quo, given that . . . the way 
things are going seems a sure formula for relinquishing 
power to the Saskatchewan Party. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes quoting from the media is 
difficult as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the . . . what the article basically says 
is the fact that the media are reflecting the thoughts and the 
views of Saskatchewan people across this province. The fact 
that this province has lost a lack of direction and really doesn’t 
know where it’s going, hasn’t got any clue as to where it wants 
to head and the direction it wants to give the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about people quitting and 
leaving this government, one would think that a person of 
Janice MacKinnon’s nature and stature would . . . that’s the 
type of person you’d want to continue to have on the front 
benches in this government. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, shortly after the election of the 
current Premier of this province as the Leader of the NDP, Ms. 
MacKinnon took a look at this government, took a look at the 
direction that this Premier was leading this NDP government 
into, took a look at the direction that this government was trying 
to lead this province, and she said, it’s really not what I want. 
 
I believe Janice MacKinnon had a real vision for the province 
of Saskatchewan. And you know it’s very interesting, Mr. 
Deputy, it’s interesting that I would be saying that. And I see 
some members across the floor agreeing with me, that I would 
even agree with Janice MacKinnon on some of her ideals. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, politics being politics, I 
guess it can be subject to change. People’s opinions can change. 
 
And what we’ve seen . . . what was seen, Mr. Speaker, is we 
look at Janice MacKinnon who was the Finance minister in the 
province of Saskatchewan, who was given so many accolades 
during her tenure as Finance minister in the province of 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan, and basically she as well said . . . She talks 
about her reasons for quitting Calvert’s cabinet just three weeks 
after being sworn in. And this is a quote: 
 

She writes that she felt a “malaise” about the new 
government’s direction particularly with regard to the new 
premier’s first budget. 

 
She comments here, and there’s a quote from her book, and it 
says: 
 

Had she gotten her way, she would have moved out some 
of the “wheelers-dealers” in the Crown sector and taken the 
government right out of making direct investments in 
companies. In short, what Premier Calvert is looking at 
now is a campaign not just against the Saskatchewan Party 
but also against the provincial finance minister who took 
the tough decisions when they were needed. 

 
I guess what it says of Ms. McKinnon, while she was elected 
and certainly had built a fairly reputable reputation as a minister 
of Finance in the province of Saskatchewan, there comes a time 
when your integrity has to be . . . you have to weigh your 
integrity against the direction of your colleagues and certainly 
the new leadership of a political party. And that, Mr. Speaker, I 
think points to the reasons why Ms. McKinnon left the NDP, 
left this government, and decided to get on with her own life — 
get on with her life. 
 
And again I see some colleagues across the floor who want to 
get into the debate; however, I can assure them, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ll have ample time to enter this debate. And they can quiz 
some of the many of the comments I have been making and the 
reasons that I’ve been giving as to why the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking for this government to call an 
election. 
 
Mr. Deputy, Mr. Speaker, members across the way were just 
lamenting the fact that I would even refer to Ms. McKinnon as 
someone that we would look to and be quoting from and 
upholding But it’s not just, it’s not just my colleagues and I, Mr. 
Speaker. Look at what, at what some of the articles in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I beg the member’s indulgence in 
order that I can make an introduction. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Kowalsky: — Members of the Assembly, I wish to 
bring to your attention a group of 51 good-looking students who 
have travelled all the way to Regina from the city of Prince 
Albert. 
 
They attend a school that is in my constituency. It’s Ecole King 
George Community School. A group of grade 5 and 6 students 
and they are here with their teachers, Ms. Tanya McShane, and 
the teacher, Andrea Jonnason, who I am proud to say was a 
student in one of my classes at one time. And I believe also that 
they have present with them a couple of drivers, whose names I 
don’t have at this time. 
 
(15:00) 
 

This group that goes to Ecole King George Community School, 
at least some of them are bilingual. And I will be meeting them 
later. I look forward to meeting with these groups later. 
 
And I just want to say this to the students: je dis bonjour aux 
étudiants d’Ecole King George de Prince Albert. 
 
(Translation: Hello to the students from Ecole King George of 
Prince Albert.) 
 
Bienvenue à nôtre Palais. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would like to join with you in welcoming all these 
shining young faces from Prince Albert, who’ve come to their 
Legislative Building. It’s always good to see a group of students 
from Prince Albert. It’s a long way from Regina to our home. 
And I want to welcome you all here. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is the forestry capital 
of Saskatchewan, home of the new forestry centre to be built in 
Prince Albert in the next weeks. And I know all these students 
are very proud of that new centre as well. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Non-Confidence Motion 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to join with Mr. Speaker and the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote to welcome the students who have come down 
from Prince Albert. Certainly it’s quite a drive and we’re 
pleased to see that you’ve come to visit our Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And just an explanation of what you’re seeing this afternoon. 
It’s private members’ day and private members’ motions that 
we’ll be debating on the floor at this time, so you won’t see the 
raucous debate that you normally would get in the question 
period. However there might be times when members might 
enter the debate. And certainly we just want to thank you for 
coming and joining us this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when we look at, we 
look at this government and its lack of vision, lack of direction, 
and what is very appalling . . . And I’m sure for government 
members was something that they certainly didn’t want to hear 
or didn’t want to see, and I continue to refer to Janice 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

 

MacKinnon and her book and another quote from The 
StarPhoenix on April 15. I believe it was the day after she had 
released her book to the public. 
 
And there’s a couple things I’d like to quote out of this, of this 
editorial. It says . . . the writer says: 
 

Janice McKinnon sounded like a member of the 
Saskatchewan Party Monday, as she officially launched a 
memoir of her days as a high-powered NDP cabinet 
minister. 

 
And then he quotes from the minister, and says: 
 

While professing a reluctance to enter the current political 
debate, the former finance minister criticized the provincial 
government’s economic development policy, implied the 
economic growth assumption in the recent provincial 
budget isn’t prudent, and questioned the government’s 
ethanol policy. 

 
And a quote from Ms. McKinnon’s book that’s in the article 
says: 
 

“I think two of the lessons of the 1990s was that the 
government should not be intervening directly in the 
economy, picking what I call winners and losers. The other 
lesson about the ’90s is that we have to be more 
open-minded about how we deliver services . . . . (So) all 
public services . . . (can) be delivered by the public sector? 
We have to be open to the fact that in some cases this may 
not be necessary.” 

 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Once again I beg the member’s indulgence to 
make a couple of introductions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Just walked into the . . . Seated in the front of 
the Speaker’s gallery are five people who are on the Internship 
Selection Committee, selecting and interviewing and selecting 
interns of the future for this Assembly. I would like to 
recognize them at this time. And if they’d wave or stand when I 
mention their names. 
 
First of all we have . . . Two of the people that are here are 
actually former speakers of this Assembly. One is John 
Brockelbank, who was the member for Saskatoon Mayfair and 
Saskatoon Westmount, and I think Saskatoon Centre at one 
time. Welcome, Mr. Brockelbank. Also a former speaker was 
the member from Rosetown-Elrose, Herb Swan. 
 
On the committee is a professor of political science from the 
University of Regina, Jocelyn Praud. And we welcome to the 
gallery two people who you often see in the legislature as well, 
who are also on the committee, and that’s one of our interns, 
Corinne Barnett, and of course our Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk. 
 
Welcome to the gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Non-Confidence Motion 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well to 
extend a welcome to Mr. Brockelbank and Mr. Swan. They 
were here when I was first elected, so they gave me a few 
pointers on how I should be performing in this Assembly and 
how I should conduct myself, and I really appreciate that. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a government that has lost a 
vision, lost a sense of direction, and a government that on a 
daily basis continues to ask the Saskatchewan Party, Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, for new ideas that they can 
implement in their policy as they think about going to the polls. 
 
And what we’ve been basically saying today and letting the 
government know, that if they wanted to and if they would 
screw up the courage to call an election, they’re certainly 
welcome to call an election at any time because I know my 
colleagues are ready to go to the polls right now . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — And many people across this province certainly 
want to go to the polls. 
 
But as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, we can see why the 
government is so reluctant to call an election at this time. 
 
There have been so many issues they’ve had to deal with in 
regards to how they manage the finances, their lack of direction, 
their lack of vision, and how they manage agencies who handle 
finances or funds that are put in their trust, or the lack thereof as 
far as management, and we . . . I’m going to bring a number, 
talk about a number of issues where there are concerns that 
have been brought to the attention of this Assembly regarding 
this government over the past number of weeks. 
 
And let me, let me begin first of all with the Dutch Lerat 
situation, Mr. Speaker, where we had . . . and I’m going to 
quote from an article in The StarPhoenix, Saskatoon, March 27, 
and where we had an individual who misappropriated some 
$837,000. 
 

If you compare the scale of the Tories’ misdeeds with 
Lerat’s misspending you will find that the $837,000 
appropriated by the former MLAs very nearly matches the 
. . . 811 that Lerat still owes SIGA for his globetrotting 
ways. 

 
And the article goes on to talk about the fact that very 
interesting how the prosecutor’s office in the province of 
Saskatchewan found that there really wasn’t sufficient evidence 
or thereof to prosecute, and yet they found it quite convenient to 
prosecute former members, such as the member from 
Canora-Pelly for a podium that he had purchased which he then 
gave to his local community; it wasn’t a personal benefit. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think what people find very distasteful is 
when they see 830 . . . $811 million misappropriated by an 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

agency and yet the government is not prepared to hold this 
agency accountable. Mr. Speaker, people find that very . . . 
They become irate when they think about this misappropriation 
because it’s their taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
It’s their dollars then, and they think about people waiting on 
waiting lists for hospital beds, for surgery, or for health 
procedures and this $831,000 could have gone a long way to 
addressing some of the needs in the health care field or, Mr. 
Speaker, could have gone a long way to addressing some of the 
needs that our universities and our colleges are facing. 
 
And even as we see in the gallery this afternoon, the schools 
across this province and the lack of provincial funding that has 
been declining over the past number of years. 
 
And many schools are, many schools are struggling with 
maintaining their programming because of that funding other 
than . . . And the reason they’re struggling with that, Mr. 
Speaker, is because the local property tax owner is becoming 
fed up and tired of always being called upon to meet the void 
that has been implemented by the Minister of Finance and the 
Premier of this province in their budgets as they brought . . . 
been bringing them forward over the past number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at a $6.2 million loss in a, I guess it was 
called a bega mingo . . . pardon me, mega bingo, pardon, we’ll 
get that correct yet — mega bingo project. And if I’m not 
mistaken, Mr. Speaker, I believe that is now up to over $7 
million lost in this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what it, what that project was, was an attempt by 
this government when it implemented gambling across the 
province of Saskatchewan, when it allowed video lottery 
terminals all across this province, and what it did, it was . . . 
destroyed the ability of local organizations, and in many cases 
through their small bingos, to raise the finances that they would 
use to provide services, whether it be in rinks or whether it be in 
local community centres or projects at the local level to meet 
the need of providing those services. 
 
And as they saw their revenues dwindle, while the VLTs (video 
lottery terminal) . . . And the government I believe in 1991 
promised that they would share 10 per cent of those winnings 
with the communities across this province. Because of that lack 
and because the government decided that no, they couldn’t, that 
they would not, were not prepared to honour that campaign 
commitment, many of these communities, many of these 
organizations found themselves in the positions of barely 
surviving. 
 
So what did the government do? The government came up with 
another bright idea. And the government decided, well we’ll 
come up with a major bingo plan whereby we’ll . . . 
electronically we’ll tie all these bingo, large bingo operations 
together. And as a result of this larger pot that we’ll be able to 
produce, we’ll get more people coming back into the bingo 
parlours, and so many of these local organizations will then be 
able to recoup some of their losses and build on the funds that 
they use to support their local rinks and other initiatives within 
the communities. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, however, Mr. Speaker, this mega bingo 

project, what happened? 
 
First of all it was just a hare-brained scheme to try and address a 
problem that this government had created because of a lack of a 
plan and initiative to build the province of Saskatchewan. I 
mean, somebody came up with an idea but forgot to put a plan 
in place to see whether or not this mega bingo project would 
work. 
 
And as a result, Mr. Speaker, what we have today is the 
government losing $7.9 million on a project that if they’d done 
a little bit of research in, Mr. Speaker, they would have found 
that that project was not worth proceeding with, and they would 
have not spent that money. They would have used that money 
to address health care and education costs in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and even addressing our highways. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, if you want another issue that the people of 
Saskatchewan are annoyed with, talk about our land titles 
registry. And, Mr. Speaker, to talk about ISC (Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) and the land titles 
registry in the province of Saskatchewan, it doesn’t matter who 
you talk to, it doesn’t matter who you come across, as soon as 
you mention the words or the letters I-S-C, people become 
annoyed. 
 
Why do they become annoyed, Mr. Speaker? Because the 
government decided that they were going to put a program in 
place, a computerized program in place that would simplify the 
process of the transfer of land titles that would cut down on the 
amount of paper that has been used in the past. And that would 
be quite economical. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what have we seen? It hasn’t simplified 
anything. In fact, Mr. Speaker, most people have found that 
someone just over the telephone and with pencil and paper 
could process land titles transfer papers a lot quicker than this 
ISC program has done. 
 
And what has it done to date? It originally was going to cost 
$17 million. To date we’re well over $64 million and we still 
have not rectified the problem of simplifying the process of 
land transfers in the province of Saskatchewan. Just another 
example, prime example, Mr. Speaker, of why many people 
across this province think it’s time for this Premier to call an 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue comes to the forefront, and I’m sure 
even the students in the gallery today have heard about 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company). Oh and pardon me, Mr. Speaker. I’m not supposed 
to draw the students into debate, and I apologize for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people across this province, whether they’re 
observing by television or whatever, know what SPUDCO is all 
about. They know about this initiative that this province 
attempted to undertake in building a potato industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:15) 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the part that is somewhat appalling is 
that we had a number of private individuals in the province of 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

 

Saskatchewan who had begun to develop a potato industry, who 
had begun to develop a marketing arm for their industry, and 
were doing actually quite well, only to find when the 
government got involved, the government, because of their 
initiative and because of their bigger, better, and 
I-know-better-than-you-can ideal in regards to marketing 
potatoes, what they found themselves in was sitting in a scheme 
whereby the province of Saskatchewan lost . . . initiated a 
program that actually cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers another 
$28 million — $28 million. 
 
Rather than allowing the private individuals who were already 
building the industry on their own to continue to build that 
industry, they decided, no, we’ve got a better idea and we’ve 
got some taxpayers’ dollars that we don’t know what to do 
with, so we’ll build some potato sheds and we’ll get into the 
potato industry in the province of Saskatchewan; and at the end 
of the day the people of Saskatchewan will be thanking us for 
getting into the potato industry. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what we found, we found a lot of 
rotten potatoes in the state of Saskatchewan. And Saskatchewan 
people and the voters of Saskatchewan will not forget about the 
$20 million debacle that this province initiated when they 
decided that they were going to get into the potato industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even . . . And just another small enterprise that the 
government decided to get involved in was FarmGro, another 
. . . I believe here’s another situation of about a $12 million 
expenditure and again, a situation where a farm community and 
farm families themselves were beginning to design a program 
that would work to help them market their specialty crops. And 
again, the government gets involved and what do we have? We 
have farmers losing their shirts and losing thousands of dollars 
to a failed project, the FarmGro project that was just nicely 
came on the market and then the plug was pulled on because it 
just did not have a sound business plan to build on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I’ve been showing and what I’ve been 
speaking about over the past half an hour or so is a number of 
issues, and I haven’t even got down to expanding in depth into 
some of these issues that have been raised. But I think my 
colleagues have a lot that they’d like to add into this debate, so 
we’ll allow them to do that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for this government to 
realize that its time is running out. And I believe the fact that 
they are realizing that its time is running out, that’s why we 
have not gone to the polls at this time. And my guess is we may 
not even get to the polls in this fall; it could be next spring 
before we go to the polls. 
 
In fact the member from Saskatoon Nutana, and I remember 
sitting on that side of the House when the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana kept saying, call an election, call an election. 
But I don’t know where the member from Saskatoon Nutana is 
today. I would expect that member to be calling an election. Or 
the member from Moose Jaw North wanted to call an election, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s enough members over there who 
were calling for an election in 1991, and that election was 

finally called. And I will not disagree with the fact that maybe 
the government extended its time period. But I wonder if those 
members over there today are sitting in the same position and 
saying to their Premier, I think we better hold on a little longer. 
It might be a little brighter, might be a little more light at the 
end of the tunnel. We just better hold out a little longer rather 
than calling an election today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think when this Premier calls, is ready to and 
calls an election in the province of Saskatchewan, that people of 
Saskatchewan are going to speak. And they will speak very 
loudly and they will speak very clearly because they are not 
happy with the direction this province is going. They are not 
happy with the lack of leadership, a lack of vision that is 
coming from this Premier’s chair. They’re not happy with the 
current fiscal position the province of Saskatchewan finds itself 
in. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the fiscal situation of the 
province of Saskatchewan, you have to ask yourself sometimes 
why, why we would even want to campaign to form a 
government, looking at what, looking at what this government 
has done and the fiscal situation it has left this province in, Mr. 
Speaker. And as I said earlier, we just have to go to the 
government’s own documents to find that out. 
 
We see in the budget that was presented earlier on, the 
government predicted that the Saskatchewan economy would 
grow by 6.8 per cent in 2003. And the editorials for the 
following few days, Mr. Speaker, they just called it laughable. 
In fact as you looked across this country, there wasn’t one 
economic group, there wasn’t one agency that even looked at 
6.8 per cent growth as something that was even achievable. 
Most of the growth factors that were being presented by 
economists across Canada and across each province were 
predicting, at the best, some 3 per cent. 
 
So when you look at this budget, and it’s basing its economic 
growth and its ability to come in meeting the target figures that 
the Minister of Finance presented, if we’re looking at 6.8 per 
cent — if we don’t reach that potential, if indeed the potential 
ends up being at around the 3 per cent then we are looking at a 
sad situation regarding the fiscal situation of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are so many other reasons why it’s time 
for an election. And I believe some of the editorials have 
certainly initiated that. In the Leader-Post, one of the editorials 
said, “Bright future optical illusion — call an election.” This 
was shortly after the budget was delivered. And I’d like to 
quote: 
 

The fact is, though, Saskatchewan people are voting with 
their feet. They have lost confidence in the province’s 
ability to provide them with a future . . . they don’t see any 
sense of direction coming from the provincial government. 
 
When it should be leading the way, the provincial 
government is wallowing in (its) indecision. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the article ends up by saying: 
 

What Saskatchewan needs is an agenda for recovery. 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

What it needs is an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe, and my colleagues believe, that it is time 
for an election in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in your gallery, I am very, very honoured and 
pleased to introduce a man that I’ve known for some time now. 
He has been . . . He’s an inspiration, quite honestly. He’s gone 
back to school and is doing extremely well. And we’re all very, 
very pleased with him in our community. And I am quite proud 
and honoured to know Mr. Doug Ehlert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Non-Confidence Motion 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I believe the people of Saskatchewan are indeed 
looking for a bright future. But at this time they do not see that 
bright future coming from the leadership of this government 
and this Premier. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move, seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its non-confidence in the 
Premier and cabinet. 

 
So moved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise today to address this 
issue: a vote of non-confidence in the Premier and cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have indeed lost 
confidence in this government. They have lost confidence in the 
Premier, who has never been elected by the people of 
Saskatchewan in a general election, Mr. Speaker. He has been 
elected in a by-election in one riding, certainly, but not across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have lost 
confidence in the members of cabinet especially, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, after reviewing all of the failed adventures that these 
elected members have been involved in with taxpayers’ money, 
Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they have lost confidence in 
the ability of the backbenchers of this government to fill in, Mr. 
Speaker, for any of the members who are currently in Executive 

Council. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of people who 
have left this government over the last three years. They have 
been what would be considered the strongest members of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. They saw the writing on the wall. 
They understood that this was a government that was old; it was 
a government that was tired; it was a government bereft of 
ideas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, this government came in in 1991 with some 
ideas. The people elected them. They carried out the platform 
that they ran on, Mr. Deputy Chair. But since 1995, this 
government has simply been running to hold power — not with 
any particular agenda, Mr. Speaker, just simply to maintain 
their hand on the levers of power. And we have certainly seen 
what this government has been prepared to do to maintain that 
hold, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It certainly hasn’t been 
for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. It hasn’t been for 
the benefit of the Crown corporations which this government 
likes to point to all the time. So you have to ask yourself, for 
whom has this been a benefit? And it’s certainly not evident 
that it’s the public, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that the people of 
Saskatchewan have lost confidence in the government opposite 
is they have no plan. They don’t know why they’re government. 
And fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whenever you ask the 
government a question about one of their policies or one of the 
things that they have done, they cannot accept, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, responsibility for their actions. 
 
In fact, you know we look at our parliamentary system, we look 
at the Saskatchewan legislature and the . . . and how we are 
governed, and we like to use the term responsible . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the . . . 
Order. I would ask the member for Athabasca and the member 
for Estevan if they would like to have a private conversation to 
take it behind the bar. I’m having difficulty hearing the speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and I’m 
glad you used the word conversation in that particular 
comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we like to look at our legislature and term it as 
being responsible government. And yet, Mr. Deputy Chair, the 
members opposite are the most irresponsible government that 
this province has had in a good many year. 
 
Not one of them, Mr. Deputy Chair, is prepared to stand in their 
place and accept responsibility for their own actions. Only, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, only when forced by the courts and the media, 
Mr. Speaker, is a member of that Executive Council, of that 
government, prepared to admit to an action that has cost this 
province millions and millions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I look to the member from P.A. Carlton, I 
believe it is. No, which one is it? P.A. Northcote — and my 
apologies to the member from P.A. Carlton — the member 
from P.A. Northcote, who for six years, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
refused to accept the responsibilities for the losses at SPUDCO. 
Only, Mr. Deputy Chair, after the courts provided the evidence 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

 

that he had been misleading the public of Saskatchewan, 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan, misleading the 
taxpayers, Mr. Deputy Chair, did that member admit to not 
having provided the proper information when asked, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the member from P.A. Northcote said that 
the SPUDCO deal was a public-private partnership, and yet we 
find out, Mr. Deputy Chair, that there was no private 
partnership there. It was all public money. 
 
And now we hear today in the House from the minister 
responsible for CIC, that the government’s prepared to release 
an additional $2 million to Minds Eye Pictures, providing they 
can get some further private financing. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, it turns out they got some additional 
private financing. The government’s prepared to put up $2 
million, and Minds Eye managed to find another 300,000 of 
public money . . . of private money, excuse me. 
 
So the public has an investment of six and a half million dollars 
in this particular company. And yet if you look at the CIC 
annual report, it’s worth a half a million. And yet the minister 
stands up there and brags about how much of a success he has 
been. In the film industry, he only lost $6 million. 
 
Now I can understand why the member might be excited about 
that because the member from P.A. Northcote lost $28 million 
in SPUDCO. So the member from CIC, if you look at it on the 
positive side, is more successful than the member from P.A. 
Northcote. But I really think that the members opposite are 
more interested in seeing how much they can lose, not how 
much they can make for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from . . . the minister in charge for CIC, the 
member from Meadow Lake, has lost $85 million in total, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, for CIC just in the last year. That’s the kind of 
leadership the members opposite are providing. And that’s why, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the people of Saskatchewan no longer have 
any confidence in the members opposite, no longer have any 
confidence in the philosophy that they follow, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
And in fact, if you look back over the elections since 1944, five 
times have the government opposite managed to make a 
majority vote of the people, where the public said yes we 
support that government. Now that’s not to say that the other 
parties have done any better. Certainly not, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
But when you look at a philosophy that has been a guiding 
force in this province for a number of years, you have to ask 
yourself, what success has that philosophy had? What success 
has government ownership? 
 
The members opposite are saying we need to buy into these 
companies across the province — like SPUDCO, like NST 
(NST Network Services of Chicago), like buying SecurTek, 
competing against the cable companies in this province, against 
the co-op cable companies, Mr. Speaker. The government’s 
saying they have to buy into the ethanol industry. They have to 
buy into the pulp industry. They have to buy into the upgrader 

industry. They have to buy into the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. 
And you ask yourself, you ask yourself, if this philosophy is the 
philosophy that will make Saskatchewan successful, why is no 
one else in the world following that same philosophy? The 
people who have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, — such as Russia, such 
as Eastern Europe — those economies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
failed, and, Mr. Speaker, have we failed in Saskatchewan 
following that policy? 
 
Back in the 1930s, Mr. Deputy Chair, we had a million people 
in Saskatchewan — a million people. Our neighbour to the 
west, Alberta, had 600,000. They were less economically well 
off than we were; they had less potential than we did. And yet, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 60 to 70 years later, we’re still at a million 
people and Alberta is over three million. 
 
Even, Mr. Deputy Chair, even Manitoba is growing, even 
Manitoba is growing. Whereas Saskatchewan, our population 
continues to decline; our out-migration continues, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. And who is leaving this province? Well traditionally, in 
Saskatchewan, it’s always been the younger people who have 
left. Because the people that we raise in Saskatchewan have 
ambition, Mr. Deputy Chair, they have ideas that they want to 
implement. They are entrepreneurial, but they can’t do it here. 
They leave. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — They go to Ontario. They go to 
Manitoba. They go to Alberta. They go to BC (British 
Columbia) or they go to the US (United States), Mr. Deputy 
Chair. But they leave. 
 
But what’s happening now? Those same people are leaving. But 
now we also have the grandparents that are leaving because 
their sons and daughters are living elsewhere. Their 
grandchildren are living elsewhere and they want to be a part of 
those grandchildren’s lives, so they pack up when they retire 
and they move out. 
 
So we lose not only the youth who should be building this 
province, who are our future taxpayers, we’re losing the people 
who are our current taxpayers. If you take a look at the 
demographic graphs, we have a shortage of people in 
percentage-wise comparisons to the rest of the country in the 
taxpaying years of 20 to 55. And that has occurred under their 
watch — under their watch. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have to look at why is that 
happening? What’s causing this? Well for a number of years, 
Mr. Deputy Chair . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, the ministers 
opposite were saying, we’re so diversified in Saskatchewan that 
whatever happens to agriculture won’t have an impact on this 
province, even though, Mr. Deputy Chair, the people of 
Saskatchewan were continuing to leave. 
 
But in the latest downturn, now they’re blaming agriculture as 
the flaw. Well that’s not the flaw; that’s one of the symptoms, 
one of the symptoms of the failure of this government. 1992, 
this government came in, Mr. Deputy Chair, and tore up the 
GRIP contracts. They didn’t ask people in agriculture if they 
wanted that to happen. They deemed it to have happened. They 
deemed it to have happened legally when it didn’t. But because 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

they’re the majority, Mr. Deputy Chair, they have the power to 
do so. 
 
Ever since that time this government has claimed, the members 
sitting opposite have claimed, the Premier — because he was 
here even though he quit for a little while in there, he was 
sitting here in cabinet, Mr. Deputy Chair — claimed that they 
were going to bring forward a new safety net program for 
agriculture in this province. Well, 11 years later and we’re still 
waiting — 11 years later. And yet the government members 
opposite want us to believe they have a plan. Well it’s taken 
them 11 years not to come up with a plan. 
 
And yet prior to that ’91 election they were running around the 
province saying, we have the solution, we are the salvation for 
agriculture, we’re going to make GRIP bigger and better. Well 
all they did was eliminate it. 
 
But that’s not unusual for the members opposite. I can 
remember back in the 1980s in a by-election down in Wood 
River where the members opposite that were here at the time 
were down there campaigning saying, if you elect a PC 
(Progressive Conservative) member here, they’re going to close 
every hospital in this constituency. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
happened. Every hospital in that constituency but one was 
closed, but who did it? It wasn’t the PCs. It was the members 
sitting opposite . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And in fact at 
that time Wood . . . Shaunavon was not in the Wood River 
constituency, I’ll have the member from Regina know. He 
needs to go back and check his history a little bit. There was 
one hospital out of five left open. And yet they were the 
members who ran around fearmongering, fearmongering in an 
attempt to gain favour with the constituents, that the hospitals 
were going to be closed under a different party. But when they 
became power, they closed those hospitals. 
 
And now we have the same sort of thing happening with the 
members opposite running around the province saying the sky 
is going to fall if you elect a Sask Party government, they’re 
going to sell every Crown corporation. Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
just like their rhetoric on the hospitals, it’s not true. The fact is, 
over the last two decades if you take a look at who has sold 
more Crown assets, it’s the members opposite. 
 
The members opposite like to say well we have to keep the 
Crowns here. We have to have the head offices here. We have 
to have those workers here. 
 
Well I sat in the legislature on the opposition side, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when the government — the NDP government — 
changed the legislation to allow the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to change their share structure so that there was 
no limit on it, so that the headquarters could move. The 
headquarters are still in Saskatchewan but they changed the 
rule. They changed it — the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker — they 
changed the rules on the ownership, taking away the fact that 
the headquarters had to stay here. 
 
Then we look at SaskEnergy, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — the same thing. They took away the rule that said 
the headquarters had to stay in Saskatchewan. It wasn’t some 

radical right-wing government that did that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it was the NDP that did that, that allowed that 
headquarters to move. They were the ones who sold the shares, 
SaskEnergy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It was, right, 
Saskoil. Sorry. The member has corrected me on the name and I 
thank him for that — Saskoil. 
 
They’re probably looking at selling SaskEnergy. We just don’t 
have the evidence yet. 
 
But they were very seriously looking though, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, at selling SaskTel. That corporation was up on the 
sales block, along with SaskPower, at one time from this 
government when Mr. Romanow was in power. 
 
And so while they want to run around the province trying to 
scare people, the clear facts are that the members opposite, the 
NDP, have been selling the Crown assets of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our policy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we believe the core 
Crowns need to be in place, that they provide very good 
opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan in this province. 
And it’s key, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I say, in this province. 
Because what they’re doing opposite is they’re taking the 
hard-earned tax dollars of the people of Saskatchewan and 
squandering them around the province. And they don’t have a 
plan in doing this, it’s just helter-skelter — well gee, it’s warm 
in New Zealand, maybe I’ll buy shares or buy a company in 
New Zealand, or maybe I’ll buy one in Australia. 
 
Take a look at the list here. We have here, Retx.com in Atlanta, 
Georgia — you know that’s not a bad place to have to go for a 
board meeting once in a while, you know — Austar in 
Australia, which also operates I believe in New Zealand. And 
yet all of these, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are losses — serious, 
millions-of-dollars losses around the world — perpetuated on 
the public by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to take a little run down the list here. You know the 
member from P.A. Northcote lost $28 million on SPUDCO. 
That was an investment in the province of Saskatchewan where 
they had a lot of support in the communities initially — a lot of 
support in those communities initially, such as Outlook and 
Lucky Lake — because it looked like something that could add 
to those communities. 
 
But why was it pressed ahead at that particular time — 1997, 
1998? Because the member opposite, Bernie Wiens, who was 
the minister of Agriculture, the minister of CIC, was politically 
in trouble and so this looked like a good economic development 
for that area. The public in that area liked it. But when it came 
time for the election, they turfed him anyways because by that 
time they could see all of the holes in SPUDCO. The potatoes 
had their eyes open, Mr. Speaker, and the whole public could 
see how rotten this deal was. And yet the member, the member 
opposite, continued, continued to deceive — continued to 
deceive — the public of Saskatchewan for a further six years. 
 
Craig Wireless is another one that, another one of the 
investments that the members opposite have put their money 
into and that has lost money — $10 million in losses —
tappedinto.com has lost $2.4 million. And everyone knows, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, that these are losses that can never be recouped. 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

 

These are dollars that the people of Saskatchewan have taken 
from their pockets to subsidize businesses, government losses 
outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:45) 
 
You know, the next thing we could expect to see this 
government investing in is a manure company, because that is 
basically what their whole economic platform has become, Mr. 
Speaker. It smells and it doesn’t work. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 
needs to come up with a plan. They need to have an economic 
plan because the economic plan that they’re using is 60 years 
old, is out of date, and doesn’t work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The Premier here, just over a year ago, 
announced an advertising program, a feel good advertising 
program that is supposed to bring people back to Saskatchewan, 
is supposed to make us feel good about Saskatchewan, is 
supposed to rejuvenate the province of Saskatchewan. And 
what’s happening? It’s not working. Out-migration continues. 
 
But you have to take a look at where the government is doing 
their advertising. Are they advertising in Alberta to try and 
bring people back? Yes, there’s a few ads. Are they advertising 
in Manitoba to try and bring people back? Yes, there’s a few 
ads. But the majority of the money, Mr. Deputy Chair . . . 
Speaker, is spent in Saskatchewan. And isn’t it amazing, isn’t it 
amazing that this multi-million dollar advertising campaign, 
paid for by the government, takes place just before an election? 
Paid for by taxpayers just before an election. Isn’t that 
amazing? Isn’t that amazing? 
 
Well the Deputy Premier says, when’s the election? Well I take 
a look at the legislation on the order paper and say, I think this 
government wanted to go to an election this spring but was 
scared off by the polls because it says they can’t win. 
 
The Deputy Premier says it’s going to be a year and a half 
away. Well if it’s a year and a half away, I guess the Lieutenant 
Governor will be calling the election not the Premier, because 
by that time their mandate will have run out. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Chair, the philosophy that these members 
opposite have been following for the last 60 years has shown 
itself not to work. If it did work, if the philosophy of complete 
government ownership was successful, we would have the best 
growth rates in Canada. We would be the pre-eminent province 
in Canada because it’s been tried here now since 1944. 
 
And yet our population has not grown, not grown at all. Where 
you look across Canada, mid-1930s, ’40s, we had a population 
in Canada of somewhere between 15 and 20 million people — 
15 and 20 million people. It’s doubled in that time in 
Saskatchewan . . . in Canada, excuse me, and yet in 
Saskatchewan, we’re stagnant. We’re not moving ahead 
because of the economic policies of the members opposite. It’s 
time that they step aside and let somebody else . . . Even 
Tommy Douglas’s ideas, Mr. Deputy Chair, have worn out, not 
only across the world but particularly in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. 
 
Let’s take a look at what this government’s plans are or were 
for seniors. Last year the members opposite decided that seniors 
in nursing homes needed to pay more so they raised up the caps 
to $4,200, I believe it was. And the government was going to 
take 90 per cent of the income of any senior living in a nursing 
home up to that level. 
 
So I find it interesting today to see an article in the paper of a 
complaint by the Leader of the NDP — in Nova Scotia I 
believe, maybe it’s New Brunswick, one of the two, in one of 
the Atlantic provinces — complaining that seniors are being 
forced to pay too much for nursing home care in that province. 
And that is exactly the plan that the members opposite were 
going to impose on seniors last year until the official opposition 
and seniors themselves embarrassed this government. 
 
And fact is it was a person in a wheelchair, a quadriplegic from 
my constituency, Mr. Speaker, that seemed to be the turning 
point — when Mr. Stevenson come forward and said, it’s going 
to cost me $500 a month more than I make as an employee to 
pay my nursing home fees. That’s what the government 
opposite wanted to do. And the Minister of Highways stands up 
and says, it’s the right thing to do. 
 
Well the Premier made the government reverse that role. But in 
spite — in spite, Mr. Deputy Chair — he took it out of rural 
Saskatchewan to make up for the shortfall in Health. Seven 
million dollars was extracted from the Highways department. 
That was money that should have gone on the roads and 
highways around rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So at the end of the day, out of spite, the Premier, the Deputy 
Premier, took the money away from rural Saskatchewan 
because they disagreed with this government’s policy. That $7 
million should have gone on the roads across Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and rural Saskatchewan paid the price of 
this government’s attitude towards seniors. 
 
If you have money, the government wants it. Just send it all in. 
That’s the taxation policy, last year, for seniors. 
 
Let’s take a look at what this government — I’ve talked about it 
earlier — what their policy was for agriculture. They killed the 
GRIP program back in ’92, promised to replace it, and have 
failed to do so. Whenever there has been some discussions 
taking place between the federal government and the provinces 
to develop a new agriculture policy, this province has always 
stood on the sidelines and refused to participate into the 
development of the program, always arguing, Mr. Deputy Chair 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having very much 
difficulty listening to the speaker. I would ask all hon. members 
to let the speaker who has the floor carry on with his speech. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The agriculture policy as put forward by 
this government has always been to avoid responsibility. Just as 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

I was talking earlier about this government’s lack of 
responsibility, they continue to do the same in agriculture. 
Whenever there is discussion between the federal government 
and the provinces about establishing a new federal program, 
co-signed by the provinces, this province has always stood back 
and said, no we don’t want to participate; we don’t want to put 
any money on the table; it’s all your responsibility. That has 
been their whole attitude. 
 
And then whenever a program comes out and the feds say, this 
is what it’s going to be, and it doesn’t suit Saskatchewan, then 
they stand up and complain about it. But they refuse to be at the 
table and to negotiate, and to negotiate what we need in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We saw the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) program 
that didn’t fit. We saw another program in there, a program that 
didn’t fit in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Chairman. So now 
they’re developing a new program. And again the minister 
refused to sit at the table and negotiate it. 
 
Now what we need out of this minister for the new farm 
program is to keep his hands off it still and say, look, this 
program does not meet the needs of Saskatchewan agricultural 
producers — be they grain, be they oilseeds, be they cattle, be 
they hogs, whatever. The new program still doesn’t meet the 
needs of Saskatchewan. 
 
And this minister isn’t at the table. He needs to be at the table 
negotiating. He needs to be at the table and negotiating with 
money in his pockets. Because to simply go to the table and 
say, I haven’t got any money and I’m not putting anything up, 
gets you nowhere. You have to be a full participant, and this 
government has refused to be participants in the agricultural 
strategies of Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s time that we had new people in place that do understand the 
needs of agriculture across this province — not the members 
opposite, but rather that should be the Saskatchewan Party 
system. Deputy Premier wants to know who that should be. 
That should be the Saskatchewan Party and the members that 
are sitting here and those other members that are nominated 
across this province. 
 
We look at the economic strategies of this government. The 
economic strategies of this government are: it has to be done by 
the government; the only vehicle that can provide for an 
economic stimulus in the province of Saskatchewan is a Crown 
corporation. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it ain’t working. If it 
was such a great idea, as I said earlier, we would be the 
pre-eminent province in Saskatchewan. 
 
But their philosophy of Crown ownership doesn’t work. The 
idea that we’re going to grow Saskatchewan by 6.8 per cent 
when everyone else across Canada, in particular, but North 
America and around the world is saying between 2.5 and 3.5 
per cent growth, you have to ask yourself: why is the 
government picking a number out of the air of 6.8? What 
benefit does that provide? 
 
Well what it does is it allows the government to claim 
additional tax revenues which they can try to balance their 
books with, even though at the end of the day those tax 

revenues will not be there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s why the government wants to use a 6.8 
figure for economic growth in this province, so that they can 
inflate their tax revenues to try to make it look like the books 
are balanced. Well the books in this province haven’t been 
balanced for three years. We’re over $1 billion further in debt 
since the member from Saskatoon Riversdale became Premier. 
Since the member from Saskatchewan . . . from Saskatoon 
Riversdale became Premier, we have gone over $1 billion in 
debt additionally. That’s $1 million a day — $1 million a day. 
That is what their economic policy is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Cannington area that I represent is a oil producing area of 
the province — southeast Saskatchewan, southwest 
Saskatchewan, up the west side. And the oil industry is slowly 
expanding throughout Saskatchewan. And you have to ask 
yourself why is it slowly expanding? Oil prices were over $30, 
they were $35, you would think that production . . . that people 
would be drilling, trying to bring new production on stream. 
And yet across Saskatchewan that wasn’t happening. It was 
happening in Alberta, it was happening in other jurisdictions, 
but it wasn’t happening in Saskatchewan. So you have to ask 
yourself, why? Because of the economic policies, the taxation 
policies, that are not business friendly in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The people who are drilling for oil understand that they have to 
make a profit. Even though the government and their Crown 
corporations don’t have to make a profit, private enterprise, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, has to make a profit. And so they look at 
where can they make their best return based on the economic 
environments of the regions, based on the productive 
capabilities. And we have lots of opportunities here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but the opportunities for profit are less here 
than they are in other jurisdictions, so the drilling is taking 
place somewheres else. 
 
They are doing drilling here though, however, for natural gas 
because our natural gas costs to drill are very low. It’s shallow 
gas, it doesn’t take very long, it doesn’t take very much money 
to do it, and people therefore get into it because the difference 
in the cost of the drilling offsets the economic disincentives 
provided by this government. So we are seeing some 
development in natural gas. And thankfully so because this 
government would be even deeper in the hole if that was not the 
case. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, you take a look at the profits that the Crown 
corporations make. I hear the minister for CIC hollering from 
his seat from time to time, we’ve made $1.6 billion in the last 
10 years. You see — and they’re agreeing with that — and you 
know that is a lot of money, that is a huge amount of money to 
be made for a profit. 
 
And we’re very glad that that profit has been made, but you’ve 
got to take a look. And what’s that profit being made on? Well 
the asset base of the Crown corporations is roughly $8 billion. 
So if you talk to John Wright who is the president and CEO 
(chief executive officer) of SaskPower, his expectation is that 
SaskPower should make a return of 10 per cent a year on its 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

 

investment. 
 
So if you take that number and apply it to the rest of the Crown 
corporations, to their asset base — Crown corporations should 
be making a 10 per cent return on their asset base, according to 
John Wright — that would amount to 800 million a year. At the 
government’s numbers, that would only take two years to match 
their 10-year profit return. Over 10 years they should have 
made $8 billion, but it didn’t happen. Why? 
 
If you take into account that the Crown corporations don’t pay 
PST (provincial sales tax), don’t pay GST (goods and services 
tax), that’s a 13 per cent difference right there from a private 
business. 
 
They don’t pay . . . Okay the minister says that they force him 
to pay PST so that it’s a change from one pocket to the other 
pocket, and it’s a transfer . . . really then becomes, is a tax 
transfer from the Crown corporations and the people who 
subscribe to those Crown corporations to the Consolidated 
Fund. Nothing more than that; it’s simply another form of 
taxation. 
 
Even having said that, though, you’re looking at a 6 per cent 
difference then between a private corporation to a Crown 
corporation. And the minister is saying that over 10 years they 
made 1.6 billion which, under normal business practices 
subscribed to supposedly by SaskPower, they should have made 
that return in two years. But they should have made an 
additional 6 per cent because they’re not paying the GST and 
they’re not paying property taxes. They pay a grant in lieu at 
times which, if you listen to the city of Regina, isn’t anywheres 
near what they would be paying if they were a private business 
paying those same property taxes. 
 
And fact is when they had SPUDCO and the potato bins, barns, 
out there in the Outlook, Lucky Lake country, they didn’t pay 
any property taxes. In fact as I remember seeing the bill on 
these . . . Each one of these was about 2 million plus. Seven of 
them, that’s $14 million. And a property tax bill sent by one of 
the RMs out there amounted to $138 on this 2 million plus barn 
— $138. That doesn’t even pay for hardly a couple of pails full 
of gravel for the road necessary to get there. And yet that’s what 
the government was paying to the RM. That is an insult to the 
local people there who have to pay that bill to get traffic to and 
from those potato bins. That’s the economic policies and plans 
of this government. 
 
So when you look . . . And now what do they do with their $1.6 
billion in profit? Well one of the things that they have done is 
they have driven up the debts of the Crown corporations to pay 
dividends. And they have taken their profits and they have spent 
them in New Zealand, in Australia, in Chile, in Georgia, in 
Chicago, in Manitoba, in Nova Scotia, Palm Springs. Yes, even 
in Palm Springs, California. 
 
And you have to wonder why, why do they . . . And the 
minister says himself, yes we’re in Palm Springs but it’s only 
one employee. What does one employee do for you in Palm 
Springs, California? I don’t know. Maybe he’s a golf instructor. 
I don’t know. You have to wonder what the heck, if you’ve got 
a business there that’s spending millions of dollars, what does 
one employee do for you? 

So, Mr. Deputy Chair . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is this 
government spending its money on these losing propositions 
around the world? Their argument is, we need to do it because 
they will pay a return and benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another one of the minister’s lines was, these are start-up costs. 
Well we’ve got the annual report from one of those businesses 
that says they’ve been in business for 40 years and yet they’re 
still losing start-up costs. Still losing start-up costs after 40 
years. Why? Why are you investing in these losers? 
 
Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are you investing in these losers? 
Because we’re all doing it. Each and every one of us is a 
taxpayer and the province of Saskatchewan is making these 
investments. Well as a shareholder, I want that to stop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — There’s one way to make that decision. 
We don’t get a chance to vote on the board of directors in 
SaskPower or SaskTel or SaskEnergy. We don’t get a chance to 
pick the CEO or the president. But we do have a chance, once 
every approximately four years — and if you listen to the 
Deputy Premier, it’ll be five years — we do get a chance to 
pick the government. And I think, this time around, the people 
of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — You go around the province and you 
talk to people at the rink, you talk to people at the auction barn, 
you talk to people on the street of any community. You talk to 
people at the hairdressers in Regina and what do they tell you 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they tell you it’s time for an 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And I know that there’s members in the 
House that are jealous of the fact that I have hair and that I get a 
chance to go to these places and talk to people, but they want an 
election. And it doesn’t matter whether you’re in rural 
Saskatchewan, whether you’re in urban Saskatchewan or even 
if you’re from Swift Current, they want an election, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Even in Swift Current? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Even in Swift Current. They’re happy 
with the member in Swift Current. They want a chance for him 
to sit on the government side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re 
tired of this government competing against their businesses in 
their home communities. They’re tired that SaskTel comes into 
their community and sets up a business to compete against 
them, especially when they don’t even have to pay the same 
taxes that the person does. 
 
You know, I can’t believe this, that the NDP, the people who 
supposedly hold co-ops dear to their hearts, are out there 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

competing against the co-ops in the cable business. Can’t 
believe that. You know, it’s amazing. It’s amazing. 
 
You know, trying to . . . And these are the people that they’ve 
always said, oh no, if you’re a good co-op member, you’re a 
good supporter of the NDP. That’s what they like to claim. Well 
that’s changed. That’s not the case any more, because the NDP 
have become just a means to maintain power by a small group 
of people. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Chair, it might surprise you to know that I am 
a co-op member. I’m a member of the credit union even. In fact, 
it’ll be a shock to the members opposite, but I was the president 
of my local credit union. And we had to fight, as a credit union, 
some of the hare-brained schemes that the members opposite 
came up with in the past and we managed to stop some of those 
things, and I’m proud to say that I was a part of it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, when you look at the people opposite and 
you take a look at that new literary masterpiece that came out 
not that long ago — Janice MacKinnon’s book — she talks 
about some of the members opposite. She talks about those 
wheelers and dealers, wheelers and dealers. You know, you 
have to wonder if they’re the guys with the pinstripe shirts, with 
their sleeves pushed up and the little armband on there, and the 
green eyeshades, you know. The people that are gambling the 
money of the people of Saskatchewan — those are those 
wheeler-dealers and their gambles are all losing. You know, it’s 
a good thing that they own the casinos because if they didn’t, 
they would certainly be losing at them as well. 
 
You take a look across this province at the casino industry. It’s 
certainly been paying off for this government. But the Premier 
himself, when he was in opposition, led the marches against 
casinos. He led the march down Main Street in Moose Jaw 
against the idea of putting a casino in there, and yet today that’s 
exactly what’s happening — his government is putting a casino 
into Moose Jaw. It’s there already. Yes there are various 
activities that are associated with the casino industry and you 
have to be wondering, does the Premier support all of these 
other industries that take place, all of these other activities that 
take place around a casino? 
 
One of the items that . . . The study done by the government 
prior to implementation of the casino policy was that there 
should be no ATMs (automated teller machine) within 100 
yards of a casino because to put them in there was to encourage 
compulsive gambling, it was to encourage gambling addiction. 
 
So what did the government do? Well you know if you make 
people leave the slot machine, if you make people leave the 
casino and go down the street, you know what? That blast of 
fresh air might bring them to their senses. You know they might 
say, gee I can’t afford to lose any more money. And they might 
just keep on walking. So what did the government do? The 
government said, we can’t allow that to happen; if we get them 
in the casino, we have to keep them there until they have spent 
all the money that they have available for gambling. 
 
And so they put the ATMs in the casinos so that the people 
could run over and take another chance on the ATM and see if 
they can get some money out. You know what? A lot of the 
time it worked. They got more money out and they could run 

back to their slot machine again and keep pulling on that 
handle, just keep pulling on it. 
 
And what did it do? Well we’ve seen the sad stories around this 
province. We’ve seen the person who misappropriated money 
from various organizations. We’ve seen the suicides around this 
province because of the . . . how deep they had gone into the 
hole, how desperate they were, Mr. Deputy Chair, because of 
this government’s gambling policy. 
 
And what did they do about gambling addictions? Most 
jurisdictions that do allow gambling put aside a certain amount 
of money, revenues that they have generated, for gambling 
addiction. What has this government done? They have put aside 
a very, very small amount — very small amount. 
 
And fact is, one of the VLT establishments was telling me 
about the gambling addiction sign that, placard that they had 
sent out to be placed above their VLTs. And you have to 
understand that a large number of these places are rather dark 
wall panelling, you know, the lighting is subdued. And so they 
sent out a black poster talking about the dangers of gambling 
addiction. So you have a black poster in a dark room that’s 
supposed to discourage you and supposed to stop your 
gambling addiction. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that poster worked as well as this 
government’s foreign investment programs. It didn’t work . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the Deputy Premier wants to 
know how it was seen. Well you see what happens is earlier on 
in the day the cleaners turned the lights on and the owners 
spotted the sign. But the public and the people who were 
playing could not see it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You take a look at the health policy of this government, you 
know. They went around this province in the last decade saying 
. . . the previous decade, saying that they had the solutions to 
health care. They had the answers. They came in in 1991 and 
they were going to restructure health. They were going to save 
money and provide better health care. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Louise Simard stood in the House here and it was, we’re going 
to save money and provide better health care — the new 
wellness program, the new wellness program. And what did it 
do? Well we’ve gone from a health budget of 1.5 billion to 2.5 
billion. We have 63 less hospitals in this province; we have 
nursing homes that are full; people on waiting lists, not just for 
weeks but months and years; we have people who are leaving 
this province because they can’t get health care here, they have 
to pay for it themselves. 
 
And fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have . . . even the Crown 
corporations are sending their clients out of this province. 
They’re sending their clients out of this province because they 
can’t afford to wait for NDP health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) are sending their clients to 
Alberta for MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging), for CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scans because they can’t wait 
to have it done in Saskatchewan. They have an economic 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

 

necessity to get those clients rehabilitated and back into the 
workforce. 
 
And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the individual in 
Saskatchewan the government says it isn’t important for that 
individual to become rehabilitated and back into the workforce. 
Mr. Speaker, if you’re on a government program like SGI and 
WCB you can get the best service, you get premiere service. 
But if you’re an ordinary citizen of Saskatchewan you get 
second tier. 
 
Two-tiered health care in Saskatchewan, paid for and sponsored 
by the NDP. And yet they run around the province claiming that 
it’s the Saskatchewan Party that wants to bring in two-tiered 
health when the NDP has already implemented it in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the fact is, I have a letter from a dear lady in my 
constituency who wants to talk about health care in 
Saskatchewan. And this lady would like to get cataract surgery. 
About a year and a half ago she got cataract surgery on one of 
her eyes but now she needs it on her other eye. And she’s been 
waiting for that year and a half. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what she says, and I quote, and she’s talking 
about her doctor here: 
 

He is only allowed to perform 4 such surgeries in an 
allotted time, whereas he did 10 (in the same time) last 
year. Even then he had a waiting list! 

 
So it’s getting worse, not better, Mr. Speaker; it’s getting worse. 
She goes on to say, and this lady is a farmer so she puts some of 
it in terms relating to farming. She says: 
 

Farmers that have been lucky enough to have a “nest egg”, 
have had to use it and then some, to keep going. I can’t 
understand why the Saskatchewan government can’t, until 
times improve, use money from other less important areas. 
Goodness knows!, SGI has to pay out fortunes for (our) car 
accidents and who knows how many . . . (have been) 
caused by eyes needing care they are not getting. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we went through a list here earlier of items 
that the government could have used the money to provide 
cataract surgery but yet spent it in Georgia or in Australia or in 
Chile or around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Ag Dealer, they invested 8.1 million and they won’t 
tell anybody how much money they have lost on that one. 
Business Watch International, another $2 million, and they 
won’t tell what the value of that company now is because most 
of these companies, if not all of them, have gone down in value. 
 
This lady, Hazel Paton is her name, from Oxbow, and she says: 
 

As one who (has) had one eye corrected almost a year ago, 
and really needs the other one done, I feel that months and 
months of further waiting, is not necessary if Government 
would allot their money to more important categories, like 
eye care. Money is available for all sorts of things . . . and 
safety of the citizens of the province (is needed). 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can certainly see that the people 
of Saskatchewan believe that this government no longer 
represents them, that there is a need for a change of 
government, and that change cannot happen soon enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — You know, can you imagine, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, how much additional support would be in 
health care, how much shorter the waiting lists would be if the 
money that was wasted on ISC was made available? This was a 
project by the government to computerize our land titles 
system. It was supposed to cost us $20 million — $20 million. 
 
And it was a worthwhile project. I mean you should be able to 
take a simple piece of paper with people’s land title on it, with 
any caveats and liens against it, and record that and have it 
available. And you can simply go in and pull it up and print it 
off. Seems pretty simple. And yet it has cost this government 
$107 million — five times as much as the original projection. 
Over five times as much as the original projection. 
 
And you know what? It doesn’t work. Instead of one piece of 
paper coming out with the title, the name, any caveats and liens 
or encumbrances against the piece of property, you end up with 
reams of paper . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, in a 
paperless system — reams of paper which have a high 
percentage chance of being wrong. They’ve got the wrong 
names on them. They’ve got the . . . Instead of putting a 
property description, they’ve got some number on there that 
nobody knows what it means. They’re not even using a legal 
land description. It’s a failure from start to finish. 
 
Now they’re hiring another company to try and go back in and 
straighten it out. Who knows how much money is it going to 
cost now? Oh, the Deputy Premier says they’re not going to 
straighten it out. You know, I don’t know how you can operate 
under this system where you can’t get a title properly. 
 
You know I was listening to a program on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) one night and they were talking 
about the reasons why there is a difficulty across the Third 
World in generating economic activity; why people who have 
property, have homes, cannot take their property and use it for 
equity to generate new capital. And the reason that couldn’t 
happen is because they had no means to record and measure 
property titles. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we allow the NDP to continue to 
run their corporation, the ISC, the way it has been running, we 
will be getting to that position as a Third World country. 
 
Where our medicine has been heading in that direction — 
we’ve been heading to turn-of-the-century medicine, that’s 19th 
century. Our road system under the NDP has been heading to 
turn of the century, 19th century. And now they’re trying to 
move our land titles back to the turn of the century, the 19th 
century. I can see the NDP now trying to revive the land titles 
office in Arcola, putting it back to where it was 100-and-some 
years ago, because that is the way their system works. 
 
They cannot move forward. They’re still operating on an 
economic philosophy that was discredited, but it’s 60 years old 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

and it’s theirs. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s another one of the reasons why 
the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in this 
particular government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are there any other reasons, Dan? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Oh there are so many reasons that you 
can’t possibly go through and list them all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but there are others here who would perhaps like to have the 
opportunity to outline some of the areas that they believe why 
the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in the 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know my colleague from Moosomin 
quoted a quote talking about governments that have lost 
confidence, and I think to repeat that quote would be an 
appropriate way to end this. And I would like to quote from the 
Premier, today’s Premier. This is a quote that he said in 
Hansard, in this Assembly in 1990, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to 
quote from it. 
 

My central point is that we have a crisis of confidence in 
the province of Saskatchewan, that we have a government 
that has been stripped of its credibility, a government that 
has no longer the confidence of the people, a government 
that no longer seems to have a vision or a clear direction; in 
short, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 
And that is still a quote because obviously the Deputy Speaker 
was still in the Chair. 
 

. . . I believe, a government that has lost the capacity to . . . 
(government). 
 
And in a democracy — I repeat — (and) in (a) . . . 
democracy or in any nation, in any nation when a 
government has lost the confidence of its people, when a 
government is stripped of its credibility, when a 
government has no vision, then it is time to defeat that 
government and give another group of men and women the 
opportunity to govern. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time for this 
Premier to call an election and today is not too soon. I support 
the member for Moosomin’s motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very, very, very 
pleased to enter into this debate this afternoon, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And at the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ll be moving an amendment that more properly 
reflects the attitudes of Saskatchewan’s people about the 
Government of Saskatchewan and this legislature. 
 
And I would challenge the members opposite to allow us to 
vote on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because the members opposite, 
they keep talking about wanting to vote . . . (inaudible) . . . in 
this non-confidence vote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let them have 

the ability and the will to let the people of this legislature to 
determine whether or not there’s confidence in the government. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about the members 
opposite. I want to talk about the Saskatchewan Party and 
where they stand. And I want to set the record straight for the 
people of the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to start with the most 
recent fiasco. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all heard in this 
Assembly over the last few days about the P.A. forestry centre. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we heard how the people of Prince Albert 
didn’t want it. We heard how industry didn’t want it. We heard 
how the First Nations people of our province didn’t want the 
P.A. forestry centre. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about what the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers said today on the John 
Gormley show. Mr. Deputy Speaker, he says this. After he cut 
down this project day after day in this Assembly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, today on the radio he says this: 
 

This project is good for the people of Prince Albert. It’s 
good for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s good for the 
forest industry. The Saskatchewan Party has always 
maintained this position. 

 
We were mighty fooled in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by 
what was said. But so was the whole community. 
 

The opportunity to expand our learning in the forestry 
sector is something that we can’t pass up. This opportunity 
is simply way too good. We’ve always been in support of 
it, and we will continue to do so. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know, but I sat in this Assembly 
the last few days and heard the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers say just the opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when the 
people of Saskatchewan catch him telling, telling the story in a 
way in which they don’t believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then they 
call us . . . call them accountable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, John Gormley then asked, did you not 
though do your due diligence, to the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. You could have made the same calls 
yesterday before you talked to me on the show. Because again, 
the day before on the show he said it wasn’t a good project. 
And you could have said, hey, there is strong support for it, 
couldn’t you? 
 
But the member, no, he couldn’t do that then because he wanted 
to take an opportunity to politically attack the government on 
something and say the people didn’t want it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when clearly the people of this province do want it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now want to talk about another fiasco. I 
want to talk about the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. I have 
here an article saying, Hermanson apologizes to Schmidt, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We have a situation here where the Leader of 
the Opposition attacks an individual, attacks his employment, 
attacks his family values, in a most . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . and integrity in a most disrespectful way, something that no 
leader of a political party should ever do to another individual. 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

 

But the Leader of the Official Opposition, of the Saskatchewan 
Party, did just that. And that man one day wants to be the 
premier of this province. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province, the people of 
this province will not put a person in charge of this province 
with the values that this Leader of the Opposition has 
demonstrated, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This election will be on an 
issue of values. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about another issue. 
We have the member . . . We have the, pardon me, the member 
from Arm River talking about Crown corporations and he said 
and I quote. In The Outlook, he wrote this: 
 

But it is no secret the Sask. Party wants to rid the province 
of most Crown corporations, however, Brkich said the 
“core Crowns” — such as Sask Water, SaskPower, SaskTel 
and SGI — will be treated differently than the other 
“treasury Crowns,” which would not be sold off 
immediately but when the selling price would reap the 
“best bang for the buck.” 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite are prepared to 
sell off the very assets that the people of this province value for 
the delivery of costly . . . cost-efficient and effective services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk now about the member from 
Swift Current, the member from Swift Current. And I have an 
article here saying, “Critic distorting facts.”  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it says: 
 

Wall may deem it politically beneficial to manipulate the 
facts, to claim that the government is allowing the Crown 
utility to gouge customers and suggest that the company 
staff lacked the competence required in a volatile industry.  
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, even the reporters are catching on that 
these people will say anything to try to garner political power, 
but it’s about nothing more than garnering political power. 
 
The article goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the article goes 
on to say: 
 

. . . that reality. And if Wall still doesn’t get it, 
Saskatchewan residents will be in huge trouble with him in 
charge (huge trouble) . . . (inaudible) . . . that the utilities 
must pay higher than spot-market rates to secure longer 
term contracts for the benefit of people. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say just 
one more thing about this article about the critic, the 
Saskatchewan Party critic on Crown corporations. It goes on to 
say: 
 

But he (referring to Mr. Wall) and his party should let 
voters decide the issue without distortions and 
misrepresentation of facts. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that what the people of Saskatchewan 

want in their future government? The answer is no. 
 
I want to go on to talk about another, another situation 
involving the member from Swift Current. And again I’m 
quoting from the Leader-Post, the Murray Mandryk column, 
Wednesday, February 26, 2003, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
quote: 
 

And last week, the Saskatchewan Party’s release on Spudco 
fell just shy of fabrication. At issue was a quote attributed 
to Crown Investment Corp. Minister Maynard Sonntag 
made June 13, 2000 during budget estimates debates. The 
Saskatchewan Party release quoted Sonntag as saying: 
“With respect to Con-Force in the construction of the 
buildings, they were jointly owned. The ownership was 
Con-Force 51 per cent and ourselves 49 per cent.” 

 
However what Sonntag actually said . . . And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to emphasize, what Sonntag actually said — the 
minister for CIC — is this: 
 

“First of all, with respect to Con-Force in the construction 
of the buildings, they were jointly owned but they were 
entirely debt-financed and SaskWater, the Spudco division 
of SaskWater subsequently bought Con-Force out.” 
 
Not only did the opposition completely reconstruct 
Sonntag’s quote, but it did so to make the point that (they 
needed to be) that there needed to be a special legislative 
investigation of Sonntag for (and I quote) “lying to the 
Legislature.” 
 
That’s not just irresponsible. It’s contemptible. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the calibre of the men and women 
opposite and what they believe and how they believe this 
province should be governed. Are the people going to choose 
the members opposite to ever be a government when they 
approach issues in this manner? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk again about the member for 
Swift Current. The member from Swift Current apologized to 
the members of the legislative Crown Corporations Committee 
for a false statement he made in committee. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I applaud the member opposite for apologizing when 
he understood he made a statement and was called upon by 
fellow members of the legislature. I do applaud him for 
apologizing. He’s getting very, very good at it because he’s 
having to stand up many times and apologize for comments he 
makes. 
 
And I think that do the opposition . . . or do the government 
members on this side draw attention to that? Most definitely we 
do, because we think it’s very important, very important for the 
people of Saskatchewan to judge people based on facts, not 
fiction, Mr. Deputy Speaker — fact, not fiction. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to deal with another situation. 
I have, I have here two press releases from the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The first one dated April 24, 2003, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, where it says: 
 

The NDP loses at least 10 million taxpayers’ dollars on 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2003 

 

Honolulu cable company. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they did not do their due diligence as they 
always want others to do. Because just a few hours later, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there’s a press release here apologizing for the 
misrepresentation of the first press release, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that what the people of Saskatchewan 
want in a future government? The answer is no. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and now I want to talk about a press 
release put forward by the member from Cannington. It says: 
 

D’Autremont said a Saskatchewan Party government would 
not make equity investments in any private-sector company 
in Saskatchewan. 

 
I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an interview with John 
Gormley and Elwin Hermanson, the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I have two issues I want 
to raise to the Assembly. One is I’m having difficulty hearing 
the member who has the floor, and I believe that he is making 
mention of members referring to their proper names. As the 
member knows, he’s only permitted to do that in the aspect of a 
quote. So two things, I would ask hon. members to please tone 
down the volume, and also the member to make sure that he not 
uses proper names. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I apologize 
for using the member’s name. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Rosetown-Biggar, the 
Leader of the Opposition, says here and I quote: 
 

Well the challenge with Crown corporations is to decide 
what role they should play in the 21st century. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

I think we have to create a new generation of Crown — it 
might not be quite in the shape it is now — to release the 
shackle so that they can expand beyond the boundaries of 
the province. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition says they 
should be investing and expanding beyond the boundaries of the 
province. And when this government does just that, they sit and 
criticize it day after day after day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they don’t have a plan. They don’t have a 
policy. They want to be all things to all people. So when it’s 
popular to say they will do something, they’ll say it. When it’s 
popular to say they won’t do something, Mr. Speaker, they’ll 
say it. They have no plan. They have no direction. They tell 
people what they want to hear because they have no vision for a 
future — no vision, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, I want to take 
just a couple of minutes here to talk about the things that are 
going on in this province. 
 
In the area of employment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or, Mr. 

Speaker, pardon me, we’ve been . . . Mr. Speaker, we are up 
11,400 jobs, year over year — 11,400 jobs. We’re tied for the 
fourth highest percentage of increase in Canada, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have retail sales up 7.7 per cent for 
626 million unadjusted. We have the 17th consecutive monthly 
increase in retail sales. And we have the highest percentage of 
increase in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the members opposite talk doom and gloom. They can’t 
say anything positive about their own province. 
 
In fact they had the audacity, Mr. Speaker, to attack, to attack 
the forestry centre in Prince Albert and say that business, the 
Aboriginal community, and the city didn’t want it. And then, 
Mr. Speaker, what happens? The city, industry, and business 
rallied to send a very clear message that they in fact do want the 
forestry centre in Prince Albert. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about 
some other great economic indicators in the province of 
Saskatchewan. To start, department store merchandise is up 6.4 
per cent sales to $181 million. We’ve got, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we’ve got manufacturing up 1.4 per cent. We’ve got housing 
starts up a whopping 137.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got 
natural gas production up 6.5 per cent. We’ve got potash sales 
up 10.4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got new motor vehicles 
up 3.8 per cent. We’ve got 17 per cent increase . . . 17.4 per 
cent increase in business and corporations. And we have 
tourism and visitors to our province up as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a province that is growing. It is a province on the move. 
It’s a province that is expanding to meet the needs of its 
provincial citizens. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have an 
opposition who wants to talk negatively, talk about doom and 
gloom day after day but they have nothing positive to say. They 
don’t have a plan. They don’t bring forth any ideas; they simply 
sit and complain. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all know it’s easy to try to be all things to 
all people. It’s easy to complain but it’s much more difficult to 
bring forward ideas. It’s much more difficult to grow than to 
destroy. And, Mr. Speaker, they are set with a single agenda to 
be government at any cost even if they have to destroy the very 
foundation of our province to get there. 
 
They talk about doom and gloom every day. I have never heard, 
I have never heard in four years in this Assembly the members 
opposite talk about the good economic news. I’ve never heard 
them talk about the positive things. They only talk about 
negative things, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or, Mr. Speaker, and 
they only do it in which to try and drag our province down. 
They have no interest in building the province. They have an 
interest in only one thing — attaining power at all costs. And 
they will do anything to attain that power. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you and the people of this 
province that those of us on this side of the Assembly will do 
everything we can to ensure that this province continues to 
grow and that we continue to move forward for our children. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that means we have to work extremely hard 
to make sure the members opposite, the members opposite 



May 6, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

 

never, never become government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, or, Mr. Speaker, as we’re drawing towards 
the end of my remarks, I would like to end by saying that the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province will judge us all on an issue of integrity. And they will 
judge the Premier of this province versus the Leader of the 
Opposition and, Mr. Speaker, when they do that this Premier is 
going to win hands down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — He is a man with great integrity, with great 
principles, and he is a man for this province, for a province that 
believes in the collective responsibility of all its citizens — not 
about simply attaining power at any cost. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or, Mr. Speaker, for those reasons, I 
would move the following amendment, seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That all words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and 
substituted with the following: 
 
expresses its confidence in the Premier of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, owing to the achievement of economic 
diversification; the achievement of job growth that includes 
opportunities for persons previously dependent on social 
assistance and persons with disabilities; the achievement of 
enhanced health, education, and social programs; and the 
achievement of a massive program of transportation, 
telecommunications, energy, and municipal infrastructure 
development. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The division bells rang from 16:46 until 16:55. 
 
Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Crofford 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet   
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I would 
ask for complete silence during the taking of the vote. 
 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Thomson Junor Nilson 
Atkinson Hamilton Harper 
Forbes Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Yates 
McCall Iwanchuk  

Nays — 20 
 
Hermanson Toth Julé 
Krawetz Draude  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Once again I would ask 
members for complete silence during the vote. 
 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Wakefield 
Stewart Harpauer Eagles 
McMorris D’Autremont Wall 
Huyghebaert Dearborn Wiberg 
Weekes Hart Allchurch 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on division. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................903 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................904 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................904 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................904 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................904 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................904 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................904 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................904 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................911 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................918 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................918 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................919 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................922 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Badge and Shield Awards 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................904 
 Polonia Dance Ensemble 
  Kasperski ...................................................................................................................................................................................905 
 Youth Business Excellence Awards 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................905 
 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................905 
 People of Swift Current and Area Replace Stolen Bicycle  
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................906 
 Women Entrepreneurs Week 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................906 
 Outlook Firefighting Expenses 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................906 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Investment in Minds Eye Pictures 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................907 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................908 
 Crop Insurance Program 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................909 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................910 
 Response to Excess Rainfall in Wadena Area 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................911 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................911 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Visit to Saskatchewan by His Royal Highness the Earl of Wessex 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................912 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 202 — The Water Quality Recognition Day Act 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................912 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................913 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................913 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 4 — Non-Confidence Motion 
  Toth ....................................................................................................................................................................................913, 918 



 

 

  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................922 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................930 
 Recorded division .........................................................................................................................................................................933 
 


	People of Swift Current and Area
	Replace Stolen Bicycle
	Women Entrepreneurs Week
	People of Swift Current and Area Replace Stolen Bicycle
	Women Entrepreneurs Week

