















































Hansard: June 09, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1501 
 June 9, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to stand to present a petition on behalf of people 
of this province who would like to see Highway No. 20 from 
Nokomis to Strasbourg repaired. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in 
order to address safety concerns and to facilitate economic 
growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt, the community of Watson, of Bruno, and of 
Bellevue. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to bring forward a petition on behalf of people who 
are concerned about Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Kelvington 
and Lintlaw. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and area 
concerned about the lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take the 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit in their community. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, of course are from the 
city of Moose Jaw but also for the communities of Mortlach and 
Holdfast, and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition on behalf of constituents from the Cypress Hills 
constituency concerning the premium increases to crop 
insurance this year. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 

crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from Lancer, 
Abbey, and Portreeve. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 43, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg, Willow Bunch, and Mazenod. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition from citizens concerned about Highway No. 20. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, Strasbourg, 
and Duval. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens from my 
constituency very concerned about the condition of Highway 
47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan, Midale, 
Bienfait, and North Portal. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents of Moose Jaw and 
district who are very concerned about the lack of a 
hemodialysis unit. And the prayer reads: 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Lafleche and 
Woodrow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents from my hometown who have a constructive proposal 
for a new CT (computerized tomography) scanner for the Swift 
Current Regional Hospital. And the prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, all the petitioners are from the frontier 
city, the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise again with a petition from citizens who are 
extremely concerned about the highway conditions in rural 
Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Vanguard, Pambrun, Swift Current, and visitors from Lloyd, 
Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
again present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with safety for workers in the oil 
patch in the Coleville area and the lack of cellphone coverage. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
construct a new cellular telephone tower at Coleville, 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Coleville and Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the high premium increases to 
farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the government’s 
handling of the Crown land leases. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from the 
village of Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 18, 36, 41, 120, and no. 124. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 59 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Gaming Authority: how 
does Wascana Gaming incorporated own the software 
developed for the SLGA’s mega bingo in light of the fact 
that RFP Western Canada Lottery Corporation reference 
no. 621-97, section 23, refers to intellectual property 
rights? 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day. no. 59 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the environment and 
resource management: how many pickup trucks did your 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

 

department purchase in fiscal year 2002-2003; and further 
to that, what companies or dealerships were these vehicles 
purchased from; and what was the purchase price per 
vehicle? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have questions for several years in regards 
to this manner. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of this Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce 
someone behind the bar, Senator Daryl Beall from Iowa. 
 
He’s a teacher and a journalist, and his claim to fame — or one 
of his many claims to fame — is he ran for Secretary of State at 
age 25, and he got nearly half a million votes and he still didn’t 
win. But he does have the record as the youngest statewide 
candidate in the history of Iowa. 
 
So I ask everyone to welcome Senator Beall to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
today to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, Senator Ryan Taylor from North Dakota. 
 
Senator Taylor is a rancher, columnist, and territory manager. 
And I think a lot of us are going to be familiar with the name 
because of the column that he writes is Cowboy Logic — so 
many of us have read that column. 
 
So I would like all of you to please welcome Senator Taylor to 
our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would also like to welcome one 
of our guests from Nebraska, Senator Adrian Smith. 
 
Senator Smith is a Republican legislator from the province . . . 
or from the state of Nebraska and in District 48. And I would 
ask all members to please join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce Senator Pam Redfield who represents District 12, 
Omaha, Nebraska. 
 
Senator Redfield is a graduate of the Duchesne Academy and a 
graduate of the University of Nebraska at Omaha. She is Chair 
of the National Conference of State Legislators; member, 
executive board, National Conference of Insurance Legislators; 
member of Innovations Selections, Suggested State Legislation, 
and Midwest-Canada Trade Relations committees, Council of 
State Governments; Task and Fiscal Policy Task Force, 
American Legislative Exchange Council; and a Chair, Rotary 
International Foundation; as well a member of the committees 
of banking, commerce and insurance, and revenue claims. 
 

I hope all members will welcome Senator Redfield. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to our colleagues in the 
House, Ilene Grossman who is sitting up in the Speaker’s 
gallery. 
 
Ilene comes to us from the Council of State Governors, the 
Midwest Legislative Conference. Ilene coordinates all of this 
and makes sure it works. 
 
And I think everyone would be interested to know that Ilene is 
very involved in the upcoming MLC (Midwestern Legislative 
Conference) conference that is proposed for Saskatchewan in 
2005. And all the members in this House, I believe, are working 
closely with that and I would ask that they welcome Ilene to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all 
members of the Assembly, 19 students who are sitting in the 
west gallery of the legislature from Wildwood School in my 
constituency. These are grade 8 students, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’re accompanied by their teacher, Cindy Dickie, and by 
four parent chaperones, Mr. Speaker: Maryanne Zuzak, Kathy 
Litwin, Terry Redpath, and Deb Baker. 
 
And I’d like to invite all members of the Assembly to extend a 
warm welcome to these students and their parents and teacher. 
And we wish you a very nice visit to the legislature, an 
enjoyable time in Regina, and a safe trip home. I’m looking 
forward to getting together with you later this afternoon. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and please welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, I would 
like to introduce 16 grade 5 students from Scotsburn School in 
Estevan. They are seated in the east gallery and they are 
accompanied by their teacher, Carolyn Walliser; chaperone, 
Bonnie Rittaler; and bus driver, Terry Whitman. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them after question period and I 
ask all members to join me in welcoming them here this 
afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
you notice that my buttons are bulging a little bit this afternoon, 
it’s not because of the diet I’ve been keeping over the session. 
It’s because three of the four best grandchildren in the world are 
in your gallery this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied, of course, by Carole, who is 
no stranger, and our daughter Laurie, and they’re Hayley, Scott, 
and Rachael McKherracher from Calgary. Mr. Speaker, it’s 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

always a pleasure to invite and welcome guests to the Chamber, 
but it’s particularly a pleasure to invite your own grandchildren 
and I’d like everyone to please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Women Voyageurs Travel 
from Cumberland House to The Pas 

 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to tell the Assembly 
about a remarkable group of northern women who recently 
performed a feat of endurance in the North for the benefit of 
northerners. 
 
Twenty-four women from Cumberland House and The Pas, 
Manitoba, took four voyageur canoes and paddled on the 
Saskatchewan River from Cumberland House to The Pas. The 
trip took two days and one overnight camp. One voyageur, by 
the way, was 71 years young, Marie Louise McKenzie. 
 
The purpose of the trip was to raise awareness of, and to raise 
funds for wellness and the prevention of diabetes, a disease, as 
you know, which affects far too many northerners. In fact, four 
of the participants are diabetics themselves. 
 
These canoes were first used in 1967 to commemorate the 
historic significance of Saskatchewan’s oldest community, and 
based on the success of this new voyage they are going to be 
used again during Saskatchewan’s centennial for a trek from the 
Churchill River in from La Loche to Cumberland House. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funds raised by this modern group of 
voyageurs will be used to purchase emergency diabetic kits and 
medic alert bracelets for distribution in the North. 
 
This was a unique adventure by a group of modern women 
connecting their communities to the past as they help build for 
the future, and I congratulate each of the 24 for their intrepid 
adventure. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kyle Multiple 4-H Club 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise and offer congratulations to the Kyle Multiple 4-H Club for 
holding a very well-attended and successful annual 
Achievement Day this past Saturday. 
 
I want to thank the club vice-president, Nadine Gray, for 
sending me an invitation to this year’s awards presentation 
covering a host of activities from archery and photography to 
beef and canine clubs. 
 
The Kyle Multiple 4-H Club holds the distinction of being the 
largest club of its kind in Saskatchewan, with 53 members and 
13 leaders. The club has a huge positive impact on the 

communities of Kyle, Elrose, and Lacadena. 
 
This year the club was led by President Alyssa Hamilton and by 
general leaders, Sherri Hodgins and Ken Hamilton. 
 
Hats off to the Kyle Multiple 4-H Club on doing its part and 
more in developing Saskatchewan’s leaders of tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Community Excellence Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you 
imagine a community where children with disabilities go to 
school with no program planning in place, no supports, and 
very little parental involvement? Where children with 
disabilities sit on the sideline during a track meet? I’m sure you 
can. 
 
But can you imagine a single event that leads a school system in 
that community to prepare with parental involvement? Can you 
imagine that the school would then ask the parents to act as the 
team leaders for all the meetings relating to their child? 
 
Where did this happen? Well, Mr. Speaker, this happened in a 
community where parents and families decided that they would 
find a positive way to work toward change. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
proud to say that these changes happened in my community of 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Two years ago parents organized a meeting between families 
and community leaders, gathering everyone together with the 
goals of creating understanding and working towards inclusion. 
That one single event sparked a host of changes. What 
happened and is still happening is community building, 
partnerships, supporting families and individuals with 
disabilities, and advocacy, all rolled into one. All working 
toward the goal of inclusion. 
 
Last Saturday, Mr. Speaker, the board of the Saskatchewan 
Association for Community Living announced Meadow Lake as 
Saskatchewan’s Community of Excellence for its contribution 
in the area of working with children with disabilities. And this 
will be recognized at the Canadian association of living as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Meadow Lake Association 
for Community Living president, Vivian Thickett, and all 
involved for being recognized for this prestigious achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

50th Anniversary of Residing in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 8, 1953 
Simon Vanderstoel arrived in the Pense area from Holland 
where he had a background in dairy farming, had achieved an 
agricultural diploma in post-graduate studies, and had just 
completed two years in the Dutch army. 
 
Simon was placed by an employment agency on the Don 
McGillivray farm north of Pense and only two and a half miles 
from where I grew up. Simon worked with the McGillivrays 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

 

until they retired. He then purchased the farm piece by piece 
until he owned all of it and went on to expand substantially 
after that. 
 
Simon married Jane in 1956 and the couple raised a wonderful 
family in the area, and their son Chris now lives on and operates 
the farm. Simon and Jane now reside in Regina in 
semi-retirement, but Simon is at the farm working hard almost 
every day through the spring, summer, and fall months. 
 
Simon and Jane Vanderstoel have been very productive and an 
asset to their community, their province, and their country — 
the kind of people that ask only what they can contribute. 
 
Congratulations, Simon and Jane, for 50 productive years in 
Saskatchewan. And thank you for the rich contributions that 
you have made to your province and your country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mine Emergency Response Competition 
 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, 
Saskatchewan Mining Week occurred recently. 
 
One of the many positive events of that week was the 
announcement in this Assembly by the Minister of Labour of 
new mining regulations to take effect next month. These 
regulations will help improve the protection of mineworkers’ 
health and safety. They are the culmination of six years of 
collaborative work between mine owners, mineworkers, and the 
provincial government. Among the new regulations are 
increased underground emergency drills to ensure prompt 
response should the need arise. 
 
As a windup to Mining Week, on Saturday May 31 the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association held its 35th annual 
emergency response competition at the Regina exhibition 
grounds. These are competitions, Mr. Speaker, in a number of 
critical areas in which mine rescue teams face mock accident 
situations and have to respond as they would in a real crisis. 
They are judged in the basic skills of first aid, firefighting, and 
other major mine problems they would potentially face both 
above and underground. These are learning exercises and they 
are good fun with the ulterior motive because of the 
competition involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several categories each with several 
awards. So I would simply like to say that the winners in this 
competition were Saskatchewan mineworkers who can perform 
their crucial work in the Saskatchewan economy with the 
assurance that their safety is well looked after. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kindersley Couple Celebrates 
65th Wedding Anniversary 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to pass along best wishes to an 
amazing couple from Kindersley who celebrated their 65th 

wedding anniversary yesterday. 
 
Clayton and Millan Jaeger were married in Meadow Lake on 
June 8, 1938. Clayton was born in Simpson and Millan in 
Saskatoon. Both were living in Regina when they met, Clayton 
delivering milk for the Co-op creamery and Millan attending 
Marvel hairdressing school. The couple settled in Regina and a 
family soon followed — twins Vera and Verna in 1939; a son, 
Jim, in 1940; and daughter Eila in 1942. 
 
Clayton moved to Brock in the spring of 1952 to work for the 
PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and the 
family followed that fall. Clayton worked for the PFRA with 
Millan by his side, helping with all that that job entailed, until 
1976 when the couple retired and moved into town. 
 
Today Clayton is 92 and Millan is 84. The couple is living in 
their own home, taking good care of each other with minimal 
help from family living nearby. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Clayton and Millan on this 
very special milestone, and wishing them continued good 
health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Galaxy Cinemas Opens Newest Location in Regina 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a great new 
Canadian company right here in Regina. Galaxy Entertainment 
have opened their 16th theatre right in Regina in Normanview 
mall. 
 
Galaxy, Mr. Speaker, is reinventing the theatre experience. 
Everyone should experience it first-hand. Galaxy brings great 
movies and they have great seats with lumbar support, extra 
width, 49 inches back from the seat in front of you, and theatre 
seating is 18 inches higher than the seat right in front of you. 
There is not a bad seat in the house. 
 
In addition, Galaxy theatres is wheelchair accessible and they 
will provide, free of charge, laser hearing devices for those who 
require it. 
 
All of this, and each of Galaxy theatres has its own unique 
characteristic in the lobby. In the Normanview mall it’s a space 
theme so it is literally fitting that they have out-of-this-world 
entertainment. 
 
Galaxy is a young company that will be a great part of Regina’s 
future. Mr. Speaker, they used their gala opening to fundraise 
over $8,000 for Regina’s YWCA (Young Women’s Christian 
Association) and that was most welcome. 
 
It’s an honour to welcome Galaxy theatres. I urge everyone to 
try the experience, and I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Galaxy theatres to Saskatchewan and wish them a 
very prosperous future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

Welwyn Couple Celebrate 50th 
Wedding Anniversary 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while 
attending a number of events this past Saturday, I had the 
pleasure of dropping in on Vince and Dorothy Dobson’s 50th 
wedding anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this couple have farmed in the Welwyn area for 
almost 70 years, and they’ve been a couple that have worked 
together very well in not only building their relationship but 
certainly building a farm. 
 
But Vincent hasn’t only been involved in farming. He’s also 
been involved as a rural councillor, and I believe, for almost 30 
years. In fact when I first got involved in politics and met 
Vincent — that’s where I met him; I met him at a SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) annual 
meeting — and Vincent was always an interesting person to 
talk to. 
 
The most important thing about this couple is the fact that over 
the number of years that they’ve farmed and raised a family, it 
appears that they’ve never had a disagreement of any kind. Just 
chatting with them the other day and in the debate that ensued 
in their anniversary, they concluded that the reason they were 
still together and have survived 50 years together is because 
they always agreed on whether who bought the groceries, who 
made decisions on the farm — any decision that was made, it 
was made together between the two of them. 
 
And I congratulate them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the minister answering for agriculture. We are now 
answering . . . entering the fourth week since it was announced 
that a case of BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) had 
been discovered on an Alberta ranch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CFIA (Canadian Food Inspection Agency) has 
been testing any beef animal even remotely linked to the case, 
going so far as to slaughter hundreds of animals to trace-outs, 
and that includes another 19 Saskatchewan cattle herds. 
 
At the CFIA’s technical briefing this morning, they said they 
are expecting the test, final test results, in the next few days and 
that they are very close to concluding their investigation. Now 
this is hopeful news, but what we are waiting to hear is that our 
international trading partners, and particularly the United States, 
will be lifting their bans on Canadian beef. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister have any indication today that 
the United States may be lifting their trade restrictions to allow 
imports of Canadian beef? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d be pleased to answer on behalf of the Premier and 
the Minister of Agriculture who are right now discussing this 
very issue with our federal counterparts in Kelowna at the 
Western first ministers’ meeting. 
 
And I want to say that we too are very encouraged with the 
work that has been done. I think it’s fair to say that people 
around the world are taking notice of the work that the CFIA 
has been involved in. 
 
I noted this morning that Dr. Kihm, who is part of the 
international team, has indicated that they have never seen such 
a comprehensive review. And I think it’s also fair to say that we 
all know the Americans will make their decision based on the 
report that is put together here, based on the scientific evidence 
that is put together here in Canada and will be then sent to the 
Americans for their review. And after they’ve completed their 
review I’m sure that they’ll find what we believe to be the case, 
that Canadian beef is a very safe commodity, and ready for 
trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A panel of 
international scientists is in Canada reviewing all of the CFIA’s 
work in the BSE investigation. And they have now released a 
preliminary report on their findings. However they say that their 
final report will take yet another two weeks to complete. And 
the American member of that panel indicated this morning that 
the US (United States) would be waiting for this final report and 
all other relevant information before they make any decision to 
lift the trade restrictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this of course is of great concern because of the 
considerable economic impact that the shutdown of our beef 
industry is having, particularly here in Western Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, if another two weeks goes by before the trade 
restrictions are lifted, the situation will be devastating for our 
provincial cattle industry. 
 
What is the minister doing on behalf of the province of 
Saskatchewan to help encourage the removal of these trade 
restrictions very quickly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say 
that we recognize the potential impact that these trade 
restrictions are having on our industry. I know that it impacts on 
the auction marts. It impacts on our cow-calf operations and on 
our feeder operations, trucking. So it’s quite clearly a major 
impact on Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
In answer to the member’s question, the fact that the Minister of 
Agriculture is meeting with his federal counterparts right now, 
that the Premier of this province has brought this to the 
forefront of the Western ministers’ agenda, that the discussions 
will be taking place this afternoon . . . I can say, Mr. Speaker, 
that I met with Minister Goodale a week and a half ago in 
Ottawa. I met with the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, as 
well as the minister of Aboriginal affairs, to raise 
Saskatchewan’s concerns, to raise Saskatchewan’s issues. 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

 

These are the types of things that we are doing. Our officials 
right now are in Ottawa meeting with the federal counterparts, 
and Saskatchewan will continue to take a leadership role in 
bringing this to a conclusion so that we can allow Canadian 
cattle into the American markets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the concern 
that trade restrictions be removed quickly is one of great 
concern. But there’s even a greater concern that we have. And 
the minister has already alluded to talks that are going on in 
Ottawa so that’s encouraging. I expect now he’ll be able to 
answer the questions. 
 
We’re concerned, Mr. Speaker, that even as of this morning we 
heard that the federal government is only working on 
compensation for producers whose animals were slaughtered in 
this investigation and that no compensation whatsoever is being 
considered for anyone else impacted by the BSE case. 
 
Feedlot operators, which the minister mentioned, are being 
crushed under the weight of feeding cattle that they now can’t 
send to market. Packing plant employees are being laid off as 
close as in Moose Jaw. Auction houses are silent and the losses 
of trucking companies are mounting daily. Mr. Speaker, this is 
unacceptable. Phone calls and letters aren’t getting the message 
across. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the minister says he has 
been talking with Mr. Goodale and others in Ottawa, can he tell 
us what this pressure that he’s bringing to bear on the federal 
government is bringing to us? Are we going to see a 
compensation package for the beef industry that goes beyond 
those just for owners of slaughtered animals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in direct 
response to the Leader of the Opposition, I can say that the 
position of this government has been clear and it’s been 
unequivocal: one, that compensation is a national government 
responsibility; two, that it not come from existing pools of 
resource to the agriculture community; and three, that it be done 
as expediently as possibly can be arrived at. 
 
But I want to say that no one on this side of the House is 
unaware of the impact on Saskatchewan and Western Canada’s 
economy. The Alberta government is well aware of it; the 
Ontario government’s well aware of it; the British Columbia 
government is well aware of it. And we’re putting as much 
pressure as we possibly can, working with the federal 
administration, working with the federal politicians. 
 
But the bottom line here is that we convince the people who are 
the recipients of exports of Canadian beef that we have safe, 
that we have a safe industry, that we have safe food. And we are 
ensuring through the scientific evidence that we are putting 
forth, working with the federal government through CFIA, that 
that is the case, Mr. Speaker. That’s a responsibility of all of us 
and I want to say that I appreciate the support that the Leader of 

the Opposition through his House Leader has indicated this 
morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, people from the beef 
industry have met with the federal government, and provincial 
governments have been lobbying for support. And yet the 
federal government appears ignorant to the fact that the BSE 
case on our beef industry and our provincial economies is 
becoming larger and larger. It’s important that the federal 
government provide emergency compensation to help our 
industries weather this crisis, and that it be delivered to those 
who need it as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need action from Ottawa. The Saskatchewan 
Party official opposition intends to move an emergency motion 
in this legislature today calling on the federal government to 
recognize that several industries and thousands of people have 
been impacted negatively by the single case of BSE discovered 
in Canada, and calling for the immediate development of a 
compensation package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister and the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government support this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
Leader of the Opposition that he may want to talk to his House 
Leader because I indicated to him early this morning, or earlier 
today, that we would be more than willing to second the motion 
calling upon the federal government to immediately come forth 
with funding to work on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’m very glad that the members 
of the opposition are willing to join in our initiatives to ensure 
that the Western Canadian beef industry is protected and that 
it’s healthy over the long haul. And I think a message to Ottawa 
from this legislature is more than appropriate. So absolutely 
we’ll be supporting the motion by seconding that motion this 
afternoon after question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible Change in Party Affiliation 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Finance minister and former Liberal leader has now decided to 
make it official. He’s joined the NDP. There’s only one 
problem with that, Mr. Speaker. The NDP policy requires him 
to resign immediately and run in a by-election like the member 
from Athabasca did. 
 
Now that the former Liberal leader has joined the NDP, will he 
be following the NDP’s own policy and resign his seat today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
members of the Saskatchewan Party that the member from 
Saskatoon has indicated that he is willing to and going to be 
joining a winning team in the next election. 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s quite clear that members of the opposition 
have been calling for an election and it’ll come sooner rather 
than later; I want to promise the Leader of the Opposition that. 
And I want to promise you that the Finance minister is going to 
be re-elected in the same seat as a New Democrat and he’s 
going to be joining a majority government in the next 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Finance has now admitted he got the idea to sue the 
leader of the option from watching Dr. Phil. Mr. Speaker, 
you’ve got to wonder, you’ve got to wonder what he was 
watching when he drafted this latest budget. Fantasy Island, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
A few years ago the NDP made a real big deal about members 
switching parties. In fact in the 1999 Throne Speech, they 
promised legislation to force members to resign and run in a 
by-election before they’d be allowed to sit with another party. 
But now that that very government needs a former Liberal 
leader to prop up its shaky government, the NDP seems to be 
abandoning its own policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the Minister of Finance has announced 
he is joining the NDP, will he be required to resign his seat 
immediately and run in a by-election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to say to the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party and all of 
his colleagues over there, I know that the member is 
contemplating joining the NDP. He hasn’t done it quite yet. But 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, every member on this side of the 
House will welcome him with open arms if he so chooses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — But I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, 
that this member, unlike members on that side of the House that 
snuck around in the dark of night forming together and cobbling 
together what’s now known as the Saskatchewan Party, this 
member of the legislature at least has the courage to be public 
about what he’s thinking about doing, being public about why 
he’s thinking about doing. And ultimately, Mr. Speaker, I am 
very much encouraged that he’s going to be joining members 
on this side of the House in a new NDP government, and I hope 
the Premier calls that election pretty soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, now that the 
House Leader’s confirmed that the Minister of Finance will be 
running for the NDP during the next election, he’ll have all 
sorts of time after the next election to watch Dr. Phil, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a quote. The quote is: 
 

What it comes down to is, (he’s) being bought, paid for, 
and wrapped up by the NDP. 

Those aren’t my words, Mr. Speaker. Those are the words of 
the former Liberal leader and that’s what he had to say about 
the member from Athabasca in 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — In fact, as a result of that defection the 
former Liberal leader began forcing Liberal candidates to sign 
notarized statements of commitment saying that they will not 
run for any other party. And he said violators of that, quote, 
“could be subject to civil litigation,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
We all know the Minister of Finance likes to sue people. He 
sued the Liberal Party; he sued the Leader of the Opposition. 
Mr. Speaker, now that the Minister of Finance has joined the 
NDP, will he be planning on suing himself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can just hear 
the excitement from members on the other side of the House. 
And I’ll tell you why: they want to see an election soon. And I 
know why they want to, Mr. Speaker, because the popularity of 
the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party is dropping like a stone. 
From 1999 when they were sitting at 50 per cent after a near 
death by that government, when they were sitting at 55 per cent, 
they’ve been going down consistently, led by the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party whose popularity sits at, like, 25 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to also say that if the Finance minister 
decides to join the New Democrats, he’s not the only Liberal 
who’s going to be supporting the NDP in the next election 
because they’re flocking to the NDP in hordes and in droves. 
And we’re going to use that popularity of the leader of this side 
of the House, the Premier of this province, to ensure a majority 
government in the next election. 
 
And I want to say again I hope very much the Minister of 
Finance is part of that because he’s a great minister doing a 
good job for the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that Dr. Phil 
could open up a branch office here in Saskatchewan after the 
next election counselling defeated NDP candidates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former Liberal leader promised to chain 
himself to the Plains hospital. Instead, he chains himself to the 
NDP. He promised to lead a strong Liberal opposition against 
the NDP government. Instead, he joined the NDP government. 
He promised to get rid of all the hacks and flacks that the NDP 
had. Instead, he’s got an office full of hacks and flacks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he promised to sue anyone who left the Liberal 
Party to run for another party. Now he’s running for another 
party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance didn’t save the Plains 
hospital and he’s sure not going to save the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Finance live up to his own 
words and words from the NDP government — resign and run 
in a by-election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear to see 
what the opposition members do during the day when they’re 
not sitting in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. They’re out watching 
Dr. Phil and The Edge of Night and whatever else is on there. 
 
But I tell you what they should be watching, Mr. Speaker. They 
should revert back to The Twilight Zone because that’s where 
their policy comes from. That’s where their approach to the 
civil service comes from, Mr. Speaker. That’s where their 
approach to public ownership of Crown assets comes from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they might want to revert to the good old days of 
Grant Devine, but I tell you that that Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party will never form a government using Grant 
Devine theories, Grant Devine economic policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People want a moderate, common sense government. That’s 
what this coalition has brought to the province and they’re not 
about to return to the bad old days of the Grant Devine 
administration. They’ve had enough of that and they aren’t 
going there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Investments 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very, 
very interesting to hear the minister responsible for SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) lecturing 
anybody about anything. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, my questions are for the minister for Crown 
Investments Corporation who also has some . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I just want to be able to hear 
what’s happening here, members. 
 
Mr. Wall: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the minister 
responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation who has a 
few of his own favourite shows, Mr. Speaker. Probably one of 
his favourite shows is Let’s Make a Deal, Mr. Speaker. It might 
be The Gong Show or his favourite one of course is Other 
Peoples Money, Mr. Speaker, because that’s what they’ve been 
spending and losing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The question for the minister relates to last week’s Crown 
Investments Corporation committee meetings where the 
president, Frank Hart, confirmed that the NDP paid National 
Bank over $20,000 to evaluate the potential of moving about 
. . . part or all of a $500 million investment portfolio the NDP 
have into a privately managed mutual fund. 
 
Will the minister confirm that CIC president, Frank Hart, and 
vice-president, Zach Douglas, are in the process of investigating 
the establishment of a private sector management company to 
mutualize and potentially privatize hundreds of millions in 

government assets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well unlike 
the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, we always explore 
opportunities to work with the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party . . . I listened very 
carefully to the question, Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully 
to the question. It was phrased in a way that the only way that 
they think that you can organize and work with the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker, is to privatize. Nothing could be further 
from the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look to ways in which we can work and 
partner with the private sector if at all possible, Mr. Speaker. 
Our Crowns are changing, Mr. Speaker. And it is important and 
critical that we do continued analysis of our Crowns and the 
investments to ensure that they remain strong and viable to 
provide the services that people so rightly deserve across our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We now 
have the Hansard from Thursday’s Crown Corporation 
meeting, June 5, where we asked Mr. Hart this very question 
about the government’s intention with respect to this $500 
million or so in assets, investments that the government holds. 
And here’s what he said: 
 

What we have found is that we think there’s potential to 
build private sector management around that fund and 
attract other pension fund money potentially down the road. 
And so that’s an option that we’re actively working on and 
we’ll be coming forward to our board (that would be the 
cabinet ministers, Mr. Speaker) with at some point. And 
then it’s kind of their call as to where we go, if this has 
merit or not. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition’s also been advised that 
indeed Mr. Hart, the president, and Zach Douglas, a senior 
official, themselves may well be negotiating the movement . . . 
who may well be negotiating the movement of this portfolio 
from CIC (Crown Investments Corporation) to a private sector 
company, Mr. Speaker, where they would be possibly the 
principals of that same private sector management company. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that CIC officials 
are actively involved in negotiations to establish this new 
private sector management company under a 10-year 
management contract to mutualize and potentially privatize 
some of these hundreds of millions of dollars worth of 
taxpayers’ assets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well there’s 
been no secret about this at all, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have always said, where we make investments under Crown 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

Investments Corporation in the CIC III (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Industrial Interests Inc.) portfolio, 
Mr. Speaker, we make strategic investments in the economy 
where we think we have opportunities to generate jobs and to 
expand the economy in those particular communities. 
 
We have always said, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve been very clear 
about this, in those areas once it’s up and going in the private 
sector and we’ve leveraged private sector money, we would 
leave it to the private sector to take over again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’ve said. It is our intention, Mr. 
Speaker, to grow and improve the Crown corporations and their 
services for the people of Saskatchewan, unlike the Sask Party 
whose agenda is clear: it is to shrink the Crown Investments 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker, shrink the Crowns so they can put 
them in a position so they can sell them off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I hope you noticed that in the 
minister’s response he didn’t come close to answering the 
question. We’re also hearing that part of the reason for the angst 
and the anger at that recent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I would 
ask the member for Athabasca not to holler over across the way. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The reason, Mr. Speaker, for the anger at the 
most recent NDP caucus meeting in part about this deal is that 
there’s this possibility that senior NDP government officials are 
potentially setting up a 10-year management contract that they 
may be involved in. 
 
And so now we’re giving the minister to stand in the House and 
give this basic assurance to the people of the province. Will he 
do that, Mr. Speaker? Will he assure the House that the NDP’s 
hand-picked officials, Mr. Hart or Mr. Douglas nor any other 
official at CIC, will be directly involved in a new private sector 
company or the 10-year management contract involving these 
taxpayer assets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been clear in 
answering the question. Mr. Speaker, Crown Investments 
Corporation will explore all options, Mr. Speaker, as it pertains 
to the investments within CIC III, Mr. Speaker. We’ve always 
said that those investments are made in strategic areas in the 
economy where we think we have opportunity in this province 
to grow our province, Mr. Speaker, and to create jobs. We think 
we’ve been fairly successful in that, contrary to what the Sask 
Party would suggest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year we were involved in 52 communities, Mr. Speaker, 
and the CIC III portfolio generated for the people of 
Saskatchewan a multitude of jobs but generated a net benefit of 
$11 million in addition to what our . . . in addition to what the 
Crown Investments Corporation subsidiaries did for the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will we explore options, Mr. Speaker, to further enhance the 
services that are provided in the province? Absolutely we will 
do that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been open about that. Our 
president’s been open about that and we will continue to 

explore options, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, no wonder so many 
NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) are very 
worried about their chances for re-election and are stating their 
views in caucus, Mr. Speaker. Here we have a government 
beset by scandal — whether it’s SPUDCO or the $107 million 
land titles system or the $24 million dot-com in Georgia or the 
bingo scandal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in that particular government now, its Minister of CIC has 
the chance to stand up in this legislature and say, listen, there 
will be no . . . there will be no arrangement. There will be no 
arrangement with respect to these assets and any 10-year 
management contract that involves hand-picked NDP officials 
without a complete and open competition. 
 
That’s all the minister has to do. And that’s the question to him 
again, Mr. Speaker. Will he answer the question? 
 
Will the hand-picked CIC president, Frank Hart; or 
vice-president, Zach Douglas; nor any other CIC official, be 
directly involved in any new private sector company or a 
10-year management contract for these taxpayer assets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, will we continue to 
explore options? Absolutely we’ll continue to explore options. 
And do you know why we’ll continue to explore options, Mr. 
Speaker? I look at what’s going on in New Brunswick, and 
Nova Scotia — every other part of the country, Mr. Speaker, 
other than NDP Manitoba — where car insurance rates are 
skyrocketing. Mr. Speaker, that’s why we will explore other 
options, to ensure that we can keep rates down in auto 
insurance. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Tied with Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, in the 
lowest automobile rates in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker; the 
lowest telephone rates in all of North America, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, I want to close with this, Mr. 
Speaker. I look in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, of June 9, 
2003 talking about what we’ve done in the Shackleton area, in 
that very member’s area, Mr. Speaker. And do you know what 
Clayton Woitas of Profico said, Mr. Speaker? He said: 
 

“Why are we here? (Mr. Speaker, he said, why are we here) 
I call it the Saskatchewan advantage,” . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’m here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce in your gallery, four people who 
are very much important people in my life. 
 
I’d like to begin by introducing my wife, Loretta — and Loretta 
just nodded her head there; that’s good. Along with her are my 
Uncle John and my Aunt Anne Lautermilch. Aunt Anne by the 
way, just had a milestone yesterday. She had a birthday and I’m 
not going to tell you which one it was. I think maybe the 29th or 
30th, they tell me here. 
 
And along with them is my cousin Lori. Lori is, again, a very 
special person in our life; we’re very close cousins. And love 
you all and welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m on my feet 
to move a motion of urgent and passing necessity under rule 46. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Compensation for Beef Industry Workers 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have heard very recently that the federal government, in 
relationship to the BSE crisis facing the Canadian beef industry, 
has announced that compensation that they are considering will 
only be for producers who have lost animals that have been 
destroyed by the CFIA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government is indicating that there is 
no compensation planned whatsoever for other people who are 
losing in the industry, including meat packing workers, Mr. 
Speaker, truckers, and feedlot operators. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that the minister from 
Prince Albert Northcote has agreed to second the motion. 
Therefore, I would move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to 
immediately develop a compensation package, which is 
separate and distinct from the agricultural policy 
framework, that recognizes that certain economic sectors 
and thousands of people have been negatively impacted by 
the single case of BSE discovered in Canada. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I move this, seconded by the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Rosetown-Biggar, seconded by the 
Government House Leader, the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to 
immediately develop a compensation package, which is 
separate and distinct from the agricultural policy 
framework, that recognizes that certain economic sectors 

and thousands of people have been negatively impacted by 
the single case of BSE discovered in Canada. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Motion 
is carried. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say that on behalf of the government we’re 
more than pleased to join with the members of the opposition in 
terms of calling on the federal government to ensure . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just like to 
clarify what has happened here, members. I asked whether the 
Assembly was ready for the question. I saw no one rise so I 
immediately called the question. I understood . . . I did see the 
member, the Leader of the Opposition, rising. However he had 
already submitted the motion and it is our custom that once the 
motion is submitted that I read it into the record and the 
member has given up his spot. So if the members wish to have a 
different procedure adopted, I would ask, request leave of the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of the 
House to revert to debate on the motion that has been 
introduced by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — I now recognize the Leader of the Opposition, 
the member for Rosetown-Biggar, for debate on the motion. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
House for leave to introduce the motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears that compensation handed out by the 
federal government, proposed to cover the costs of the industry 
in regarding the BSE case that was discovered in northern 
Alberta three weeks ago, will only go to the producers of 
animals who have been destroyed under the authorization of the 
Canadian Food Inspection Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this crisis is now entering its fourth week. Mr. 
Speaker, at the time the mad cow case was discovered, 
members on the government side, certainly members in the 
opposition, people from the industry, indicated that if this 
situation was not resolved within two weeks time, a great deal 
of damage would be caused to the beef industry in Canada and 
that Saskatchewan would be at the forefront of that damage 
because, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the second largest cow 
herd in the nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition as well as members on the 
government side have been working and speaking and moving 
resolutions in this House to try to bring a quick settlement to the 
BSE case. Mr. Speaker, we are trying to resolve the issue by 
co-operating with the CFIA and by speaking out in support of 
the Canadian beef industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear; one animal — one animal alone — has 
tested positive for BSE. And there has been an immediate 
quarantine of other beef herds; many, many hundreds of 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

animals have been tested. The number is approaching 2,000, 
Mr. Speaker. Not one other case of BSE has been discovered in 
any Canadian herd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that the Canadian demands for 
inspection of our beef animals for slaughter are amongst the 
highest in the world — in fact, that our standards are set higher 
than the standards within the United States. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, this crisis is now entering its 
fourth week. And as a result it is no longer just the owners of 
the herds who have some way been connected or traced to that 
one cow that was found with BSE, that are being affected. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the entire industry is now beginning to feel the 
pinch caused by trade bans put on our beef exports by the 
United States, by Asian countries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now auction marts are sitting empty. The beef cattle that used 
to be auctioned off on a regular basis are not going to market. 
Mr. Speaker, the trucking firms that truck livestock to market, 
that truck them to export locations, are sitting idle. The drivers 
are not working; the transportation companies are not 
functioning like they usually do and money is being lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are particularly concerned about the plight of 
feedlot operators who have many animals that have reached 
their market weight and have surpassed their market weight, but 
they are not going to market because the market is simply 
paralyzed in the light of the BSE case that was discovered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that beef prices are now down by 
30 per cent. The cattle industry alone — and this is without 
spinoff — the cattle industry alone is losing $11 million a day. 
XL Beef in Moose Jaw have handed out 150 layoff notices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live in a Canadian confederation where the 
provinces have certain responsibilities and the federal 
government have certain responsibilities. And when we have 
national crisis we expect the federal government to play a 
leading role, both in negotiating on behalf of that industry that’s 
in crisis and also in providing financial compensation when 
there is hurt beyond the control of those impacted by the crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as of late, we are experiencing regional tensions in 
the nation of Canada as a result of this BSE case. We, a week or 
two ago, had some problems with the province of Ontario that 
was somehow suggesting that we should regionalize this 
problem and that somehow other regions outside of Western 
Canada shouldn’t be impacted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen the tension over the fact that the 
federal government responded very quickly — as they should 
have, Mr. Speaker — to the problems around the SARS (severe 
acute respiratory syndrome) outbreak in the Toronto area. They 
waived the UI (unemployment insurance) premiums for health 
care workers that were forced to leave the workplace because 
they were quarantined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw in Atlantic Canada problems in the fishing 
sector where the federal government moved with great haste to 
compensate those impacted by decisions that the federal 

government had made that restricted people from their 
livelihood. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now here, particularly in Western Canada, 
we have many people who are restricted from earning their 
normal livelihood because of decisions made by the federal 
government. We’re not arguing with the decisions that were 
made. We recognize that when you have a case of BSE you 
have to do some tracing. There needs to herds quarantined. Mr. 
Speaker, we recognize that some of our international trading 
partners will respond with a halting of trade. We understand all 
of these things can happen and we know that we have to work 
through these difficulties. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s incumbent upon the federal government, 
when they take these kind of actions and as a result of those 
actions they put hundreds and thousands of people out of work 
or they substantially reduce their incomes or they threaten the 
very existence of businesses such as trucking firms, auction 
marts, and feedlots, that the federal government is responsible 
to intervene with a compensation package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Lyle Vanclief, 
indicated a few days back that if everybody just agrees to this 
agriculture policy framework agreement that that will somehow 
solve the problems around the BSE financial crisis that we are 
facing; that somehow there’s something in this new 
arrangement that would meet the needs of trucking firms who 
aren’t trucking cattle today; that somehow that this would 
magically, Mr. Speaker, solve the problem of feedlot operators 
who have animals who are past market weight and have no 
market into which to place these animals; that in somehow, Mr. 
Speaker, the agriculture policy framework agreement would 
solve the problem of laid off workers in the packing industry, in 
XL Foods in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that simply isn’t the truth. And we need to rise up 
and challenge Mr. Vanclief and say, Mr. Vanclief, you’re not 
squaring with the people of Canada. You’re not squaring with 
the producers of beef. You’re not squaring with the people 
whose livelihood depends on a vibrant beef industry. You’re 
not really squaring with the people of Canada who might not 
understand the impact of Mr. Vanclief’s statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the federal government to recognize 
its responsibility to do the right thing to compensate those 
damaged by this BSE case in the . . . in Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the federal government to say yes, 
Western Canada is just as important as Toronto; yes, Western 
Canada and the beef industry in Western Canada, and right 
across Canada for that matter, is just as important as the fishing 
industry is in the nation of Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent upon the federal government 
to say because we have quarantined herds and because of the 
discovery of this BSE beyond the realm of coping by producers 
and others in the beef industry, that their markets have dried up, 
that they must come to the plate with a compensation package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have called on the provincial government to be 
aggressive in dealing with the federal government on this issue. 
We have called for them to go beyond writing letters and to get 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

 

on the phone and talk to the Minister of Agriculture and to 
speak with the Prime Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that the Premier today is meeting 
with other Western premiers in Kelowna and that this issue is 
being raised, and we thank the Premier for doing that, and we 
wish and we expect full co-operation from the other three 
Western premiers and two northern territorial leaders. 
 
And we expect that by speaking together — Mr. Doer and Mr. 
Klein, Mr. Campbell and the northern leaders — they will add 
some punch to the message that we are trying to take to the rest 
of the nation that a compensation package needs to be 
developed that is fair and recognizes the importance of the beef 
industry in the workplace, in the economy of Saskatchewan, in 
the economy of Western Canada, and quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, in the economy of the nation as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that all members of this legislature 
have agreed that the issue is important enough that we can have 
an emergency debate regarding it. And I’m pleased for the 
support that I received from the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote in seconding this motion. 
 
And I believe that by standing united in this legislature and 
calling upon the federal government to take action, it’s moved 
us beyond the realm of partisan politics and it helps the federal 
government to understand that we’re serious about the fact that 
Canada is a country where the federal government needs to take 
some ownership and responsibility for the decisions in which it 
has the primary responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that regard I believe that the provincial 
government here should be as equally aggressive as the 
province of Alberta and the Premier of Alberta, Mr. Klein, who 
has spoken of the importance of the federal government coming 
to the plate, who has talked about even premiers putting 
together a delegation that would go and speak with our 
American counterparts to ensure them that our product is safe. 
It’s just as safe as the American beef and in fact the doors to our 
exports of beef should be reopened to the United States and to 
other countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is because of the urgency of this situation, the 
fact that millions of dollars are being lost daily, that people’s 
livelihoods lie in the balance that we have moved this motion 
today: 
 

That the Assembly urge the federal government to 
immediately develop a compensation package, which is 
separate and distinct from the agriculture policy 
framework, that recognizes that certain economic sectors 
and thousands of people have been negatively impacted by 
the single case of BSE discovered in Canada. 

 
I move this motion, as I said, seconded by the hon. member for 
P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote and, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that 
with all of the force that we are able to muster in this province, 
that we communicate that message to the federal government in 
Ottawa, to the federal Minister of Agriculture, to the Prime 
Minister of this nation, to everyone involved in the putting 
together of a compensation package, including the Finance 
minister of Canada and all those who might expedite a quick 

development of a compensation package. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say to the House and to members of the 
House that I’m very pleased to interject myself into this debate. 
 
I think it’s no secret that the people of Saskatchewan, the cattle 
producers, the people involved in the industry, and those who 
support this industry are well aware of the impact. And as the, I 
guess, the search to prove through science that in fact Canadian 
beef is safe to our American counterparts — which are quite 
clearly our largest export market — there needs to be some 
consideration from the federal government as it relates to 
compensation. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, from this government’s 
perspective, compensation needs to be far beyond the cattle 
who are being slaughtered. There is an impact that goes much 
broader than that. I think it’s no secret that as cattle production 
has been growing and becoming a larger part of our economy, 
we in Saskatchewan become aware of just how much this 
industry does mean for us and to us. 
 
And that, I want to say, is why we are calling on the federal 
government to supply compensation outside of the programs 
and policies that are in place across this nation; which is why, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the Premier has taken a very 
aggressive leadership role in this nation; which is why our 
Minister of Agriculture has taken a very aggressive leadership 
role, and why our officials are at this point and right now 
meeting with our federal counterparts in Ottawa. 
 
And I want to say that the motion put forward by this 
legislature, I’m pleased to see the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party join the government in putting forth our thoughts as it 
relates to the future of this industry and the federal 
government’s responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I recall just a few days ago, and it’s 
been mentioned, the SARS outbreak in Toronto, a negative 
impact on tourism, certainly it impacted on that economy; it 
impacted on that province of Ontario. And I watched, Mr. 
Speaker, with support as the federal government moved quickly 
to put forward some national response financially to that SARS 
outbreak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recall some time ago when the province of 
Quebec and in Ontario were in some severe difficulties as it 
relates to electrical outage in a large, large way because of some 
ice storm circumstances that happened in there. And I want to 
. . . in those two provinces . . . And I want to say as well, Mr. 
Speaker, we as a province offered our support to Ontario and 
Quebec. And, Mr. Speaker, we went through some difficult 
times with our friends in Ontario and Quebec, and ultimately 
there was a federal response financially, the issue was dealt 
with, and life moved on. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a circumstance that is no different 
than that disaster. This is a circumstance that has visited our 
agricultural producers as it relates to livestock through, I guess, 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

the BSE issue that’s been dealt with in other areas of the world. 
 
I want to say that I believe the federal officials and the 
provincial officials from Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 
Columbia have been working diligently to ensure that we put 
forth an analysis, a scientific analysis, of that industry so that 
we can present that as a package to our American counterparts 
and encourage them to open their markets to our Canadian beef. 
 
I indicated a little earlier in the House today, Dr. Kihm who is 
with an international team who are reviewing the work that’s 
being done here in Canada, here in Saskatchewan, here in 
Alberta, and he indicated that he has never seen such a 
comprehensive review, which is what I believe that we need to 
do to ensure that we have our trade markets open as it relates to 
Canadian beef. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the process can be urged to be moved forward 
through dialogue with American elected people, American 
officials. Certainly we’ve got to continue to push our federal 
government as it relates to compensation so that they 
understand that this is a disaster and that this is a disaster visited 
upon our industry that needs to be financed and funded by the 
federal government. Because, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had evidence 
of circumstances where we believe here in this province that our 
national counterparts have not been living up to their 
responsibilities. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And I want to refer to some of the trade issues as it relates to 
subsidies on grain, subsidies on durum and subsidies on spring 
wheat; production subsidies in Europe and in the United States 
of America. And we’re attempting here as a province to deal 
with them as much as we can, but the federal government I 
don’t believe is living up to their responsibility in that regard. 
 
And we’re certainly hopeful that they’ll be mindful of this issue 
as it relates to our cattle industry here in this province and will 
ensure that they live up to their responsibilities to fund support 
for this industry. 
 
We’ve indicated that we as a province are going to be pushing 
for initial compensation as a feedlot industry because that’s 
where it impacts directly and immediately. Certainly the 
trucking industry that others have mentioned and we’ll mention, 
here in this province, will be impacted; certainly the feed 
industry. There are spinoffs that permeate throughout rural 
Saskatchewan as it relates to this. 
 
We know that the potential impact financially is huge. It’s very, 
very large. Our Department of Agriculture officials indicate that 
it could be as much in a one-month period, with 17,000 feeder 
cattle ready to go to market it could be an impact on 
Saskatchewan alone in a one-month period of $50 million, 
which is not a small amount. 
 
So we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, that we are not supporting a 
60/40 cost share with the federal government. We are not 
supporting this funding that would come out of existing 
programs, that will have impact on other disasters that we will 
have and other market conditions that we will have. So we’re 
not accepting 60/40 and we would want not to see this come out 

of existing programs. But the federal government has a 
responsibility to find new money as they have with the SARS 
issues in Toronto, and as they did when we were looking, Mr. 
Speaker, at the unfortunate circumstances around the ice storm 
in Ontario and Quebec. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have been aggressive as an administration 
in pursuing our federal counterparts. I can tell you that I’ve 
raised this issue — not only with respect to the EI (Employment 
Insurance) funding — with the minister from Saskatchewan in 
the federal government, Mr. Goodale. I’ve raised this concern 
with him in the context of fairness; I’ve raised it in the context 
of a federal responsibility, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say that I 
believe Minister Goodale listened and I’m hopeful that he can 
convince his counterparts in cabinet to respond similarly to 
what they do when this circumstance visits Eastern Canada. 
 
So we’re looking, Mr. Speaker, for more than compensation of 
the animals that have been slaughtered because the impact is 
larger than that, and there’s a potential impact that’ll be much 
larger than that. We are encouraging this to be done quickly so 
that we can get the scientific information that’s been put 
together here in Canada that will be coming to a conclusion in 
the next few days. We’re urging the elected people in the 
United States, with whom we have negotiated free trade 
arrangements, this country and their country, and we’re hopeful 
that they will move through their process quickly so that we can 
have our rightful access as Canadian beef producers and 
producing provinces to the American market. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say in closing that I will be 
supporting this motion — as clearly indicated by the fact that I 
seconded the motion — and I want to urge the federal 
government to move very, very quickly in terms of developing 
a compensation package along the lines that I’ve attempted to 
articulate here. I’m certainly hopeful that we will continue to 
see support from other provinces across Canada. The Western 
ministers I believe will be making some progress on this issue 
this afternoon as the Agriculture ministers who are meeting 
there with them. 
 
And I think at the end of the day that fairness and reason will be 
in the forefront of the federal decision makers. We can only 
expect no less than a fair shake from the federal government 
who we believe is responsible to fund this particular support for 
our industry. And through this motion we’ll be urging the 
federal government to move swiftly and move fairly to support 
our agricultural community here in Saskatchewan. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to enter this 
extremely important debate for our province and for the cattle 
industry within our province. 
 
I find it quite amazing that it took only one, single, isolated case 
of BSE to turn Canada’s livestock industry into total chaos. 
Within hours of a single case of BSE being reported, the US 
border was closed. And soon to follow were, I believe, seven 
other countries also closed their borders and banned exports of 
the Canadian beef into their countries. And since then the cattle 
industry has been losing $11 million a day in exports. 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

 

But that is just the tip of the iceberg quite frankly because we 
don’t know yet the losses that are being experienced by the 
auctioneers, by the rendering plants, by the individual feedlots, 
the packers, and the list just goes on and on and on as to who’s 
actually losing money each and every day. 
 
And the member from North Battleford just pointed out, and I 
shouldn’t have missed this one, the trucking industry is also 
losing money each and every day — and a lot of money. 
 
Saskatchewan produces over $700 million in farm cash receipts 
from cattle each year so the impact on our province each and 
every day if this industry is ground to a halt is going to be 
crippling to our province. We’re going to feel the effect of this 
for a long time to come. 
 
And of particular urgency in this issue is the feeding industry 
and the dependent businesses and services industries of the 
feeding industry, because our province has about 1.3 million 
head of feeder cattle, I believe. And those that are contained in 
feedlots are critically dependent upon a turnaround of the 
animals on a regular basis. They cannot just hang on to these 
animals and that’s what they’re being forced to do. 
 
And each and every day that they keep the market-ready 
animals, they’re losing money not only just in the feed that they 
are feeding them but they’re going to lose money when they 
finally do get to sell these animals because they’re going to be 
overweight and they’re going to be docked for that overweight. 
 
So the provincial government has been asking the federal 
government, we’ve been ensured by both the Premier and by 
the Agriculture minister that they’ve been asking the federal 
government to consider a compensation package initially for the 
feeder industry and the affected industries from the feedlots. 
And the industry leaders themselves have also been asking the 
federal government for assistance to help out with the 
immediate damage that’s being created as long as the borders 
are closed. 
 
But you know it was when I first read today’s headline I was 
quite encouraged. I know that the Minister of Agriculture told 
me last week that he was sending a group of industry leaders to 
talk to the federal government and see what they could work 
out. So I read the headline “Mad cow compensation package 
ready within two weeks, says source”, and I found that 
extremely encouraging. 
 
Unfortunately if you go on to read the rest of the article, Mr. 
Speaker, you find out it’s not so encouraging after all: 
 

(Almost 2,000 head of) . . . cattle have been slaughtered for 
testing following last month’s discovery of . . . mad cow 
. . . (disease) in Alberta . . . 
 
The plan so far is to provide money to farmers who have 
had their cattle slaughtered as part of the mad cow 
investigation. Those farmers already receive some cash for 
animals that are ordered destroyed. 
 
(But) There are no plans to compensate other farmers, who 
have been unable to sell their cattle, or feedlot . . . 
(operations), who are being forced to feed cattle that should 

have been sold for slaughter weeks ago. 
 
So it wasn’t as encouraging as the headline led us to believe, 
Mr. Speaker. I was actually shocked and speechless when I read 
further, when I read the entire article. The federal government is 
saying, at this point, that they’re only willing to compensate 
producers who have had their cattle depopulated — something 
which quite frankly they’re obligated to do through their own 
legislation. 
 
But to date there has been no indication by this federal 
government that they’re willing to go one step farther than a 
compensation package that they’re legislated to do. Despite the 
loss of millions of dollars in the industry and the feedlots, the 
auctioneers, the packing plants, the rendering plants, the 
trucking industry, despite the losses — the astronomical losses 
that we are realizing here in Saskatchewan and in Alberta and 
any other province that’s being affected by a cattle industry — 
they are going to do absolutely nothing. That’s their indication 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most people in this Assembly know — they’re 
well aware from other talks that I’ve given — that I am a sixth 
generation Canadian and I’ve always been very proud of that, 
until now. I have never, ever, ever entertained Western 
separation movement until now. Because I’m not proud of our 
federal government, I’m not necessarily proud to say I’m a 
Canadian for the first time in my life. 
 
I never, ever dreamed, Mr. Speaker, that I could say that. But 
it’s just gotten so unbalanced in our country as to the decisions 
that Ottawa has been making, it’s to the point of absolute 
lunacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Toronto wanted work done to their harbour, 
guess what? There was a half a billion dollars available. Not a 
problem. They would just fork over the money. But when we 
ask for a meaningful package to address trade injury here in our 
province, there is no money. It’s simply not available. 
 
The harbour in Toronto might be quite important. I don’t know 
all the economic spinoffs that would come from that harbour. 
But I do know the economic impact that the producers of our 
province have. And yet there was no money for the Western 
situation. 
 
When there was ice storms out in Toronto, out east, not a 
problem — there was money. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Moved the army in. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — There was . . . Yes. There was help. Move 
the army in. Let’s help out. There was money. There was 
compensation. 
 
When there’s drought here in the West and it has a huge impact 
on our province — well, there’s no money; it’s just simply not 
available. 
 
When SARS devastated Toronto, not a problem. They can 
overlook, they can waive the two-week waiting period for 
unemployment insurance. Our Labour minister can ask for the 
same for the workers that are affected by this BSE and workers 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

that have been laid off because of it. No, sorry, can’t do it. Not 
possible. We can’t make that kind of allowances. 
 
Financial situation or any financial compensation package for 
the East seems to be absolutely no problem. But whenever it’s 
asked for in the West, it never ever seems to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our federal government cannot possibly — they 
can’t possibly — justify their actions. I cannot fathom, I cannot 
imagine how they can consider themselves good, responsible 
international leaders because quite frankly they’re so blatantly 
prejudiced in favour of the Eastern provinces and their policies 
are shamefully in favour of the Eastern provinces. I find it 
totally unacceptable. 
 
And so with that, I will be supporting the motion put forward by 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to also join in this important emergency motion and 
obviously agree that compensation with respect to BSE is of 
critical importance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak very briefly from a couple of 
perspectives. First of all, certainly as a minister of the Crown 
but also as the MLA, and then also as an individual who has 
grown up in a farming and cattle producing area. 
 
As the MLA . . . A lot of people will not realize this or will be 
surprised to learn this, Mr. Speaker, but in the Northwest, that 
region has more cattle than anyplace else in the province. So the 
area that I represent in fact is probably more impacted by this 
situation than anywhere else in the province, although it is 
obvious that it has a huge impact on our entire province. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I was also personally born and raised on 
a cow-calf operation. Many of the members in this legislature, I 
assume even my own colleagues here, will be surprised to learn 
that I myself have been a part of delivering thousands of calves 
already over the years. It’s been a few years since I’ve been out 
there. They’ve tried to entice me back a few times but with not 
any success in that. 
 
But I assure you that I am fully, fully aware of the impacts of 
BSE and understand completely the cattle producers, and the — 
fear, I think it is — the sense of fear that they feel right now. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well last year in the Northwest we were, in the 
last few years, we’ve been impacted with a lack of moisture and 
lack of rain. And if you add to that this situation now, it is 
critical for the producers in the Northwest anyway. 
 
Let me also say that for cow-calf producers right now it is 
probably not quite as serious right at this very moment because 
there will be some time before the calves come back in the fall. 
But for those who have culled the cows, for those that are 
selling feeders into the feedlots, it is an extremely, extremely 
difficult time; and I speak now from a provincial perspective. 
 

There will be all components across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
Clearly the cow-calf producers that I’ve talked about, 
backgrounders, the auction barns, feedlots, truckers, packers, 
processors, and the rendering industry is hugely impacted by 
this. Those are the direct impacts. 
 
And for those who would be indirectly impacted, the retails . . . 
the retailers and the stores, I suggest that even they are starting 
to be impacted to some degree. Although this will take a little 
bit more time, but it will be significant if there is not 
compensation fairly soon. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that the debate here today, Mr. 
Speaker, has not been about whether or not there should be 
compensation. We are all in agreement, both government and 
opposition, that there should be compensation. And I’m certain 
that all members agree that we stand together with our livestock 
industry here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The trade responsibility . . . the trade, I should say, is a federal 
responsibility. We all agreed on that, Mr. Speaker, and therefore 
the compensation related to the trade, to the trade impacts, must 
also be a federal responsibility. 
 
I know that my colleague from P.A. Northcote alluded to this 
and the . . . and I think it’s important that it is repeated. Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government must understand the impact 
and that’s why it surprises me that they’ve not reacted more 
swiftly than they have. 
 
They themselves have commissioned an Alberta consulting firm 
to estimate the impacts of the cattle and beef trade ban. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this consulting firm that the federal government 
commissioned has concluded that a one-month ban will cost the 
Saskatchewan cattle industry $52 million. And a four-month 
ban — obviously it would take us into the fall when you’re 
starting to ship some of the feeders — a four-month ban would 
be significantly more damaging and it’s estimated the impact of 
that would be $300 million on the provincial cattle industry. 
 
Now that’s a huge, huge impact, Mr. Speaker, and it is 
something that the federal government absolutely needs to 
recognize, what a drastic impact that would have on our 
province. And therefore it is, as I say, with pleasure that I join 
in the motion with the opposition and with our government as 
well here, Mr. Speaker, in calling for that compensation 
package. 
 
And before I sit in my place, Mr. Speaker, I do want to also say 
that I am particularly pleased that our Minister of Agriculture 
and our Premier is joining with the premiers, first ministers, 
from across Western Canada in raising this issue today as we 
speak, Mr. Speaker, and pleading with the federal government 
to quickly and swiftly pull together a compensation package, 
because it is absolutely critical that this takes place much, much 
sooner rather than later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to take part 
and agree with the motion that: 
 

. . . (urges) the federal government to immediately develop 
a compensation package . . . (which) is separate and distinct 
from the agricultural policy framework (and that’s critical), 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

 

that recognizes that certain economic sectors and thousands 
of people have been negatively impacted by the single case 
of BSE discovered in Canada. 

 
And I am pleased to support that motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m appreciative 
to be able to take part in this debate today, Mr. Speaker, and to 
talk on the motion at hand. And I think it’s very timely that we 
have American visitors here today and hopefully they will take 
our message back on just how devastating this ban that a 
number of countries have put on Canadian beef, but especially 
our American friends that is naturally our biggest trading 
partner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this ban went on I believe on May 20 and we go 
another nine days and that’s been a whole month. If at the 
beginning we would have talked about this ban lasting a month 
I think people, especially ranchers, farmers would have been in 
complete shock. And before we know it we’re even talking 
possibly two weeks before a decision is made in the US, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think without a word of a lie that it’s going to be devastating 
to far more than just the ranchers, who it could put many of 
them under, and the mixed farming operations out there. 
 
But it’s far more widespread than that, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
a number of the businesses out there . . . or the one I heard, a 
owner of — or I believe he was the owner of — of Roberge’s 
trucking firm the other day said that he’s already laid about half 
of his drivers off, hasn’t called back a number of the guys that 
own their own rigs. It just shows how devastating it is to that 
one business and to every other trucking firm in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also go on to the feedlot owners. And we know how many 
of these businesses operate, Mr. Speaker, that they’re on a 
month-to-month budget where they balance their books by 
selling their finished stock, finished animals, and then paying 
their bills and it goes on and on and on. 
 
Even if they work through the futures and so on, Mr. Speaker, a 
month of this will be something that they may never get over, in 
fact many of them probably will not be able to handle, and will 
go under. And, Mr. Speaker, that will be devastating to the 
province of Saskatchewan but also to the whole Canadian 
economy. 
 
And I guess that’s where the federal government comes into 
play here once again. And there’s a number of comments and 
quotes today out of the Western premiers’ talks that they’re 
having in Alberta right now about how the federal government 
is once again dropping the ball and kind of excluding Western 
Canada when it comes to any kind of compensation for this. 
 
I think there’s hints that if they do give compensation for other 
than the farmers that have actually had livestock slaughtered, 
that it may come out of existing programs. And here we go 
again. They’ve got the existing programs so watered down, Mr. 
Speaker, at this point, that there isn’t money to go around and 

it’s not serving the purpose of Saskatchewan farmers. If they 
take, which could be a huge amount here, if they actually 
properly pay farmers the compensation that they need to be paid 
to carry on, there’ll be nothing left for anybody left under these 
programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This needs to be federal money, new money, and paid very, 
very quickly because many of these businesses, Mr. Speaker, 
especially if the bankers will not carry these businesses, will not 
last to see the light of another month go by. 
 
And I think again, Mr. Speaker, it’s crucial that we convince 
our American friends that this ban has to be lifted as quick as 
possible. We’re talking here, Mr. Speaker, one isolated incident 
of BSE, mad cow disease — one cow out of how many hundred 
thousand we have in this country and how many millions we 
have in the US, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would hope the Americans really pay attention to this 
because what goes around, comes around, Mr. Speaker. And 
sooner or later the same thing will happen across the border in 
the US. For all we know it may have happened but if it has it 
hasn’t been reported, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would say to the Americans to really consider closely how 
long they hold this ban off. Because if that happens in the US, it 
will be also devastating to their cattle industry, to their ranchers, 
and all their cattlemen. So be very careful how long we drag 
this out because it could come around to bite them in the long 
run. And I hope they would take that into consideration and 
being one of our best — without a lie — our best trading 
partner in the world, will take into consideration the devastation 
and the hurt that it’s putting on our farmers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we go into other businesses. We go into the 
slaughterhouses, the rendering plants, the abattoirs, a number of 
the businesses that are tied to those businesses, where they 
finish beef products. And it goes all through the system, Mr. 
Speaker. Everything is coming to a standstill and from this 
point on there’s going to be more people losing their job, Mr. 
Speaker. And whether that family is a young family with four 
kids, five kids, even a couple with two kids, it’s devastating for 
these people to lose their jobs. 
 
And I think Jane Stewart, the federal minister, had made the 
comment, well this is different than SARS; they can go out and 
get another job. That’s not that easy. That minister for some of 
her past record maybe should be the one out looking for another 
job, not the people in Saskatchewan who through no fault of 
their own are caught in a bind on this one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This hurt is going a long way, Mr. Speaker, and it’s hurting a 
lot of families out here. It’s going to be the end of a number of 
businesses if this goes on very long. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
federal government cannot solve all the problems but they can 
certainly alleviate a lot of the hurt. They can help these 
businesses survive this crisis. 
 
I mean, when the Quebec ice storm was on they were there to 
help them, which they should have been. There was help went 
from and donations went from Saskatchewan to Quebec. 
Anywhere in this country where there’s been something to this 
proportion before happened — anywhere in the country, 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

whether it’s Eastern Canada, in the Atlantic province, no matter 
where — the rest of the country has been there to help them. 
Well it’s time for the federal Liberals to stand up to the plate 
and help Western Canada. 
 
If you want to defuse the Western alienation and the Western 
groups out here that are promoting separation, they could really 
help the cause by putting that to sleep by helping Western 
Canada people at this point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I join in on supporting the motion today. And I join with 
everyone on both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, in saying 
that I hope that the federal government comes to their senses, 
sees the light. And if the Prime Minister wants to leave a legacy 
of good thoughts behind when he leaves, he could certainly help 
his image in Western Canada by addressing this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure . . . Well do you know, Mr. Speaker, I 
wanted to say it gives me a great deal of pleasure to stand and 
rise in this debate, which it does, but I’m not pleased that we are 
even debating this. We should not have to. 
 
We should have the support from our federal government in 
Western Canada for an industry that means a great deal to us. 
We should not have to be standing here and be debating this 
today in the House. The federal government should be giving us 
the support and the support that Western Canada needs during 
this very, this very drastic, critical time for Western Canada, a 
major part of the country, and for an industry that means a great 
deal right across the three Western provinces — four actually, 
Mr. Speaker; Manitoba also has some effect from this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this first came about when this lone case of 
BSE was first tested positive in Alberta, this government made 
a request to the federal minister to waive the two-week waiting 
period on EI with the hope, Mr. Speaker, that if it was needed it 
would be there, a sign of support for Western workers and 
people within the industry, and also a sign from the federal 
government that they understood the importance of this industry 
in Western Canada and were willing to give the support that 
was needed immediately. It may only be a small, two-week 
waiting period that was waived but it would have meant a great 
deal to Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this whole Assembly believes that there 
should be compensation. We can . . . We’re not here to debate 
on whether compensation is needed — we know it’s needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this situation progressed, in Moose Jaw, my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, one of the first results was the 
shutting down of our XL meat plant. It was reopened, Mr. 
Speaker, to depopulate some of the herds that had been 
quarantined, but it is still a drastic hit on our community of 
Moose Jaw. And, Mr. Speaker, that has just spread across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right in the very beginning when the first case was 
diagnosed, I was speaking to someone from Eastern Canada, 
from the East Coast, and I said to them that this case had been 
diagnosed and it was pretty devastating for the industry in 

Western Canada and that I hoped that there would be a swift 
resolve to this situation because it could be drastic in the effects 
that it had on our province. And, Mr. Speaker, this person said 
to me, well what difference does one sick cow make and who 
would be laid off from that? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I took the time and explained what this 
industry means to Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Western Canada. 
And when you look at the very basic numbers — you look at 
primary agriculture, the meat processing, livestock 
transportation, whether it’s livestock or whether it’s carcasses 
that are transported to market after, agricultural wholesale 
distributors that will be affected, the trucking industry — it is 
huge. And, Mr. Speaker, those ripples will be felt right across 
our country and right across our economy as this situation drags 
on longer and longer. 
 
We have tried through the department to accumulate some 
numbers to get a better idea of what kind of numbers we’re 
actually looking at when it comes to employees and employers 
in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at 12,000 
businesses across our province may be affected by the BSE and 
this slowdown in the livestock industry. And just roughly, we 
are looking at 24,000 employees. That’s 24,000 employees, 
24,000 families in this province that are affected by this 
outbreak or this one isolated case, Mr. Speaker, of BSE. And 
that goes from everywhere from the primary agriculture into 
transportation and all the things in between. And Mr. Speaker, 
that will grow as the ripples are felt throughout the economy. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, we are not here to debate whether 
compensation should be available but we all agree that it should 
be and, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise 
and support this motion that . . . expressing to the federal 
government that we feel that compensation and a compensation 
package that is new and is set up specifically to address this 
most drastic situation in Western Canada be developed as soon 
as possible. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say I’m very pleased that 
our Premier has made BSE and the compensation package a 
topic on his list for First Ministers’ Conference that . . . the 
meetings which are currently going on in Kelowna, and I know 
that he and the Minister of Agriculture will speak eloquently 
and demand the compensation that is deserved by this industry 
and needed by Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to support this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise in support of the 
motion before the House this date. 
 
I think it is important that the aid package that I think is going 
to be required for the Western economy not be part of normal 
and regular farm aid — not only because if the package is 
developed that takes away from the CFIP (Canadian Farm 
Income Program) program then that necessarily hurts other 
producers and the amount of money available for other 
producers; but in addition, as has already been pointed out by 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

 

the member from Watrous and other members, many people are 
being impacted and laid off their jobs who are not producers. 
 
So non-producers in the areas of the packing plants, the auction 
marts, the trucking industry, are just as impacted as primary 
producers. And of course many producers who do not have 
animals that will be slaughtered also will be impacted as far as 
price is concerned. 
 
Now some will say that this motion is premature in the sense 
that we simply do not know at this point in time what the full 
economic impact is going to be. For a start, we can’t even 
predict today on what date the border will be reopened not only 
by the United States but by Australia and several other 
countries. So the full economic impact will largely be 
determined by how long the trade embargo continues and we 
simply can’t answer that. And it also has to be said that that is 
not a Canadian decision. That is a decision that will be made by 
our trading partners, not we ourselves. 
 
All we can do is what we are doing; namely, aggressively take 
all measures in science and in health to demonstrate that we 
have done everything humanly possible to track down the 
source and the extent. And hopefully at the end of today or 
within the next couple of days we will be able to report that 
extensive culling and extensive tests have failed to result in a 
single, solitary additional case of BSE being located. And I 
think that should give Canadian consumers and our 
international trading partners considerable comfort that 
Canadian beef is safe. 
 
I do think that we are going to have to accept the reality that 
when a compensation package is developed, that some 
provincial participation is going to be required. I note that other 
speakers have mentioned SARS in Toronto, the ice storms, the 
cod fishery of Atlantic Canada. And in all those cases, some 
provincial participation was required. 
 
However, I’m pleased to advise this House that I did, last week, 
write to the Hon. Jane Stewart to express my dismay and my 
extreme opposition to her announced decision not to waive the 
two-week waiting period for EI benefits and to insist and 
demand, on behalf of this province and Western Canadians 
generally, that she revisit that decision. 
 
I think that it is shocking to us in the West that the EI waiting 
period would be waived for one group of workers in Toronto 
and not waived for the packing plant and auction mart and 
trucking employees of Western Canada who have been thrown 
out of work as a result of the sudden closure and shutdown of 
the meat-packing industry in the West. So I’ve written to the 
Hon. Jane Stewart. I have expressed my opposition to that 
decision and I have asked for her to revisit that decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we still this day do not know the full impact upon 
our economy. However, the dramatic events in the past three 
weeks have again underscored how there is nothing so 
important to our economy as to have a healthy and open trading 
relationship with our friends and our partners, and that the 
Canadian economy which — in this as in so many other things 
— is based on producing large quantities of certain specialized 
products at which we excel but large quantities which we in the 
domestic market cannot possibly consume. 

We as a country have always specialized in the production of 
certain commodities. As opposed to producing a little bit of a 
lot of things, we produce a lot of certain specified commodities 
at which we excel. 
 
Because of that basic fact of the Canadian economy, there is 
nothing so crucial or important to us as open trade and a strong 
and open relationship with our trading partners. And that has 
again been very dramatically demonstrated to us. 
 
And for anyone in Saskatchewan or anyone in Canada who 
questions the value of having a full, open, and healthy trading 
relationship, I trust they have reassessed in the last three weeks. 
Because I think we’ve really gotten the final answer in the last 
three weeks as to where we as a country stand if we don’t have 
open trade and open borders. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know there’ll be other members anxious to 
come in. I don’t wish to take up any more time but I do wish to 
say that I support the . . . I support this motion. I support the 
principle behind it. 
 
I do think that there are some details that will require time to be 
worked out but it is in order for the federal government to begin 
discussions and to begin gathering together the information as 
to those sectors of the economy which legitimately require 
compensation as a result of the events that have overtaken them 
and thrown workers out of work through no fault of their own. 
 
I do think that — whether the government acknowledges it or 
not — that if we are expecting a comprehensive package for 
producers, for rendering plant operators, for the employees of 
packing plants and trucking firms, that inevitably there is going 
to be some request for the provincial government to participate 
in that. I do not think it should be 60/40 but I do think that, as 
with crises in other parts of the country, if we are going to ask 
taxpayers in other part of the country to participate, we must 
also and will have to demonstrate our own good faith and our 
own commitment to the workers in those industries. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to introduce the motion of transmittal. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies and verbatim transcript of the rule 46 
motion and debate and vote with respect to the federal 
compensation to economic sectors affected by the BSE 
crisis to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister of Finance, the Minister of Agriculture, and the 
Minister of Human Resources Development. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written question no. 709. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to question 709 has been tabled. 
 
(15:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Seated to 
my left is Ms. Lorna Nystuen who is the director of coroner’s 
services for the Saskatchewan Justice department. And seated 
behind me is Ms. Madeleine Robertson, who is a Crown 
counsel with legislative services, Saskatchewan Justice 
department. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair. And 
welcome to the minister and his officials for this time this 
afternoon. 
 
With regards to the details of Bill No. 16 and specifically with 
reference to the collection of tissue and fluid samples, what 
kind of legal or constitutional issues had to be considered with 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
provision involves a balancing act between respect for privacy 
and other rights that people have and the need for coroners to be 
able to get information in order to properly determine the cause 
and manner of death for the purposes of The Coroners Act. And 
so this Act represents a balance. 
 
It would allow coroners to obtain blood samples taken by 
hospital staff prior to a death and that would allow . . . may 
assist the coroner to determine the cause of death or the manner 
of death. There may be, for example, evidence of drugs, alcohol 
in blood. 
 
But I should add that The Coroners Act itself — not an 
amendment to the Act but the existing Act — states in section 
13(2) that: 
 

Objects removed pursuant to subsection (1) (which is the 
section that allows a coroner to obtain certain objects) may 
only be used by the coroner to establish identification and 
cause and manner of death for the purposes of this Act. 

 
So in other words the seizure of the blood sample, I’m advised 
by the officials, would be used by the coroner for the purposes 

of The Coroners Act but it would not be used for other 
purposes, for example a criminal prosecution. That would be a 
matter for the police, I suppose, under their powers of seizure to 
obtain in order to get whatever evidence they wanted to use for 
their own purposes. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I would like for the minister to 
comment on the position of the provincial association of 
coroners, whether this was an issue there that they’d been 
looking for for a long time or whether this is one that didn’t 
have total, unanimous support from their association. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m advised by the 
officials that they have spoken with several coroners and, of 
course, the chief coroner with respect to this matter and that the 
coroners that they have spoken to have indicated support for 
this change. They are not aware of coroners being opposed to 
this change. 
 
We can’t say that there isn’t some coroner somewhere who is 
opposed to the change, but any coroners that we’ve spoken to 
through the officials have indicated that this is a problem, that 
they want it fixed. And that’s the only information that we’ve 
received at the Department of Justice. 
 
So we can’t say that there isn’t some coroner somewhere that 
for some reason would oppose this; I’m not sure why. But any 
that we have heard from say that this is what they want. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as we usually ask with 
almost every piece of legislation, does this catch us up with 
other provinces or are we in a leadership position with other 
provinces on this one? And with some specifics as well, please, 
as to, if we’re catching up, have all the other provinces done it? 
Are we the last ones? Are we right in the lead or where are we? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that no, 
we are not the leader in this sense. The other Western 
provinces, I’m advised, already have a similar provision. There 
may be some provinces of Canada that do not have this 
provision but the trend is toward having this kind of power in 
the hands of the coroner. 
 
I’m advised that in the Western provinces this already exists. 
We’re not sure at the moment whether it exists in every 
province of Canada, although it exists in several. And I think 
what I’ll do is say to the member that we’re not the leader of — 
the other Western provinces apparently have this — but what 
I’ll do is send the member a letter which will outline in detail 
for the provinces and the territories which have this power in 
their legislation at the present time and which do not yet have 
the power. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Chair, through you to the minister. 
Thank you for that commitment to get that information out. And 
I think with that particular question it brings us to the end of the 
questions that we had on this particular Bill, Bill No. 16. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

 

Speaker. I would like to thank the opposition Justice critic for 
his very good and helpful questions. And I’d also like to thank 
the officials from the Department of Justice and the coroner’s 
services branch for their assistance with the legislation and for 
the good work that they did today and the good work that they 
do throughout the year. 
 
And with that, I’d like to move that we report this Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Learning to 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. On 
my left is Dr. Craig Dotson, deputy minister of Learning. 
Behind Dr. Dotson is Wayne McElree, assistant deputy 
minister. Behind Mr. McElree is Dr. Michael Littlewood. 
Beside Dr. Littlewood is Glenda Eden, manager of financial 
planning and corporate services. Right directly behind me is 
Gillian McCreary, executive director for Learning. 
 
And on the back corner is Don Sangster, executive director of 
school finance. And right directly in front of Don is Dr. 
Margaret Lipp, executive director of the . . . of Learning 
department. Behind us in the back row is Dr. John Biss; Nelson 
Wagner, executive director of facilities; and Edith Hazen, acting 
associate executive director of student financial assistance. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair; and 
to the minister and her officials, thank you very much. We 
appreciate your attendance again and I’m sure that we can get 
some questions answered that everyone is just dying to hear 
your replies on. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to start with the education tax and 
mostly I’m going to talk about the classifications. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Now we know that the minister has started a . . . has a 
gentleman going around the province talking about the 
education property tax issue and looking at fairness and equity 
in determining if he can come up with some solutions to this 

immense problem. When we have 17 school divisions that get 
no money from the government at all and Saskatchewan having 
the highest percentage of education paid on property of any 
province, we know it’s an issue that has to be dealt with. 
 
One of the PowerPoint slides that is being used is one that talks 
about education tax by property classes. And this one was 2001 
and it talked about commercial and industrial property paying 
222 million, agricultural paying 160 million, and residential 
property paying 264 million. Does the government or does your 
office have the similar numbers for 2002 and 2003? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We have the numbers for 2001. 2002 we 
only have the estimates because we haven’t got the audited 
financial statements yet. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you supply us with those 
numbers, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We can provide the estimates, yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, will they . . . are they 
available now or when will you be able to supply them? We’d 
appreciate them today if possible. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We don’t have them with us today but we 
will have them available the next day or two. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m wondering, 
can you tell me if rental properties like apartments are 
considered residential or commercial? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Multi-dwelling residential, that’s what 
they’re considered. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, you don’t . . . you’d 
indicated you don’t have the numbers here with you so can you 
break them down for us by properties and how much is being 
paid by multi-dwelling properties and how much by 
single-dwelling properties, and how much is by people in the 
various categories so we can get a better handle on who’s 
paying what amount of the property tax? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We can give you the information in as fine 
a disaggregation as we can. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister, we appreciate 
that very much. And I would look forward to it in the next 
couple of days if possible. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m going to just ask a couple of questions on 
the early childhood development and then we’ll go on to 
post-secondary for a few moments. 
 
I notice that there is a slight increase of money this year under 
early childhood development. Is this money still coming all 
from the federal government and can you give me an idea of 
how this money is actually spent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The early childhood development money 
is all federal money. And it’s spent in three government 
departments — Learning, Health, and Community Resources 
and Employment — for an array of programs in nine different 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

targeted communities, including screening at birth up to 
parenting skills. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, just for clarification. The 
money that’s coming from the federal government, I believe 
this is just the one-third of it; the rest of it is divided out into the 
other departments. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — For 2003-2004 it’s divided as follows: in 
Learning we have 3.032 million; in Community Resources and 
Employment 3.3 million; in Health 6.669; for a total of 13.010. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. A number of the 
schools that I’ve had the opportunity to visit have daycares right 
within the school building. Can you give me . . . Can you tell us 
how many schools in the province actually have daycares 
within the school? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We don’t have the exact number. Those 
are local arrangements made. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is the money that is paid to the workers within 
the daycares, does that come from Social Services or does that 
come from the Department of Learning? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The arrangements made with daycares in 
the schools are done with the individual boards. And we don’t 
have any money directly into daycare salaries. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So if the school division themselves were 
paying the daycare workers it wouldn’t be something that the 
department was keeping track of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — No. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the Wraparound program 
that is considered very successful in a lot of the community 
schools and within different departments is something that is 
basically part of SchoolPLUS, but it’s the idea that it’s going to 
involve different departments. How many of our schools right 
now actually have the Wraparound program involved in their 
curriculum or within their workings of the school? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Wraparound program is in the 98 
community schools that are in the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I 
know there’s something that is considered important and yet we 
have never seen if there’s been any measuring outcomes or 
results from the actual programs. Have you had the opportunity 
to look at the . . . assessing the outcomes of this issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’re currently doing a review of 
complex case management and we have six case studies under 
review under the direction of the human services integrated 
committee. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
we had quite a lengthy discussion a week or so ago about 
educational priorities of your government at the post-secondary 
level and I’d like to continue along some of the areas of 
discussion that we initiated at that time. 
 

When we last spoke I asked about the increases in student loan 
levels. We had, at that time, discussed the increasing shortfall 
that student loans provide to Saskatchewan students who are 
hoping to attend post-secondary institutions. And we had some 
discussion around the ability of students to access universities 
and technical schools and so forth based on the currently 
available limitations of student loans. 
 
I think you indicated in our conversation that the last time there 
was any look at the levels, the funding levels provided through 
student loans, you suggested that it was last reviewed in the 
mid-1990s. 
 
I’m wondering, Madam Minister, if you can tell me, is there 
any intent on the part of your government to look at reviewing 
that level of financing once more? And if so, when that might 
happen? And also when you make that decision, what is the 
involvement of the federal government in trying to 
accommodate those increases? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. We continue to make 
improvements in our student loan program; in this budget we 
did with the exemptions and as well as in the year 2000. 
 
There is continuous scrutiny of the student loan program at the 
federal-provincial-territorial level. In fact next month . . . this 
month there will be a committee looking at the student loan 
program at the federal-provincial-territorial level. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister, through the 
Chair. In subsequent discussions I’d like the minister to 
elaborate a little bit about the factors that go into discussions at 
the interprovincial conferences with the federal government as 
to how those loan levels are set, and what factors come into 
play, and are they different for the various provinces, and so on. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The criteria for students loans is a 
needs-based assessment. And the considerations for that 
assessment are consistent. They include things like education, 
expenses . . . living expenses, earned income, assets, savings, 
those sorts of things. And the different provinces can choose 
different responses to loans and debt, and they can also choose 
the bursaries, how they apply bursaries to reduce that debt. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. Are 
you suggesting, Madam Minister, that the criteria for student 
loans is need-based right across the country through all 
provincial governments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes, that’s what I’m saying. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — How long has that particular program been in 
effect? I know that we have a joint program with the federal 
government but can you give us an indication how long that 
program’s been in effect? 
 
And I know you indicated last time we talked that you thought 
the Saskatchewan program was reasonably successful, but I’m 
wondering if other jurisdictions are feeling the same way. What 
is your understanding of how other provinces feel about the 
current arrangement with the federal government? 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The student 
loan program, the federal-provincial student loan program, has 
been in effect for 20 years or more. And Saskatchewan, as of 
the summer of 2001, has the most integrated program with the 
federal government. Ontario is the only other province that has 
a partially integrated program. 
 
We have one of the most generous bursary programs. And the 
distinction there is that student loans provide students with debt; 
bursaries provide students with forgiveness of debt. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, the integrated nature of the 
student loan program with the federal government, has that in 
your estimation brought us greater efficiencies or more federal 
funding? What is the benefit of that greater integration? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There has been no additional federal 
money, although there has been some administrative 
efficiencies. But the primary benefit is to students where they 
have the seamless application and the seamless repaying of the 
debt. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to go 
now to the Canadian millennium scholarships. This has been a 
program that the federal government introduced several years 
ago and has worked reasonably well throughout the country 
from what I’m told, although I know there was controversy 
from time to time as to how the money was used by various 
provincial governments. 
 
Could the minister please explain for us how the province 
administers the Canadian millennium scholarships that arrive 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Okay the $9.7 million that comes from the 
Canadian millennium scholarship fund has been integrated into 
our Canada-Saskatchewan scholarship . . . or student loan 
program. And basically it’s to . . . We’ve given it to the 
universities to reduce . . . to keep tuitions lower, and also into 
bursaries to reduce student debt. So this has been added to the 
university operating grant every year. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — If I understood you correctly, Madam Minister, 
then not all of the Canadian millennium scholarship funds go 
directly to participants who have applied for scholarships, some 
of it is spread through some of the institutions prior to 
disbursement to students? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Each province determines how 
they will administer or disburse their millennium scholarship 
money. 
 
All of our millennium scholarship money goes to the students 
and that has freed up money from our program to give then to 
the universities into their operating grants. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you for that clarification, Madam 
Minister. Can you advise us today, when the federal 
government actually writes the cheque that they send to the 
province of Saskatchewan to cover the cost associated with the 
millennium scholarship? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. It comes every year in May 

and goes directly to the Student Aid Fund. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Is it the opinion of the minister that the 
scholarship fund works to the complete satisfaction of the 
provincial government or are there changes and other things 
that they would like to see accomplished through this particular 
arrangement with the federal government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We are at this point satisfied with our 
agreement. It was signed in ’99-2000, so it’s just barely four 
years old. And we continue to look at whether we would look at 
enhancements or changes but at the moment we’re satisfied. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, the conversation we had last 
week also entailed the potential increase or demand in the 
province for post-secondary education among Saskatchewan 
residents. And I think I talked about the accessibility issue, how 
possible it would be for students to attend post-secondary 
schools, and the vast anticipated increase in applicants that 
many senior university officials have predicted. 
 
I was at a conference recently where it was indicated that the 
province of Alberta has had a recommendation brought before it 
that suggests that they double completely, right across the 
board, all of their post-secondary seats which would — in order 
for them to accommodate that big a change — would require a 
lot of what are now smaller, non-degree-granting institutions to 
be able to grant degrees. And if that’s true for Alberta, I’m sure 
that the demand will be of equivalent and proportionate size in 
this province. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I want to ask you a philosophical 
question, I suppose. I’d like to know whether the government of 
the day has considered the increase in demand and how that 
might impact on our existing institutions, and what the 
provincial government would recommend be done to 
accommodate that demand vis-à-vis the expected increase in 
applicants? 
 
Would the government look at significantly expanding the 
options offered, the courses offered, and the enrolment 
opportunities at our existing schools? Or will the government 
take a long, hard look at the possibility of offering 
degree-granting status to other universities and colleges? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — That’s a very large question and I’m going 
to try and keep the answer fairly short. 
 
We do have our technical institutes, SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), and our colleges, 
who continually respond to the market. And SIAST is 
particularly good at that. So they are always looking at what 
needs . . . what courses need to be given and how to be offered. 
 
The colleges offer first- and second-year university classes. And 
they also have a transfer of credit so that people who take 
something at a college can move it into a university. And 
there’s things like on-line learning and distance learning, and all 
kinds of things that we continue to look at and change so people 
have access to learning closer to their home communities. 
 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

So those things are constantly being evaluated and constantly 
changing to meet the demand of the learner. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, through the Chair, with a 
supplementary question. 
 
I think we covered that base last week but I guess what I’m 
looking at frankly is, if there is a surge in demand, the on-line 
potential and the regional colleges and the other efforts that 
have been put in place now to address the issue of 
accommodating increasing demand may be insufficient. And if 
that in fact is true, we’re going to be caught in a situation where 
we will not be able to service the needs of our own students in 
this province, let alone anybody from out of province who 
might want to come here. 
 
So I think with an eye to the future, what I’m hoping to hear 
from the minister is that the department and the government of 
the day is looking at taking serious steps to addressing what 
could be a very large influx of students. And maybe moving 
beyond the government’s comfort zone in terms of who may or 
may not offer degrees. 
 
I think that there’s kind of a philosophical issue there, a pretty 
serious philosophical issue that the government’s going to have 
to come to grips with, and I’m just wondering if any attention 
has been paid to that particular issue at this point? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We have a fairly flexible regional college 
system that can increase capacity fairly quickly and 
significantly. We continue to monitor that and to react to that 
need. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chair, through you to the minister. 
Will the government anticipate making any changes to the 
legislation that limits the degree-granting capability to any 
existing college? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. We have no immediate plans to expand our 
degree-granting institutions although we are in discussions with 
SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College). There are 
certainly a broad range of things to discuss like faculty, 
accreditation, standards — all those sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I’m encouraged to hear that 
you’re looking at granting some additional recognition to the 
Federated Indian College. I think that that’s an important step 
forward. 
 
I’m also aware, having been in conversation with individuals 
over the last year or 18 months, concerning the move of 
Canadian Bible College and the Canadian Theological 
Seminary to the city of Calgary after a long tenure here in the 
city of Regina, that is a school of outstanding character and has 
a national reputation — one of the best theological training 
institutions in the country. And they felt they were obligated to 
move to Calgary because conversations with the government 
led nowhere when they sought an opportunity to offer degrees 
outside of quote “religious disciplines.” 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I think it was a tragedy that we had to 
lose the college over that particular issue. I think it would be an 

even greater tragedy if we had to lose more than one to the 
same possibility. 
 
And I’ve had conversations with some of the other privately run 
— in some cases sectarian, in other cases not — but in 
conversations with some of those institutions, their leadership 
has indicated to me that they find the restrictions on their ability 
to offer degrees not just encumbering but really limiting their 
future growth and development. 
 
And I think those schools offer a high calibre of education and a 
good opportunity to bring students into the province from 
outside of our jurisdiction. That’s a growth industry that really 
brings new dollars into the province and into our economy. 
There is not much chance that people who attend those 
particular schools are students lost to the University of Regina 
or the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I would hope that in the next few years, 
the next opportunity that review of The Education Act comes 
up for consideration, that the province would look at providing 
those kind of opportunities to schools that can meet the very 
criteria you talked about — whether they can meet academic 
standards, your professorship standards, or whether they can 
meet library standards, or whatever is required — because 
there’s no sense in us losing good schools and the opportunity 
to bring students here when we could in fact be growing that 
industry in this province. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I would ask that you would give an 
undertaking to have another look at that particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just want 
to correct something I think I heard, is that the Canadian Bible 
College did have an arrangement with the University of Regina 
to have credit courses delivered through the college. They had 
an affiliated arrangement. This is a matter, the private schools 
and degree granting, is a matter that’s continuing to be under 
discussion. And we will continue to listen to what they have to 
say as the needs evolve. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I understand, to the 
minister, that Canadian Bible College did have an agreement 
with the University of Regina. But they were looking for an 
opportunity to offer degrees on their own merit and under their 
own charter. And I believe that it wasn’t an unreasonable 
request. It was something that we really should have 
entertained, and I’m hopeful that in the future those kind of 
requests will be given serious consideration. 
 
I do know that some of these colleges feel that their access to 
the minister and to the department is sometimes constrained, 
and maybe that’s because of the additional or other 
responsibilities the department has. 
 
But we can’t afford to lose those kinds of schools, with all the 
jobs and all the well-paying opportunities that leave the 
province. And I appreciate the fact that you have said today, for 
the record, that you will give serious consideration to those 
types of requests in the future. I think it’s very important for the 
future of this province. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Just on one point that the member 
mentioned, I am not aware of being asked to meet with anybody 
and I certainly have not turned down any of those requests if I 
have been asked. So I’m not aware of any of those. And I would 
entertain anybody who wants to talk to me. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To Madam 
Minister, and to your officials, it seems that whenever we talk 
about education we always get back to the issue of funding 
because that is the one question that people keep bringing up. 
Our school system is working well in most areas and I think 
that’s thanks mainly to the school boards who squeeze every 
penny till it hollers, and to the teachers who work very hard at 
what they’re . . . what they’ve been asked to do and going 
above and beyond. 
 
But, Madam Minister, right now there is a number of questions 
about deficit budgeting. And I’m wondering if you can give me 
the department’s more formal stand on deficit budgeting within 
a school division. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Before I actually answer the question, I do 
want to say that the success of our education system is also due 
in large part to the provincial government’s contribution of $1.2 
billion to our learning sector. 
 
The Education Act prohibits boards from deliberately deficit 
budgeting, to answer your question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. To the minister, 
well the $1.2 billion spent on education of course is not just K 
to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) learning, it’s also . . . it’s 
post-secondary. And the fact that Saskatchewan pays more 
education tax on their property than any other province leads 
everyone to believe and to understand that the responsibility for 
education is going mostly on to taxpayers. 
 
So yes, there’s some thank you that goes to the provincial 
government, but most of the thank you has to go to the 
taxpayers who are paying the lion’s share of the cost of 
education in this province. 
 
Madam Minister, you said that there is no mechanism for 
school divisions to actually deficit budget, but we do know that 
there is some actual work done within the school division that 
allows them carry over, and some carry back, and it does 
happen. What are the department’s rules on this issue and what 
do . . . Do the divisions have to report to the government and 
show their annual returns? And what in turn does the 
department do if they see that there is a concern with the deficit 
budget? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. And thank you to the members for 
giving me the opportunity to introduce a very large class from 

Muenster School. We have 20 grade 8 students in the east 
gallery and along with them are Marvin Renneberg, Florence 
Schreiner, Gail Rueve, Kris Breker, Wayne Hogemann, and 
Ben Zimmerman. 
 
To the students, right now we have the opportunity to listen to 
estimates on Education. I’m asking the minister questions on 
the Department of Education, or Learning as it’s now called. 
And the minister is replying with answers that I need to have 
when it comes to talking about this department and spending 
money. 
 
I hope you enjoy what you’re seeing in the gallery and I’ll have 
the opportunity to meet with you in a few minutes and answer 
any questions you have. So welcome to the gallery and I hope 
you have a good time today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Chair, first of all I just want to 
reiterate that The Education Act prohibits deficit budgeting 
deliberately. But if that does happen, that there is a deficit 
budget, then the next budget they’re obligated under the Act to 
pay that off. And each school board has a publicly audit . . . or 
an audited statement that’s publicly available as well as coming 
to the department. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So if there is . . . 
I know that school divisions have the opportunity to have a 
debt, but that would only be for, I would imagine, for capital 
expenditures. If it goes over into the actual operating capital and 
operating budget, then it has to be repaid out of the first money 
that comes into the department the following year. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
member is correct that school boards can carry capital debt but 
the operating debt has to be paid off. In their next budget they 
have to show the way that they’re going to pay off that 
operating deficit. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, there are a number of school 
divisions that are involved in amalgamation proceedings at this 
time. 
 
And some of them have a debt that’s involved that’s part of 
their books at this time and in order to amalgamate they’re 
being forced or, in order to have another school division want 
them, they’re going to have to get that debt paid off before they 
can actually have amalgamation proceedings. So I am aware of 
school divisions that actually have to increase their mill rate 
considerably in order to have amalgamation proceedings go 
forward. 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

How many school divisions are you aware of that are having 
this issue and is it something that the department has been asked 
to deal with to allow the amalgamation process to proceed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Long-term 
debt can be carried forward. There is no obligation that before 
amalgamation occurs the debt has to be paid off. There are 
arrangements being made between districts with assets and 
liabilities that can be carried forward and assumed by the 
amalgamated district. 
 
There have been no requests for the department to intervene in 
any of this as to this date. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I’ve 
had questions from school divisions who are questioning the 
League of Peaceful Schools, I believe it’s called — the bullying 
issue — and some schools that feel that the programs, it’s very 
warranted and yet maybe it’s not working to complete 
satisfaction. 
 
Can you give me a rundown of what this issue, the bullying 
issue or the League of Peaceful Schools, how you’re dealing 
with this issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To answer 
the question, the League of Peaceful Schools is a national 
program that we don’t have a lot to do with. There are . . . 
Schools can choose to use it. 
 
We have a caring and respectful schools program that is 
through the department. And as we proceed with SchoolPLUS, 
that caring and respectful schools program is one of the six 
areas that schools can focus on. 
 
And I just can read you some detail of what the . . . some of the 
roots of violence and the effective programs that we’re hoping 
people will look at: 
 

. . . that the programs are centred on an unconditional 
commitment to all children and youth; that they’re open, 
inclusive, and culturally affirming; that they engage family 
and community and collaborative action; they focus on 
strengths; they’re comprehensive and integrated. 
 
They share responsibility among educators, families, and 
community to ensure that schools are caring, respectful, 
and safe places; share responsibility among educators, 
family, and community to ensure the personal and social 
well-being of all children and youth; promote students 
taking responsibility for their behaviour; promote 
prevention and early intervention approaches; and undergo 
continuous assessment and renewal. 

 
And that program of caring and respectful schools began in 
September 2000 and is working very well with school divisions 
and communities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you tell me how many 
schools are involved in the caring and respectful schools and 
can you tell me how money they’re given if they become part of 
this program? 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. We are not 
giving targeted money to the program. The program . . . The 
money that we’re giving, that targeted money this year, the $90 
per student, is going into the SchoolPLUS initiative. And as I said, 
the caring and respectful school program is one of the six that 
you can choose to use your money for and do your SchoolPLUS 
focus on. And we also don’t track the schools that are, that are 
or are not using this. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, within the Department of 
Education Act, is there any laws or regulations to deal with 
students that are difficult within the school division, that may 
have had a number of complaints against them and the 
complaints have gone to the school board or to the teachers, and 
there may be a . . . school boards may be at a loss as to how to 
deal with the student? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The Education Act has two general 
provisions. One permits boards of education for dealing with 
discipline or behaviour problems by suspension, and the second 
part of the Act that speaks to this is that no matter what the 
behaviour or the discipline problem is with the child, the board 
is obligated to provide an education to that student so they must 
develop programs that meet the needs of those students even if 
they are difficult. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I’m 
going to go on to another issue right now and that is the issue of 
busing. Can you tell me how much money the department 
spends on busing in this calendar year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The recognized expenditures for busing 
are 60 million for rural, 11.4 for urban, and 5.5 for special ed. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is there a breakdown between Catholic and 
public schools? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There is. We don’t have it with us but we 
can get it for you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is there any 
places where the Catholic and public school systems are sharing 
a bus? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. There may 
be an instance but we are not aware of it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, are there any school 
divisions that are using the public transport system that is paid 
for by the department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We give them the money. The school 
boards get the money and they determine then how they spend 
the money. And whether it’s on public transport or some other 
means, it’s up to them to decide. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just wanted 
to take a few seconds to talk on behalf of the Sask Central 
School Division. It’s a school division that I think the 
superintendent of business, Phil Benson, summed up quite well 
that the increased revenue that was publicized provincially did 



June 9, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

 

not translate into the same good news when it was applied to 
the provincial funding formula for their particular school 
division. 
 
And even though they have made the difficult choice to increase 
the mill rate by 1.5, they still have had to cut three teaching 
positions, reduce the support staff hours. They’ve made cuts in 
areas of maintenance and numerous other areas. 
 
The chairman, Gary Orthner, indicated that the salary 
settlements with the teachers, support staff, and bus drivers is 
simply not going to be covered by any increases by the 
provincial government so they have to figure out within 
themselves how they’re going to finance this. 
 
But the other issue that’s happening with the Sask Central 
School Division, I’m just going to take the information from an 
article that I have, entitled “Frustration continues to grow at 
Sask Central School Division.” And the statement is: 
 

Maybe the early bird doesn’t always get the worm, 
particularly if the worm comes from the provincial 
government coffers. 

 
More than five years ago, Mr. Deputy Chairperson, the Sask 
Central School Division was formed from two existing school 
divisions — the Long Lake and the Last Mountain school 
divisions. And it was a voluntary amalgamation at the time. 
And at that time the respective boards received $15,000 each, 
for a total of $30,000 for making the amalgamation. 
 
Now to my understanding, the current school year in the 
province of Saskatchewan is promoting the second round of 
voluntary amalgamation amongst school divisions. However, 
they’ve upped the financial ante considerably since the first 
round. And that’s become an issue for the Sask Central school 
board. 
 
A statement that was made by Ralph Eliasson, the director of 
education for the Sask Central, said that if we hadn’t shown 
leadership and waited until the school . . . or the second round, 
we would have got in the vicinity of a quarter of a million 
dollars. 
 
The Sask Central Board of Education expressed their concern 
with the inequity of the process almost immediately with the 
former Education minister. And in around, I believe it was in 
around November, they were given the assurance by the former 
Education minister that the department would look into the 
request being made by the school division to make the system a 
little more equitable. However they have since been told that 
the meeting wasn’t all that meaningful and they’ve tried to set 
up a meeting with the current Education minister. 
 
As of April 24, no date of meeting has been established. Has 
that meeting taken place? And is the minister considering some 
sort of settlement with the school division, for indeed showing 
leadership and amalgamating well in advance of this round of 
amalgamations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Just a couple of points. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Chair of Committees. The south . . . Sask Central 
School Board’s mill rate is set this year at 19.5. The average 

rural mill rate is 19.31, so it’s fairly close to the average rural 
mill rate. 
 
The transition money this year in amalgamation is not . . . has 
not been made retroactive. The difference from ’97 when 20 
school divisions amalgamated, there was a different set of 
criteria, and all of them accessed that criteria. So the money in 
this round of amalgamations is a different set of criteria and it is 
not retroactive. 
 
Oh, and one more point as to the invitation or the request for a 
meeting, I have not seen or heard of that in the almost four 
months that I’ve been in the department. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the minister should know 
by now that the mill rate is dependent — the amount that will 
be paid by the taxpayers — is dependent upon the assessment of 
the land. If it’s highly assessed property then the mill rate, even 
a lower mill rate, will mean higher taxes. Surely she can figure 
that out. She’s had this portfolio for a little while now. 
 
I will be informing the Sask Central School Division that she 
will . . . is looking forward to attending a meeting with them. 
She’s indicated that she has not heard from them so I’m sure 
they’ll be interested to hear that. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, my questions are related to post-secondary education 
and particularly access to the various colleges and different 
subjects in post-secondary education. 
 
I was approached by some constituents over the weekend about 
students getting into the department of education in particular. 
I’m just wondering, what’s the criteria and what’s the 
procedures for getting into the Faculty of Education and what 
are the road barriers that are in the road why students are not 
being accepted into that faculty? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The University of Regina had 900 
applications for its education program and they have 300 seats 
available, and they determine their own admission criteria. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you can tell me what that criteria is though? Even though it’s 
set by the University of Regina, surely the department knows 
what that criteria is. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. The University of Regina’s criteria is different for 
each faculty and we don’t have them with us right now, but we 
can certainly find you the one for Education if you want it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister, if you 
would, please. The difficulty that the parents pointed out to me 
was that in one case one of the students was a physics major, 
had just graduated from the U of R (University of Regina) in 
physics, wanted to go into Education to become a physics 
teacher, which from my understanding is one of the areas that’s 
in very short supply in the education system, that there is a need 
for physics teachers. That person was rejected. 
 
Another case was a graduate who had just graduated this year 
from kinesiology, wanted to become a teacher as well, was 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 2003 

 

rejected in their application. A third student was a student who 
two years ago was the U of R scholar at her high school, had 
attended the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) for one year. 
I’m not exactly sure what she did last year, whether she took a 
year off, but anyway she applied again this year to the U of R 
for Education. 
 
All three of those students were rejected. It’s not because 
they’re . . . In the case of the U of R scholar, obviously her 
marks are at the very best level. The other two were . . . had just 
graduated with good marks from physics and from kinesiology. 
You would think that the department would be . . . or the 
university would be looking for these kind of students to 
become teachers and not be rejecting them. 
 
So why is it that in the case of the students that had just 
graduated could not get into the department or Faculty of 
Education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I understand the frustration of the people 
that are contacting you but this is something we have no control 
over. The U of R determines their own admission standards and 
their own process for admissions. We do not have any influence 
over them, so the question would be better directed to the 
university itself. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. If the 
U of R was here on the floor, I would ask them the question. 
But they’re not here on the floor and you, Madam Minister, are 
the minister of Education in Saskatchewan, the one who 
answers for education, K to 12; the one who answers for 
post-secondary in this province. Madam Minister, it’s your job 
to be able to, if you don’t know the answers today, to be able to 
supply those answers. 
 
So, Madam Minister, will you gather that information and 
supply us? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
At this point in time, I would report that we rise, Mr. Chairman, 
and report progress. And we’ll come back to another 
department after seven. 
 
The Chair: — Okay. Just to clarify, that we will report 
progress on the Department of Learning and move to Justice. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes, I’d like to thank the members of the 
opposition for their questions and I’d like to also thank my 
officials for coming today. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report 
progress on Department of Learning and move to Justice. Is that 
agreed? 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 

The Chair: — It is now near 5 p.m. We will stand recessed 
until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 



 

 

 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1501 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1502 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1502 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1502 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1502 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1502 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1502 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1502 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1502 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1503, 1525 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1503 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1511 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Women Voyageurs Travel from Cumberland House to The Pas 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1504 
 Kyle Multiple 4-H Club 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1504 
 Meadow Lake Community Excellence Award 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1504 
 50th Anniversary of Residing in Saskatchewan 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1504 
 Mine Emergency Response Competition 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
 Kindersley Couple Celebrates 65th Wedding Anniversary 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
 Galaxy Cinemas Opens Newest Location in Regina 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1505 
 Welwyn Couple Celebrate 50th Wedding Anniversary 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1506 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1506 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1506 
 Possible Change in Party Affiliation 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1507 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1507 
 Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan Investments 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1509 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Compensation for Beef Industry Workers 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1511 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1513 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1514 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1516 



 

 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1517 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1518 
  Hagel (transmittal motion).....................................................................................................................................................1519 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1520 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1520 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1521 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1521, 1525 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1522 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1526 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1527 
 
 
 
 


