















































Hansard: May 08, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 963 
 May 8, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of people in my area who are 
concerned about the high cost of education tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Kelvington and 
Lintlaw. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district who are 
concerned about the lack of dialysis services in their 
community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have done 
repeatedly over the last number of weeks, I stand again today to 
present a petition on behalf of individuals in the constituency of 
Cypress Hills, concerned particularly about this government’s 
policy on the issue of Crown grazing land renewals. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this three-page petition is signed by producers and 
Crown leaseholders in the communities of Cabri and Pennant. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition, 
the prayer of relief of which reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister 
of Highways preserve the old bridges between Battleford 
and North Battleford. 

 

Your petitioners come from Battleford and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the ruthless and 
careless lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency very concerned about the premium increases in 
crop insurance. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Bienfait, Estevan, 
North Portal, Frobisher, and Macoun. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise again with a petition from residents of rural 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about access to adequate 
health care. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause the Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Fife 
Lake, Assiniboia, and Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of farmers who are worried with the 52 per 
cent increase in the crop insurance premium. And the petition 
reads as follows: 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Eston and Plato. 
 
I so here present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with the 
constituents concerned about the cost of prescription drug costs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the fairness for Crown 
leaseholders. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and Perdue. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present on behalf of constituents. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey, Strasbourg, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are concerned with the government’s 
handling of the crop insurance premiums. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Glenbush 
and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 13, 18, 21, 23, 27, 36, 40, and 90. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

Who were the persons and their companies currently 
licensed as gaming suppliers by Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming in 2002? 
 

I’m asking the same question for 2001, for 2000, for 1999, 
1998, 1997, and 1996. 
 

And who are the persons and their companies currently 
licensed as gaming suppliers for Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming? 
 

While I’m on my feet, I have three more questions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Were the bids for the software contract for mega bingo 
open for public scrutiny or was it a sealed bidding process; 
which companies bid on this contract; which were the 
persons and their companies presented by Western Canada 
Lottery Corporation for the final decision in awarding of 
this contract? 
 

And the same questions, Mr. Speaker, about the hardware that 
was contracted for mega bingo. 
 
And the last question: 
 

What are the specific contents contained in the request for 
proposal package that was presented by Western Canada 
Lottery Corporation to persons and their companies 
interested in the RFP, reference no. 621-97; and will 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority provide this 
package or a copy of this package to members of the 
Legislative Assembly wishing to review it? 
 

I so present. 
 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: what is the terminology for Crown 
corporations underwriting or lending money to other 
Crowns; and further to that, relative to that terminology, 
what are the lending guidelines specifically for debt to 
equity ratios? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and all members of the Assembly, a 
group of Saskatchewan public servants seated in your gallery 
who are touring the legislature and I know having an 
opportunity to learn a little bit about our world here in the 
legislature. 
 
The participants are employees from the departments of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization; the Public Service 
Commission; Health; Industry and Resources; 
Intergovernmental Relations and Aboriginal Affairs; Labour, 
Community Resources and Employment; Justice; Saskatchewan 
Environment; and the Legislative Assembly. And welcome to 
the interpreter as well. 
 
And I look forward to meeting with this group shortly after 
question period. And I’m sure all members will want to join me 
in welcoming them today and thanking them for all the good 
work they do on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming the members of the public 
service to the galleries today. 
 
We look forward to the procedures that we have here and hope 
that you enjoy them as well. And the Whip and I look forward 
to meeting with you after question period and after you have a 
chance to talk with the minister so that you get both sides of the 
story as to what actually happened here on the floor today. 
 
I would ask the members to welcome the members of the civil 
service here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

World Junior Curling Champion Honoured 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Saturday the community of Maryfield threw a celebration to 
honour a very special person. The person the community was 
honouring was their very own Janelle Lemon. Mr. Speaker, 
Janelle Lemon was the second on Canada’s world champion 
Junior Girls Curling Team. 
 
Over 200 people gathered in the community centre to enjoy a 

roast beef . . . pork supper, pardon me, and an evening of 
celebration honouring their hero, Janelle Lemon. 
 
Janelle began her curling career in her primary school years. 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t uncommon to find Janelle at the curling 
rink throwing rocks and practising shots whenever she had a 
spare moment. Janelle has been encouraged by her parents, 
family, teachers, and her community as she has pursued her 
curling endeavours. 
 
On Saturday Janelle was joined by her teammates, skip, 
Marliese Miller; third, Teejay Surik; alternate, Tammy 
Schneider; and coach, Bob Miller, as well as family members of 
the other team members. 
 
What an honour for my wife and I to join with the community 
for this joyous celebration. Mr. Speaker, I extend my 
congratulations to Janelle Lemon and her teammates on their 
successful World Junior Curling Championships for 2003. I 
know that there will be many more successful curling successes 
in their futures. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mossbank Historical Society to Re-enact 
Debate of the Century 

 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the Premier’s 
advice to the people of Saskatchewan to seize their own future, 
the Mossbank and District Historical Society is sponsoring a 
daylong event where visitors will be transported back to 1957 to 
the debate of the century, when in the town of Mossbank, 
Tommy Douglas took on Ross Thatcher. The issue, the issue? 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The old saw about those who forget history are condemned to 
repeat it comes to mind. It’s one of the reasons that days like 
this, reminding us of our past, are so very important to our 
future. 
 
This re-enactment of the debate of the century is the cornerstone 
of a special day for Mossbank but there are many other 
activities planned as well, Mr. Speaker. Main Street will be 
adorned with 1950s vehicles, people dressed in 1950s fashions; 
there’ll be a pancake breakfast and much more. 
 
Congratulations to the people of Mossbank as they remember 
their past while reaching for their future. Mossbank has the 
spirit and the vision to thrive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Cleanup Campaign 
Underway in Swift Current 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a massive 
cleanup campaign is underway in my hometown, the city of 
Swift Current. The Swift Current Masonic Lodge and Shrine 
Club, along with the city, are coordinating the effort to clean up 
Swift Current. 
 
Over 1,000 volunteers will be taking to the streets, the back 
alleys, the parks, and the ditches around the community to pick 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

up all of the litter in Swift Current to start the spring. The Good 
Sam’s RV Club, the Kiwanis Club, the Eliminators Car Club, 
volunteers from the abilities centre, and all of the schools in 
Swift Current are going to be involved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Residents are being encouraged to clean up their own yards and 
back alleys, and those who are willing to go the extra mile can 
visit the Shrine Hut to pick up a map showing them the areas of 
the city that still needs a little TLC (tender loving care). 
 
I’d like to congratulate the Masonic Lodge and the Shrine Club 
for grabbing hold of the reins for this particular project. 
 
As well I’d like to ask all members to recognize the efforts of 
all of the hardworking volunteers and children in the city of 
Swift Current who are helping to clean up the city. And better 
yet, I invite the members to come this summer to Swift Current 
and check out just how clean and wonderful the community of 
Swift Current is. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Musician Wins Prize at 
National Music Competition 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The depth and the 
breadth and the variety of talent to be found throughout the 
province is a constant joy and a source of amazement to me, 
and I suspect to all of us. 
 
One of the real pleasures of being an MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) is this constant reminder that yet another 
Saskatchewan person has distinguished him or herself in the 
wider world. 
 
The case in point today is a constituent of mine who is quite 
well known in Regina, throughout the music community, Bob 
Evans. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Bob is a gifted guitarist with a wonderful singing voice. His 
main area is folk music and he also plays the blues and gospel 
music. We have grown accustomed to hearing him about town 
either as a solo performer or with a group. But by the way, Mr. 
Speaker, he also has a day job in the Department of Health. 
 
Recently he was a winner at the National Fingerpicking 
Championships in Winfield, Kansas. This is a prestigious 
festival, familiar to guitar, banjo, mandolin players and fans 
across the continent. Contestants enter from around the world, 
but only 40 people in each category make the final cut in the 
competition. The most popular category is instrumental solo 
guitar, Bob’s category. 
 
His first time out he won the third best guitar picker in the 
world. His prize was a custom built guitar and a great deal of 
prestige among his peers. Prestige, which by proxy and with 
pride, Saskatchewan can share. 
 
I know all members will join me in congratulating Bob and his 
nimble fingers. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Math Students Test Nestlé Canada Brainteaser 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
a group of math students in Naicam learned that advertising can 
stretch the truth and that math has a practical application in 
everyday life. 
 
Mr. Erick Hufnagel’s grade 8 math class had been working on a 
unit focusing on perimeter, circumferences, diameters, etc. A 
student, Jake Christianson, brought to the attention of the class 
a brainteaser math fact that was on the Nestlé Canada Smarties 
box. It stated the number of Smarties produced by their 
company in one day could encircle the earth. 
 
The student found out that Nestlé manufactures 17 million 
Smarties every day. They then figured out that each Smartie had 
a diameter of 1 centimetre so that meant that 17 million 
Smarties could cover a distance of 17 million centimetres or 
only 170 kilometres. 
 
After much discussion and encouragement by their teacher, 
Bradley Nienaber e-mailed the company and told them that 
their math was wrong. The company replied to Bradley and 
admitted that they were wrong and they would correct their 
packaging. They also sent the students 25 gift certificates for 
Nestlé’s chocolate bars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this class learned many valuable lessons in this 
exercise that will hopefully make them question advertising and 
take facts at face value, as well as teaching them to draw their 
own conclusions. These skills will serve them well throughout 
their life. I ask members to join with me in congratulating the 
grade 8 students in Naicam for thinking outside the box. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students Celebrate Century Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when you take your 
next break, as I’m sure you will, I invite you, as I invite all 
members, to go downstairs to the wall just outside the 
Cumberland Gallery and look at a huge, colourful poster that 
was made by the students of Connaught School, which is in my 
constituency of Regina Centre. 
 
Now the poster was created by the students as part of their 
participation in Youth Week, which occurs the first week of 
May, and this week showcases the talents, ideas, and abilities of 
young people. 
 
Now this was a very special thing, Mr. Speaker, because they 
celebrated Youth Week by having a Century Festival. As you 
know, it’s Regina’s centennial this year and Connaught 
School’s been here nearly as long as the city. 
 
But the idea of the Century Festival came from a remarkable 
young man called David Mark. And David worked with Street 
Culture Kidz Project on this festival using the idea of the 
Century Festival to provoke the kids into thinking about the 
future by asking them this question: what is your vision for the 
next century? After all, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only us adults who 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

 

can dream dreams and have vision. 
 
The students have recorded their ideas in books, murals, 
artworks, and stories. On May 5, the students presented their 
ideas and their works to an assembly which I was proud to 
attend. And they had ideas on environment, peace, combating 
racism, as well as inventing new technology such as flying cars. 
The assembly was filmed and Connaught will be 
communicating their ideas with other schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was very encouraging and satisfying to realize 
the future is in such good hands. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Women Win at Hair Design Competition 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
exceptional young women from Weyburn were recently 
recognized at the national level for their outstanding creativity 
and ability in their chosen field of hair design. 
 
Courtney Stott and Rhea Labbee both won first place in 
different categories at the Wella Young Protege Competition 
held in Toronto. Courtney, with her model, Kendell-Jo La 
Coste, won first place for consumer fashion, which included 
haircut, colour, and style. Rhea, with her model, Kendra Saboe, 
won first place in the young perm category, which included a 
perm, colour, cut, and style. 
 
Both Rhea and Courtney qualified to compete at the national 
level by winning at the provincial level last fall, and their prize 
for winning in Toronto included a $1,500 scholarship to Vidal 
Sassoon in Toronto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of Rhea and Courtney, not only 
because they are from my constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, but because both Rhea and Courtney worked for me at 
the Weyburn Dairy Queen. By their recent achievement it 
shows that the strong work ethic that they had then continues to 
serve them well today. 
 
I’d like to ask all members of the legislature to join with me in 
congratulating Rhea and Courtney and to wish them much 
success in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Learning. School divisions across Saskatchewan have been 
finalizing their budgets and the news for taxpayers is very 
bleak. According to the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, education property taxes are going up right across 
the province. And school divisions are blaming this directly on 
the shoulders of the NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 
School divisions know that the NDP government has forced 
them to increase education property taxes because the 
provincial funding didn’t cover the cost of the teachers’ salary 
or the operation of the school district. 

Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government gambling millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars right across this whole world and forcing 
school divisions to increase property taxes to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 
has put a huge investment in education this year — $1.2 billion 
in education. We committed to fully fund the teachers’ increase 
and we did so. We put the total amount of the increase into the 
foundation operating grants and from there it was disbursed into 
the school districts. They have the autonomy to make their own 
decisions at the local level and have done so. But our 
commitment this year was a major statement of our value of 
education in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know the Minister of Learning 
is well aware that there are 15 school divisions that don’t get 
one penny from this government, nothing to cover the cost of 
teachers’ salaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association), at least 64 per cent of school divisions 
have had to increase their education property tax because the 
education grant did not cover the cost of the teachers’ salary 
increase and the operation of their division. The average mill 
rate is going to be going up in virtually every school division 
across this province, and it has for the last three years. 
 
To make matters worse, the NDP has also increased the 
computational mill rates. That means that the amount of money 
they get from the province is less so they have to add more 
money to the education property tax bill. In the meantime, the 
NDP government is gambling millions of dollars in Australia, 
in Atlanta, in Nashville, all over the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government gambling taxpayers’ 
dollars outside of Saskatchewan, making us pay more for 
property tax, and they still say that education is a priority for 
their government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That question . . . 
Or if there was a question, it was pretty much all over the map. 
But I will talk about the foundation operating grant which we 
put our money into, and that is the formula that disburses our 
money to the school boards in the province. 
 
We have total support from the school boards to the Teachers’ 
Federation and the SSTA for the foundation operating grant 
formula. That is the fairest way. It is an equalization type of 
formula, and I’m not too sure if the member opposite 
understands the formula but that is the fairest way to distribute 
our money, which we have got full support from all the partners 
in the education sector. And that is how we continue to do it, 
with their support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there’s not many taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan who think this is very fair when their taxes are 
going up every year and this government is gambling their 
dollars outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — The minister seems to missing a very 
important point. School divisions have to increase property 
taxes because the NDP have misplaced priorities. And the NDP 
doesn’t care, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian Taxpayers Federation 
presented the Minister of Finance with more than 8,500 
petitions. Every one of those petitions called for lower property 
taxes. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP took those 
8,500 taxpayers’ petitions and they either lost them or shredded 
them because they really didn’t care that people were concerned 
about property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP shredding the concerns of 
thousands of taxpayers of this province and then telling school 
divisions to get more money from property owners in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as was indicated in the 
budget on March 28, there was an increase to the foundation 
operating grant. There was a record investment in education of 
$1.2 billion. And I might point out to the members opposite that 
the amount of dollars in the foundation operating grant in 1999 
was $397.5 million; in this year’s budget it’s up to 510. That’s a 
hundred million dollar increase in just four budgets, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s investment that this government has been 
putting into education in this province. 
 
But I might add that the petition that has been presented to the 
government will be tabled by myself here in the absolute near 
future. We have that petition. And also, Mr. Speaker, I wish to 
indicate that the no. 1 recommendation on that petition was that 
we create a commission to investigate the financing of 
education and we have done that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the SSTA said at least 64 per 
cent of school divisions have increased their education property 
taxes. That’s a fact. That’s a fact that we have to live with every 
day. 
 
The education grant does not cover the teachers’ salary increase 
and it did not cover the costs of operating a school division. 
Every . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP keeps telling school 
divisions to prepare for a loss of 35,000 students by the end of 
the decade. And the NDP keeps shortchanging school divisions 
on education grants. But the minister clearly has no intention of 

following her advice when it comes to being efficient in her 
own department. When young families continue to stream out 
of Saskatchewan and the K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) 
enrolment continues to drop and the NDP continues to tell 
school divisions to cut back and become more efficient, the 
salaries at the Department of Learning on the K to 12 side has 
gone up 12 per cent this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP shortchanging school divisions 
and driving education property taxes up across Saskatchewan 
while the Minister of Learning increases the amount of money 
given to her staff and her department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve already talked 
about the record investment in education of $1.2 billion. We’ve 
talked about an increase to our foundation operating grant of 
over 20 per cent in the last three or four years. We’ve talked 
about our investment in terms of what we’re doing for school 
divisions on the foundation operating grant. We promised to 
cover fully 100 per cent of the teachers’ contract, and we’ve 
done that. And, Mr. Speaker, we have the best equity outcomes 
of any jurisdiction of 32 OECD (Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development) countries. 
 
So I talk about this. I talk about our investment in education. 
And I ask the member, who in the last campaign and the 
platform on her campaign literature did not mention education 
once, and she has the gall to get on her feet and talk about why 
we’re not spending more, Mr. Speaker . . . Well they froze 
spending on education in the last election. We’re providing 
investment to our citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Supply of Nurses 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we 
pointed out the severe doctor shortage in this province. 
Saskatchewan has the second worst doctor-to-patient ratio in 
the country, over 300 doctors below the national average. 
 
But it’s not just doctors. Yesterday I attended the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association conference. The Minister of 
Health addressed the conference and gave his standard 
everything’s-fine speech. And then he left, which is too bad, 
because if he had stuck around he would have heard SRNA 
(Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) executive 
director, Donna Brunskill, blast his NDP government for the 
severe nursing shortage in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why isn’t this NDP government getting the 
message? When are they going to address the severe nursing 
shortage in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government, our NDP government . . . 
 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party is 
saying I can’t talk about education. But interestingly enough, I 
can talk about both health and education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this government, our NDP 
government has made a strong commitment to both education 
and health care. In this budget we committed $2.5 billion to 
health care and $1.2 billion to education. We are continuing to 
work with our partners in the educational institutions and the 
professional associations to address the nursing human 
resources. And we will, we will await the outcome of a study 
that we have commissioned from Doug Elliott, and we will use 
that information to inform our decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad that the Minister of Learning is knowledgeable about 
nursing because after the next provincial election we’ll have 
one more nurse back in the health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote, since the 
minister wasn’t there, I would like to quote from Donna 
Brunskill’s speech. She said, and I quote: 
 

What is going on around us in response to the nursing 
shortage is unacceptable. We need to take a stand. 

 
She goes on to say: 
 

In Saskatchewan, nursing education seats were reduced 
from 475 to 180 by this NDP government. The conscious 
reduction in education seats coupled with high-stress work 
environments have resulted in a chronic nursing shortage. 
Enough is enough. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what is this NDP government doing to address the 
shortage that’s outlined by the SRNA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After the next 
election this nurse will be still here. And there will probably be 
another chicken fryer in Melfort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Anyway but, Mr. Speaker, our government 
has increased the nursing seats capacity since 1999 by 65 per 
cent. As late as this last March we added 40 new seats in the 
northern nursing Aboriginal program, and we continue to look 
at ways to address the nursing shortage and the nursing human 
resource issues in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

again this minister is very convenient in missing some of the 
real facts. The facts are this NDP government reduced the 
education training seats for nursing from 475 to 180. Now they 
bring it back up to 260 and say they’ve increased it by 
two-thirds. Mr. Speaker, they are still seriously behind what 
they were educating when this government took office. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the executive director of the 
SRNA also said yesterday that we don’t have to study this any 
more; it’s an excuse for inaction. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, she 
has also said last year there were 700 applications for the 260 
available spots. This year she understands that that number is 
approaching 1,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are young people who want to join the 
profession of nursing and are being turned away because of this 
government’s lack of vision for the future of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, when will this government realize you can’t reduce 
waiting lists, you can’t advance the opportunities to get 
diagnostics, unless you have health care professionals to 
provide the service? When will they recognize this fact and take 
action immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it fairly 
ironic that the Saskatchewan Party stands in their seat and tries 
to defend health care or education, when in their 1999 platform 
their fight for Saskatchewan was: for education, audit and 
freeze; for health, audit and freeze; fighting for the Crowns, 
audit and sell; fighting for the public service, audit and fire; 
fighting for Justice, audit and interfere. 
 
If people in Saskatchewan think the Saskatchewan Party is 
fighting for them, they should look close and think hard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the minister for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) provided the opposition with a copy of a 
presentation that Don Ching, the CEO (chief executive officer) 
of SaskTel, is making, has made here in Regina, that highlights 
the success or the lack of success of SaskTel’s investments out 
of this province, Mr. Speaker, their out-of-province 
investments. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as much as we appreciate getting a copy of 
the presentation, we’re alarmed by what appears to be some 
misrepresentations in this particular presentation, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’d like the minister to be able to clarify whether he’s 
approved this. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — We’d like the minister to clarify some 
information on here where, under the category of total return, 
return of the taxpayers for Retx, Soft Tracks, Craig Wireless, 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

tappedinto, and BWI (Business Watch International) there’s a 
. . . Instead of highlighting the losses that these investments 
have racked up, there’s an initial, N-A, beside each of those — 
N-A. 
 
Will the minister tell us what N-A means? Does it mean not 
applicable, not available, not accurate, or not accountable? 
Which of those does that mean? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, N-A means none of the 
above. What it means, Mr. Speaker, it means, Mr. Speaker, that 
SaskTel for its investments have returned — as I have said 100, 
1,000 times in this legislature — it’s returned to the people of 
Saskatchewan first of all good service, low cost, high quality to 
the people of Saskatchewan for many, many years. It will 
continue to do it for many, many more years unless that party, 
the Sask Party, ever gets in government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is an important question. The 
president, the hand-picked president of SaskTel, former Premier 
Romanow’s roommate, made a presentation to the Regina 
Chamber of Commerce about defending SaskTel’s foreign 
investments. That’s what he did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in this presentation on foreign investments by SaskTel, all 
of the information isn’t provided. Even as we are debating in 
this legislature and the government is admitting to losses at 
Retx in Georgia, at Soft Tracks, at Craig Wireless, at tappedinto 
in Tennessee, even as the government officials are admitting to 
those losses here, he’s not disclosing those losses in these 
public presentations around the province. Does the minister 
believe that is acceptable on the part of the president of 
SaskTel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well again, many of these questions that he asks could be asked 
in Crown Corporations. And he knows when he asks these 
questions in Crown Corporations, where there are many 
officials present, that he gets full and complete answers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And on a daily basis he stands in this Chamber, says that they 
don’t get the information. How is it that he’s even able to ask 
the questions about many of those issues? Because we provided 
the information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again, many of the investments that SaskTel 
has made in this province and outside of this province have 
benefited people of Saskatchewan in a very significant way. 
They have provided high-quality service for the people of 
Saskatchewan at very, very low and affordable rates, amongst 
the highest-quality service in all of the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently N-A means not 
answering and that’s nothing new for this minister in this 

House. If he’s inviting the opposition to ask these questions in 
Crown Corporations, he ought to turn around behind him and 
talk to the chairman, the NDP chairman of the Crown 
Corporations Committee of this legislature because just 
yesterday — just yesterday — I had a discussion with him and 
invited him to reconvene. Let’s reconvene that committee. 
 
I asked the chairman of committees, when will we be meeting 
again? So he may want to ask the member for Regina Victoria 
who will indeed be able to convene a meeting of the Crown 
Corporations Committee. We’ll ask the questions there. We’re 
not getting the answers in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister has not answered the question. I’ll put it very 
simply and very clearly. This presentation is disingenuous at 
best. It does not represent the state of SaskTel’s international 
investments. It represents something other than the facts. 
 
So does the minister believe that that is acceptable, to have 
SaskTel officials making a presentation like this around the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well when 
this member from the Sask Party talks about misrepresentation, 
he is treading on very, very thin ice given what that party has 
done in this legislature over the last few days, Mr. Speaker — 
very thin ice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel — part of what these folks in the Sask 
Party want them to do — has gone around the province, and 
most recently with the chamber, providing them detailed 
information. They accuse this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, of not 
providing information. I say look at the list and there are pages, 
Mr. Speaker, of what this government has done to become more 
accountable. 
 
Given what I had read in this Chamber sometime ago where the 
auditor couldn’t even rely on the statements when they were 
government, talking about the Crown corporations . . . Mr. 
Speaker, we provide significant transactions. We provide now 
semi-annual reports, Mr. Speaker. The boards are recognized as 
having amongst the highest standards in all of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we meet or exceed TSX standards, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I could go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Well the minister has a chance to explain exactly how 
he comes to this conclusion because we know even from Mr. 
Ching’s presentation that there are only two . . . there are three 
winning deals in all of this, Mr. Speaker. Two of them were 
done by the previous government. One of the them is a 
privatization of SaskComp, if you can believe it. 
 
So there’s one deal that the NDP can claim in international 
investments that made them 6.1 million, but once you throw it 
into the mix, the net result is this, Mr. Speaker. The net result is 
that under this government, SaskTel has lost $45 million, 45 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

 

million taxpayer dollars in out-of-province investments that it 
doesn’t have for things like education in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the meantime, it looks like SaskTel officials are less 
interested in telling the truth about that fact. And I want to ask 
the minister if he will direct his officials to correct their public 
presentation on SaskTel’s international investment . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let me 
say two things about that question. There were a number of 
questions that were in that statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all he is correct — the deal under LCL 
(Leicester Communications Limited) was first structured under 
the Devine government, Mr. Speaker. But there isn’t a 
telephone company in the world that would not disagree with 
SaskTel in believing that if they had sold it, sold it under the 
construction or under the model that existed when they had it, 
that it would have been a huge money loser. 
 
The fact is that under this government and under SaskTel, and 
under the management of SaskTel under this government, they 
restructured it and made a huge profit for the people of 
Saskatchewan to be directed to better service, Mr. Speaker. 
Anybody knows that. 
 
And in addition to that, they can attack SaskTel in this Chamber 
and the people that work for SaskTel across our province on a 
daily basis. The fact is that SaskTel is, if not the strongest, tied 
with MTS (Manitoba Telecom Services)out of Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker, for the strongest telephone company in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Effective Use of Health Care Resources 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, in the past 10 years health care 
spending has increased by $1 billion. This year alone, 72 per 
cent of the increased spending in the budget went to health, but 
so far we have seen no results. We have a shortage of 300 
doctors, a shortage of 700 nurses, it takes eight months to get an 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), and three years to get a hip 
replacement. 
 
My question for the minister: how is it that, after spending $1 
billion, waiting lists just keep on growing? What guarantees is 
he putting in place to ensure that the 184 extra million dollars 
being spent this year will actually get through to patient care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have been 
working very carefully with the regional health authorities 
around an accountability structure like we’ve never seen in this 
province before. 
 
(14:15) 
 
We are working together to set out a plan where they get their 
budgets on budget day and they move forward. 

One of the key things that we’re doing is making sure that our 
health system is accountable for exactly the kind of questions 
that the member asks because one of the challenges that we all 
have is making sure that we use our health dollars, here in 
Saskatchewan, in the most efficient way possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, according to Roy Romanow, 
Canadian health care is now at the crossroads. Either we will 
continue to have a one-tier publicly funded health care system if 
we can fix it or we are going to devolve into two-tier health care 
where access is determined by income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people judge the quality of their health care by the 
length of the waiting list. And on that test, Saskatchewan has 
failed them. Without concrete results this time, confidence in 
our public health care system will be irreparably compromised. 
 
My question for the minister: how does he account for 
increased spending of $1 billion with no results to patients and 
longer waiting lists today than we had 10 years ago? What 
guarantees will he put in place? What guarantees will he give us 
that patients will actually see waiting lists decrease? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
answers to this question and I’m going to answer it in two ways. 
First question is, 10 years ago approximately — actually it’s 
about nine years ago — we had a federal Liberal government 
where that member is affiliated that ended up taking out a huge 
chunk of money in health care. It put the whole system out of 
kilter. We got a bit of the money back in September 2000. We 
got a bit more in February of this year. 
 
But we need to continue to press the federal government to play 
their true part, the federal Liberals. And I ask that member, in 
his role as a Liberal, to make sure he gets that one. 
 
The second point is around . . . dealing with waiting lists. We in 
Saskatchewan have the first province-wide surgical care 
network that we’re developing. That will be coming into place 
in another number of weeks. And that will end up providing us 
with exact information about how we can allocate the resources 
throughout the province so that we can deal with waiting lists in 
specific areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are the strongest defenders of 
medicare in Canada and we continue to keep that role. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 26, 
The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, The 
Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 28, The 
Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les 

sociétés sans but lucratif 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 29, The 
Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 30, the 
pawned property (recording) amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 
sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de 

hasard 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 31, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 
2003 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 36, The 
Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 37, The 
Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I move that Bill No. 38, The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 192 and no. 193. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 192 and 193 have 
been submitted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to stand to convert this for debates returnable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 194 converted to debates returnable. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
once again to table on behalf of the government responses to 
written questions 195 through 197 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 195, 196, and 197 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act. Mr. 
Speaker, this Act is being introduced to further our commitment 
under the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care announced 
by this government in December 2001. Mr. Speaker, we are 
following through on our commitment to protect the security of 
seniors and persons with disabilities while continuing to 
improve and expand long-term care options for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
The Personal Care Homes Act was passed to govern licensing 
of personal care homes in the province. The Act regulates 
private accommodations that provide care for individuals who 
choose not to remain in their own homes. The Personal Care 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

 

Homes Act was developed in consultation with consumer, 
health, and social interest groups to ensure that private care 
homes were regulated and monitored and would provide the 
best possible care to their residents. 
 
Saskatchewan Health has monitored these facilities, keeping in 
mind that residents of personal care homes must receive safe 
and secure care. The Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care 
reaffirmed our commitment to providing the best possible care 
for our residents and supporting those most in need. 
 
The amendments being proposed today, Mr. Speaker, were 
developed after consultations with seniors’ organizations, 
personal care home residents, current and potential operators, 
health sector unions, health administrators, and professional 
associations. These consultations emphasized the need for 
financial security should a personal care home face sudden 
closure. This amendment, Mr. Speaker, includes two provisions 
to protect residents in the event that a large, privately operated 
personal care home faces sudden closure. 
 
First, new operators of large personal care homes will be 
required to post a bond or other form of security to assist with 
transition planning for residents in the event that the personal 
care home is no longer financially viable and goes out of 
business. As well, the government will now have the ability to 
appoint a public administrator to ensure safe and secure care for 
residents through such a transition process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to offering those residents of 
the province who need special care, whether they are seniors or 
persons with disabilities, the best options for their individual 
circumstances. We are satisfied, Mr. Speaker, that these 
amendments will provide another level of protection for those 
residents of large personal care homes. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a very complex Bill dealing with a very 
important issue, and that is the safety and security of people in 
care homes. And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter whether those 
people are in care homes that are run privately or if they’re in 
care homes that are run publicly. Each and every one of those 
citizens deserves and should know that they are safe and secure 
in their home, in their place of lodging, Mr. Speaker. And it 
should not matter whether it’s a private or a public facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because while private homes do close from time 
to time — and that is certainly an impediment to the people 
living there — public facilities also, Mr. Speaker, have been 
known to close and that causes a severe impediment for the 
citizens that are living in those homes. So there needs to be 
some security for both, Mr. Speaker, that when you’re in a 
long-term care facility that you have some assurance that there 
is going to be a place for you in the system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about that residents need to 
have comfort and confidence. They deserve to live happy and 
productive lives. Well, Mr. Speaker, that means that they need 
to live in the communities that they were living in prior to going 

into a long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. That’s why the 
private care homes are increasing in this province, is because 
people want to live in the communities where they worked and 
lived their entire lives. That’s where their friends are, that’s 
where their families are — those that remain in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, because a good member . . . a good number of 
those families have moved out of this province. But those that 
remain, Mr. Speaker, the seniors in long-term care facilities 
want to stay in those communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in a large number of cases that is not able to 
happen because the facilities either aren’t in their communities 
or the facilities in their communities are not large enough to 
accommodate the demand. And I know that the Minister of 
Health has said that there are enough long-term care placements 
across the province to accommodate the needs that we have 
according to the statistics for the numbers over the age of 75. 
 
(14:30) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what the problem is, is they’re not in the 
communities where the seniors are living. They’re being 
transferred 50 miles away. They’re being transferred 100 miles 
away, Mr. Speaker. And in those cases, in a lot of those cases, 
the spouse is not able to travel those kind of distances on a 
continual basis. 
 
So the person who is put into the senior’s care facility is away 
from their family. Their spouse has no access to them. The 
family is living a long ways away. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
they live miserable lives under those circumstances. So it’s very 
important that there is the ability to have security and safety and 
comfort in their home communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks of large private care 
homes, it’s going to be important for us to find out from him 
what he means by large. Is large more than 5 residents, more 
than 10 residents, more than 20 residents? What is the criteria 
here? Because everyone needs to have that security, Mr. 
Speaker — not just those in a large but those in smaller care 
homes as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you’re looking at these bonds, also you need 
to take a look at what is the cost going to be to the individual 
who resides in one of these long-term care facilities. Obviously 
the private care homes are there not to be a charity, Mr. 
Speaker. And in a large number of the cases where they are a 
charity organization, they’re already part of the government 
system known as affiliates, Mr. Speaker, and receive some 
government support, if not all of it through government support. 
 
Those private individuals who provide these kind of long-term 
care facilities because there isn’t enough available in the public 
system are not doing so, Mr. Speaker, because they are wanting 
to lose money. So the cost associated for the imposition of a 
bond has to be transferred then on to the residents of those 
private care homes. 
 
And I think it’s going to be critical to find out from the minister 
what kind of costs are we looking at? How big is that bond 
going to have to be? What kind of a time frame are we looking 
at if there is a closure of a long-term care facility? The bond is 
in place to cover what kind of requirements? Is it to provide 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

residency for 30 days, residency for 60 days, residency for a 
year? Because in a large number of cases when you look across 
the province, Mr. Speaker, the waiting lists are over a year long 
to get into long-term care facilities in this province. And so how 
long does that bond have to be in place to cover the residency 
for the individuals involved? 
 
When that bond is in place, Mr. Speaker, and the administrator 
is appointed, if — and we don’t know what the minister has in 
mind for this operation; those questions still need to be asked — 
but if the administrator is going to take over physical control of 
that long-term care facility, who now becomes responsible for 
the costs? Is that applied against the bond? Is someone else 
responsible for those long-term costs that the administrator 
might impose on that long-term care facility? 
 
There are a large number of questions here, Mr. Speaker, that 
need to be addressed by the minister and clarify what this bond 
will do. The people in residence in those long-term care 
facilities certainly need to have the protection but there needs to 
be a lot more answers and a lot clearer explanation than what 
the minister has given in his second reading speech, Mr. 
Speaker, so at this time I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
 

The Chair: — I would recognize the Minister of Health to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, or Mr. 
Chair, I guess of this particular committee. 
 
I’m pleased to have with me today Lois Zelmer, who is on my 
right, who is the director of health services policy and 
legislation from the policy and planning branch; and on my left, 
Cathy Dermody, who is the health professions consultant from 
policy and planning branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome 
minister and your officials this afternoon to discuss the Bill No. 
6, An Act respecting the Profession of Podiatry and making a 
consequential amendment to The Medical Profession Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of things that this Bill is 
designed to do and I’d like to go over them briefly. 
 
First of all I believe it moves the Bill and the practice from the 
chiropodist type of legislation that was in place in the past, and 
updates it and brings it into the more contemporary terminology 
of podiatry, and also updates the regulatory structure for the 
podiatry as a self-regulating organization. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, that’s correct. And if you wish I can 
give you a summary of the changes that are here, and then if 
I’ve missed something that you have a question about, well we 
can go that way. 
 

Basically this legislation follows our template legislation for 
health professions with one exception, which is that we’re 
going to put in bylaw-making authority to allow podiatrists to 
prescribe medications and order diagnostic tests. 
 
But the Act will update the existing Act and change the name of 
the Act from The Chiropody Profession Act to The Podiatry 
Act. It will change the name of the Saskatchewan Association 
of Chiropodists to the Saskatchewan College of Podiatrists. It 
sets out the requirements for meetings and other administrative 
matters. It provides for the appointment of three public 
representatives on council, one of which must also serve on the 
discipline committee. 
 
It sets out the bylaw-making powers for both administrative and 
regulatory bylaws and the filing requirements. It provides 
bylaw-making authority to allow podiatrists to prescribe 
medications and order diagnostic tests. It provides for 
ministerial bylaws. It sets out registration requirements, and 
requires that educational qualifications be specified in the 
bylaws. 
 
It provides title protection for podiatrists and chiropodists, and 
provides that the title, doctor, may only be used in conjunction 
with the words podiatrist, podiatry, chiropodist, or chiropody so 
that it clearly indicates that the person is not a physician. 
 
It also includes investigation and discipline provisions. It 
includes penalties of up to a maximum of $6,000 for those who 
use the title, podiatrist or chiropodist, but who are not licensed 
to do so. 
 
It requires an annual register and an annual report and it 
provides for transitional bylaws, transitional provisions for the 
bylaws for the council and for licences. 
 
So that’s a summary of the whole Act and what it’s intended to 
do, and I’m happy to answer any further questions. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that overview 
because it touches on many of the specific questions about this 
legislation that I was going to ask so that we might get it on the 
record. I think that’s important in these discussions as well, not 
only to sort of go over it together but to make sure we have it on 
the official record what the intent is. 
 
Mr. Minister, you mentioned in your summary that there is 
going to be an exception from the normal template, if you like, 
and framework in that podiatrists are going to be given the 
authority to subscribe or to call for certain tests and certain 
procedures. Could you outline specifically, have they been 
decided, what specific tests and what specific procedures are 
envisaged by bylaw in this legislation? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — To introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. In the west 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

 

gallery I’d like to introduce to the House, through you and to 
the House, 43 students from St. Edward School that is my 
riding in Avenue P. And they are accompanied today by 
teachers Dustin Kasun, Mel Sysing, and Klarissa Komarnicki. I 
hope I got that right. I see a face — maybe I didn’t quite get it 
right. 
 
But I do want to say one thing about this school. It means a lot 
to me, St. Edward School on Avenue P. I used to coach softball 
on the playground with the Kelsey Jets. I don’t know if the kids 
there, if any of them are on the Kelsey Jets team. But I’ll be 
meeting with the group shortly for a photograph and to review 
some of the proceedings that we’re taking part in here today and 
answer any questions. 
 
So welcome to our House today, and we’re glad that you’re 
down here from Saskatoon seeing what goes on in the 
legislature. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’d like to respond to that 
question about the prescribing of medications and ordering of 
tests. This area of the development of the bylaws will be done 
in close conjunction with the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons and the Saskatchewan Medical Association. It’s 
contemplated that for the medications it’ll be primarily topical 
medications that relate to some of the foot infections and things 
like that. 
 
And practically, they will be working very closely with the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons as they develop this, and I 
think they’re just starting to do that. And till they have those 
rules in place, this particular part of the legislation wouldn’t be 
proclaimed in effect till we get the regulations in place first. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I assume that in these discussions, 
once the specific bylaws are prepared, they need to be approved 
by the board of the podiatric college. And then are these bylaws 
that also require the Minister of Health’s approval? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, the bylaws would have to be 
approved, as well as the drugs schedules and the regulations 
that go with that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, I believe that podiatric 
surgeons are going to continue to be under the responsibility of 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons. Is part of the 
discussions that will go on between the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association), 
and the college of podiatry, are they going to work on some of 
the protocols exactly of that relationship so that that is pretty 
clearly defined and transparent? 
 
(14:45) 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think you’ve anticipated what will 
happen is that as they work on this particular Act, they’ll also 
be looking at some of the other definition of the role of some of 
the people with surgery training. 
 
Just out of interest and I think to inform the public, it’s 
important to know that both British Columbia and Alberta right 
now allow podiatrists to order X-rays and lab tests and there are 
a number of other provinces that do regulate podiatrists. 
 
But part of the challenge comes in, for example, British 
Columbia, they regulate primarily or almost exclusively 
American-trained podiatrists. And so one of the challenges we 
have in Saskatchewan is to work with the 
British-system-trained people and the American-trained people. 
And we think that we’ve been able to set out a process that 
allows for that to be qualified. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I agree that these 
are some of the challenges, but I think that the template 
framework provides the kind of flexibility that this can be 
worked out. 
 
Mr. Minister, in discussion with podiatrists, they indicate their 
support for this and they believe that it’s an improvement and a 
much-needed change to the oversight regulatory structures that 
they have in their association. They also indicate that they are 
very much hopeful that when this legislation is approved, that 
the department will approve and proclaim the administrative 
sections of this legislation early on. 
 
Is it your intent to proclaim at least the administrative sections 
early on so that they can go about much of the organizational 
work, and then perhaps proclaim some of the other parts of the 
legislation later on because that I believe is a request and a 
concern by the podiatrists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the plan is clearly, as you suggest, 
that we would proclaim some of the administrative sections so 
that they can allow for the college part to go ahead and also 
allow them then to be developing some of their professional 
status in that part, even if we don’t have all of the parts around 
the medication and ordering tests completed or some of the 
other parts. 
 
So our plan would be to work very closely with the profession, 
and proclaim those parts which will work as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Chair. We certainly support this initiative and are prepared to 
see it move forward now. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, members. This is a fairly lengthy 
Bill. Is leave granted to deal with it in part? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 55 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — I see the minister does not have any new 
officials. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, as you 
realize this is a very short Bill and as I understand it, it deals 
largely with the educational requirements for occupational 
therapists, and I wonder if you want to outline in an overview, 
to start, exactly what the intent of this legislation is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much. I would be very 
pleased to outline the very straightforward things that we need 
to do with this particular legislation. 
 
The amendments will remove the requirement for an 
undergraduate degree in occupational therapy from the Act, 
thus allowing the Saskatchewan Society of Occupational 
Therapists to license an occupational therapist who has a 
professional master’s degree in occupational therapy without 
first having received an undergraduate degree in occupational 
therapy. 
 
Another amendment will require the Saskatchewan Society of 
Occupational Therapists to specifically outline the educational 
requirements in its bylaws. And this will include both the 
undergraduate degree — occupational therapists education — 
as well as the professional master’s degree. 
 
Another amendment will require the society to specifically 
outline the re-entry educational requirements in its bylaws. This 
is to allow people to return to the profession. And then there are 
a number of small housekeeping amendments. 
 
But the key point here is that the society, Saskatchewan Society 
of Occupational Therapists requested that we amend this so that 
professional occupational therapists with a master’s degree 
would not have a challenge under our legislation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In our discussion 
with occupational therapists, they certainly are very much again 
in favour of this legislation and the flexibility to make their 
educational requirements more appropriate to their profession. 
 
And so, Minister, we have no objection to this Bill. We think it 
is a worthwhile improvement on the current state. So, Mr. 
Chair, we would be prepared to see this move forward. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Registered Nurses 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — I see that the minister has new officials — not 
that the other officials were old, but I recognize the minister to 
introduce his officials. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’m very pleased to introduce all of 
the young, capable officials from Saskatchewan Health. 
 
I have new officials on this particular Bill. I’m pleased to 
introduce Elizabeth Kalmakoff, who is a health professions 
consultant in the policy and planning branch, as well as Vivian 
Krakowski, who’s a consultant in the primary health care 
branch. 
 
And we’ll be pleased to respond to any questions on this matter. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
different officials. I won’t get into that debate. 
 
Mr. Minister, this amendment to The Registered Nurses Act is, 
I think, in recognition of the continued commitment that the 
SRNA and the professional registered nurses in the province 
have to their continuing educational requirements and the 
specific commitment to making sure their competencies are up 
to date. 
 
Minister, would you outline the intention of the Bill in 
summary, and then we’ll proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’d be pleased to set out a 
brief summary of the amendments that are proposed here. The 
amendments will provide the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses 
Association with the authority to make bylaws to establish and 
govern a continuing competence program and to require the 
participation of members in that program. They will also ensure 
the confidentiality of any information related to a member’s 
participation in the continuing competence program. 
 
Another amendment will limit the term of office of a public 
representative to three years, and since the Act allows for two 
terms this means that a public representative would be able to 
serve for a total of six years. And it also . . . another amendment 
provides for filing requirements for administrative bylaws. 
 
And that’s the total package of what’s proposed here. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, has there 
been discussion in the planning of this amendment with your 
department in terms of what would be the terms of reference 
and the scope of the continuing competency program as 
envisaged by this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What this legislation will do will enable 
the Registered Nurses Association to set up a continuing 
competence program within their bylaws, and they’ve been 
working at those and doing it throughout the profession. And as 
you can understand, this takes a lot of discussion. 
 
It’s also, I think, in many ways modelled on what the medical 
doctors have done around some of their programs, and so it is 
something that we’ll continue to develop. But what we’re doing 
here with this legislation is providing that protection for the 
program that they will develop. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, the terms, 
continuing competency program or competence program, 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

 

implies that it is for people who are currently engaged in the 
profession. Is there any provision in this program for people to 
acquire the skills in order to re-enter the profession after some 
time of not practising in it, or is that covered by a different 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to that question is that 
we now have re-entry programs for nurses that go back and do 
the refresher course. But what may happen is that somebody 
would take the re-entry course, go back and start working, and a 
competency issue would reveal itself through this process and 
this program that’s being organized. And then at that point it 
could be dealt with through this particular process because they 
would have completed the re-entry but they maybe still need 
some assistance in some skills that they have to improve. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, some time 
ago the licensed practical nurses were also given the framework 
and the structure similar to other health professional templates, 
if you like, to self-regulate. Is a program similar to this 
envisaged for the licensed practical nurses as well as the 
registered nurses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is that the licensed practical 
nurses do have a continuing competency program within their 
organization, but at this point they have not come forward to 
request the kind of protections that are in this particular piece of 
legislation for the SRNA. It is conceivable that at some point 
they would come forward with that kind of a request but at this 
point they have one that they operate within their own 
profession. 
 
I think I should also say that one of the sort of reasons that this 
program exists in Saskatchewan is that it’s part of a national 
nursing program in the sense that every province and territory 
has looked at these kinds of things. And so they build it on their 
own knowledge and skills here, but it’s also related to nursing 
right across the country. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you to 
the officials this afternoon. Mr. Chair, we certainly are in 
support of this legislation and prepared to allow it to move 
forward. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 5 - The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Mr. Chair: — Order. I would invite the minister to introduce 
her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. On my 
right I have Dr. Michael Littlewood, executive director of 
legislation and school administration. Behind me I have Shirley 
Robertson, manager, superannuation program, teachers’ 
superannuation commission; and Norma Knuth, manager of 

financial operations, teachers’ superannuation commission. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, and to 
your officials, the Bill that is being . . . we’re looking at right 
now is something that I understand has been given agreement to 
by both the SSTA and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation), so there are just . . . Maybe we should have an 
opportunity to just quickly review the Bill so that everyone is 
aware of what we’re talking about in this Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
provisions of the collective agreement require the government 
to introduce these necessary amendments. There are a number 
of housekeeping and administrative amendments, but the main 
substantive amendments are as follows. 
 
In section 2, the definition of contributory service is amended 
such that teachers in receipt of a disability allowance are not 
required to return to teach in order to have the period of 
disability fully included in the calculation of their pension. This 
amendment will eliminate a problem whereby such teachers are 
financially disadvantaged in their pension solely on the basis of 
being disabled. 
 
In section 18, teachers will be allowed to purchase periods of 
parenting leave beyond one year for pension purposes as 
required by The Labour Standards Act. The government will 
pay the employer portion of the required contributions as it 
currently does with respect to the purchase of the first year of 
parenting leave. 
 
A new section 36.1 is added to eliminate an unfair and 
unintended consequence of the replacement of previous 
interprovincial reciprocal agreements with a new agreement. 
For a small number of Saskatchewan teachers who have 
transferred their service to another province, the new provisions 
will eliminate a potentially significant financial barrier to 
returning to teach in Saskatchewan. 
 
In section 49, the current requirements that the annual report of 
the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission include personal 
information about pension plan numbers are being deleted as 
they are inconsistent with the principles of privacy and are not 
necessary for effective public reporting by the commission. 
 
As the member has said, the amendments have been reviewed 
and approved by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and 
the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m wondering 
how many teachers will actually be involved in the first issue, 
where there may be somebody on long-term disability and will 
have to have the government and the pension plan covered up to 
the age of 65? Do you have numbers of people, of the teachers 
who would be affected by this first issue of the Bill? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There’s currently 371 teachers on 
disability at the moment. The majority of them do not return to 
work, but over the next several years it could affect a couple of 
hundred teachers. 
 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, does this amendment or 
change take place starting now or is it retroactive? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This agreement, on 
proclamation, will be retroactive to September 1 of ’02 when 
the contract was began. So it will be retroactive to September of 
’02 upon proclamation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you give us 
an idea of what the anticipated costs will be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — In the remaining life of the plan, which is 
about 50 years, it will add about $9 million to the cost over the 
next 50 years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, will it matter where the 
teacher resides while he’s under this disability part of the 
clause? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — No. 
 
Ms. Draude: — In the second part of the Bill, we talked about 
maternity leaves. And I’m wondering how many maternity 
leaves are granted each year for young women in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We see about 150 to 200 maternity leaves 
a year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And, Madam Minister, under the third clause 
or the third issue, we talk about allowing teachers who transfer 
their pension from one to another province under the old 
teachers’ plan and then are able to return. How many people are 
affected by this clause of the agreement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — It’s really hard to determine because it 
depends on who leaves and who comes back. So it’s not 
something we can predict or that we would know, but we don’t 
anticipate it to be a high number. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I imagine the fourth issue 
that this Bill deals with, eliminating the requirement to publish 
the names of plan members who have died, is something that 
everyone would be in agreement with because there wouldn’t 
be really any point of doing this. So I imagine The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act was . . . This was 
probably looked at as an important part of the agreements. 
 
Is this something that all other plans within your department 
have already dealt with, and is it something the government was 
dealing with right throughout the various departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This is the only plan under our jurisdiction 
and we’re not familiar what the other plans are doing 
throughout the public service. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I know we have two 
different pension plans — the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan 
and the Saskatchewan Teachers Retirement Plan. What 
percentage of teachers are under the superannuation plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’re down to about a third of the 
teachers in the old plan and two-thirds in the new plan. 

Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, when is it expected that the 
old plan will actually be finished? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The last teacher under the old plan would 
be expected to retire in the next 10 to 15 years. And after that 
the plan keeps going until all those teachers are no longer with 
us. So it’s hard to predict how long it would be. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think that this 
Bill has been reviewed by a lot of people. It has been agreed to 
in negotiated contract and is something that we’ve heard since 
has full support of everyone that’s involved. 
 
So I would like to congratulate you for your work, and say that 
we have no objections to the Bill and hope that it goes forward 
quickly. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(15:15) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Registered Nurses 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Teachers Superannuation and 
Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. On my left is deputy minister, 
Dr. Craig Dotson. On Craig’s left is John Biss, executive 
director of university services. And behind is Brady Salloum, 
executive director of student financial assistance. Next to Brady 
is Dr. Margaret Lipp, executive director of Saskatchewan 
Learning. 
 
Directly behind me is Gillian McCreary, executive director of 
Saskatchewan Learning. On her right is Wayne McElree, 
assistant deputy minister. Behind Wayne is Nelson Wagner, 
executive director of facilities, and Kevin Hoyt, director of 
finance, corporate services. 
 
Behind the bar is Glenda Eden, manager of financial planning. 
 
And before we start questions, I just want to bring to the 
attention to my colleagues that this morning I was in Cypress 
Hills Regional College, opening the regional colleges 
conference, kicking it off, actually. And the enthusiasm at the 
regional college level was very high. They’re a very interesting 
group. 
 
The keynote speaker from Ontario said wonderful things about 
our regional college structure and about the people in it. And 
his speech, his presentation was extremely interesting to all of 
us and I was very glad I could attend it as well. 
 
He had some innovative, refreshing ideas about accepting 
change and complimented all of us on the flexibility and how 
we are moving forward with our regional college system which 
is a strength in our commitment to lifelong learning. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I’m gratified to hear your pleasant comments about the 
community of Swift Current. 
 
Although that’s not within my constituency of Cypress Hills, it 
is the largest trading centre in the southwest part of the 
province. And naturally we’re very proud of that city and all of 
southwest Saskatchewan. So we would welcome you back for a 
longer visit the next time you come so you can see all the great 
things that the Cypress Hills area has to offer. 
 
Having opened your comments with the salute to the regional 
college system in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
recognizing its rather unique nature in comparison to some of 
the other post-secondary opportunities in other provinces, 
would the minister care to develop for us this afternoon her 
vision for the regional colleges; what it is the provincial 
government hopes to attain educationally through the regional 
colleges and the roles that they play in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — It’s too bad the member wasn’t there this 
morning and I could have given . . . and heard my speech which 
talked about exactly the strengths of the regional college 
system, which is the fact that they are the lifeblood of learning 
in rural and northern communities. 
 
They broker classes from the universities and SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
and they bring learning to the students close to home. 
 
They are also a centre for e-learning. And their conference 
theme was T.Rex to High Tech. And it was very . . . They had 
the gymnasium decorated in a jungle theme and it was . . . and 
little dinosaurs on the table. So it was very effective. 
 
And they were very proud of the fact that they are an integral 
part of our education system in lifelong learning when they take 
the learning out to our northern and rural communities. That is 
their strength. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. 
The phrase, brokers of courses, as it applies to the regional 
colleges, is an interesting one. And I think that’s maybe one of 
the strengths and possibly one of the weaknesses of our regional 
college system because it’s neither fish nor fowl. It’s sort of a 
broadcast approach to a variety of different educational 
opportunities. 
 
Has the minister and her department given any consideration to 
more carefully identifying the specific role of the regional 
colleges in maybe the offering of post-secondary courses at the 
university level versus credit courses in upgrading or possibly 
technical courses? Can you give us some indication if the 
department has given any thought to more carefully defining 
what it is that the government would like to see regional 
colleges provide for educational opportunities in the more rural 
areas of the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There is a mandatory review in law of the 
regional colleges every five years. The last one that was done 
was called futures . . . they recommended futures close to home. 
And they validated the role that the regional colleges are 
playing in our post-secondary education system. 
 
And interestingly enough, the speaker this morning, he had a 
comment that we are no longer going to be earning a living; 
we’re going to be learning a living. And so this was, I think, a 
major comment to all of us that lifelong learning is something 
that everybody agrees we are into and should be into. 
 
And the regional colleges are flexible and responsive to the 
needs of their students. So if there are changes that should 
happen to address the needs of students close to home, then we 
would see that those would be discussed and implemented as 
necessary. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, 
because of the uniqueness of the regional college system that 
the province of Saskatchewan enjoys, I’m wondering if there 
isn’t greater opportunities that might be provided. 
 
These particular institutions are located in very strategic areas 
in the far-flung corners of the province and, as you have 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

indicated, they bring educational opportunities close to home. 
But I’m wondering if the colleges have ever expressed a 
concern to the minister or the department about limitations in 
their ability to provide educational opportunities. 
 
Have you ever had the opinion expressed to yourself, Madam 
Minister, or to your officials, that these colleges would like to 
be more than they are now, that they might want to provide 
greater opportunities, more in-depth training opportunities? 
Possibly, as in the case of SIAST, which is a little different 
situation in Prince Albert, they might benefit from additional 
research opportunities there — not just be a technical school but 
be an institution of research and maybe some applied science. 
 
Is that the kind of opportunity that regional colleges have been 
calling for? Have they expressed a desire to do that type of 
enterprise as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The regional colleges have eight campuses 
and plus one in Lakeland, or one called Lakeland. The 
education is a provincial program and we have discussions 
routinely with our partners — the universities, SIAST and its 
campuses, and all the regional colleges — about what is 
appropriate to deliver and the training needs of the population 
where the colleges serve. 
 
So that is a dynamic discussion and if there are things that 
would be needed or should be done, then that’s where that 
discussion would happen and things would move on from that 
partnership, of discussing what we need in Learning. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, can I assume from your 
comments then that instead of a master plan for regional 
colleges, that dynamic ongoing discussion would result in 
possibly different outcomes for each individual college as the 
process unfolds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Each campus is different; it serves a 
different part of Saskatchewan and a different demographic and 
there’s different needs in that demographic. For example, the 
Northlands College serves the North and has a different 
emphasis, perhaps, say, on forestry, where in the South the 
emphasis may be on oil and gas. 
 
But the colleges do have that ongoing knowledge of the 
students that they serve and the communities that they serve and 
they, along with their partners in post-secondary sector and the 
Department of Learning, have those discussions to see what is 
most appropriate and what is needed in those communities that 
they serve. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, can 
I assume from your comments that the colleges individually are 
as autonomous in their mandate and in their determination of 
the programs they’d like to pursue as some of the more senior 
institutions might be, for instance SIAST or the two public 
universities in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think that some of my earlier answers 
when we talk about partnerships, there is a very close 
partnership with the regional colleges, not only with the 

partners in education and post-secondary but with the 
department as well. And so there are different needs in each 
college, but there’s a relationship of discussion and 
collaboration with the department that’s very close and very, 
very necessary. 
 
And so I don’t know what your definition of autonomy is, but I 
think we’re talking about responsiveness to communities and 
the community individually that the campus may serve. But 
then we also talk about the education system in Saskatchewan 
as a whole. So we are all keeping our eye on the big picture as 
well as the small picture. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So, Madam Minister, when I look at the budget 
document here, and it talks about the amount of money that the 
provincial department of Education, or Department of Learning 
in their post-secondary sector provides to regional colleges, 
that’s just the portion that comes from the provincial purse. 
 
If the colleges in their wisdom wanted to pursue a program of 
studies that required a considerable larger sum of money than 
was being given them through the Department of Learning’s 
budget, would they be free — would the board of governors, the 
directors, the administration of those colleges — would they be 
free to pursue those programs or is there a vetting process? Do 
they have to get prior approval from the Department of 
Learning to achieve those ends? And could you elaborate for us 
what that process might be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The colleges have an ability to work with 
partners in their community; it might be business, it may be 
industry. They have that ability to work out some contracts, if 
that may be the case, to deliver different programs that that 
certain industry or business may need. They do then have to 
submit a business plan to the department which we will then 
approve. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So if I understand your answer, assuming the 
program makes sense from a business point of view, there 
would be no reason to withhold approval of those programs by 
the ministry. 
 
Looking at the budget document again, I noticed that under 
regional colleges, the amount of money set aside is $16.101 
million. Could the minister outline for us today how the money 
is apportioned between the nine regional colleges? What criteria 
might be used, or is there a formula of some sort that applies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Each college got the same base increase, 
the 3 per cent, in the budget but their baselines were determined 
by the population that they serve and the industry demand. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, the population that they 
serve, are we talking about the registered number of students or 
are we talking about the population of the region in which the 
college is located? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The adult population of the region. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Can the minister give us some indication what 
percentage of the operating budgets of the schools the money 
from the Department of Learning would represent? 
 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — In last year’s total budget for the colleges 
we provided 32 million of the $44 million total budget. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I think I’m going to need 
some clarification — 32 million of a $44 million total budget? 
That must be a figure that includes more than just the regional 
colleges. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Since you’re in your book, we might as 
well talk about that. On page 92 is what you’re looking for, the 
budget. And then if you flip to page 94, regional colleges also 
get a proportion of the budget under JobStart-Future Skills, 
northern skills training, basic education and literacy, and the 
technology enhanced learning, to comprise their total budget. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, you mentioned earlier that 
there’s an annual, I’m sorry, a five-year review process that’s 
been put in place to look at the mandate and some of the issues 
that regional colleges face. Can you tell us when the next 
review will be and are you aware of growing issues that might 
need to be addressed as part of that review? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The next required review is 2005. But we 
have regular meetings with the board Chairs and address issues 
on an ongoing basis, and larger issues are collected and dealt 
with as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I haven’t had direct conversations with very 
many of the individuals charged with the administration of the 
regional colleges. I have had some indirect approaches made, 
and one of the things it seems to me that regional colleges are 
grappling with is how can we as educational institutions offer 
more, be more significant, provide more pertinent opportunities 
for our students, and how much of this can we afford and how 
will we achieve these particular endeavours. 
 
And I’m wondering if the minister has given any thought to 
creating a committee of study, a commission of some sort, to 
address some of those questions. 
 
You know, the universities and SIAST in this province are 
wonderful institutions, but I think they are anticipating 
considerable growth over the next decade or so. And if that in 
fact is true, we might find the existing institutions overburdened 
by an influx of students. And if that is to be alleviated without 
the investment of a lot of cost and infrastructure and expanding 
of faculty and so forth, maybe there’s a role here for the 
regional colleges to provide some of the maybe first-, second-, 
and third-year classes that students might otherwise take. 
 
I’m not advocating that particular position or view but I know 
that there is some interest among regional colleges to be more 
active in that, in that provision of education at that level. So I’m 
just wondering, Madam Minister, if you would consider 
undertaking a more thorough review of the role of the regional 
colleges to the end that I’ve just discussed. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We have had a major review of the 
regional colleges in 2000 and we will have another one in 2005. 
But the colleges are represented on a learning sector strategy 
planning steering committee already with the universities and 
SIAST. So this would be the place where these sorts of things 
would be discussed and we don’t need to create another one. 

Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I hope that through the 
ongoing process that you just referred to though, that the issues 
of advanced education and the requirements for our population 
are being aired and not just discussed, but there is some plan in 
place to address some of these pressure points that are going to 
develop in the province as a result of the burgeoning need for 
greater educational opportunities at the post-secondary level. 
 
You know our situation, as tight as finances sometimes are, our 
situation is often reactive instead of proactive. And what I am 
finding frankly is that when we make, when we make decisions 
relative to post-secondary educational opportunities strictly in a 
reactive way, we end up losing students from this province to 
other jurisdictions. 
 
I brought with me a letter today from a young lady who wants 
to get into the Faculty of Education at the University of 
Saskatchewan and she’s simply not going to be able to make it 
because I think that her marks probably aren’t quite as good as 
some of the other people. But as a consequence, because that 
opportunity isn’t available to her at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), she is looking seriously at the University of 
Calgary or the University of Alberta. Now that’s an anecdotal 
incident I suppose but, you know, when you have dozens and 
dozens of these anecdotal experiences brought to your attention, 
pretty soon a pattern develops. And I think we’re seeing that. 
 
I guess I’m hoping, I’m hoping that the regional colleges will 
be able to play a more important role in addressing the growing 
demand for post-secondary opportunities in this province 
without laying the burden at the feet of our two largest public 
institutions and saying, here, you’ve got this problem, deal with 
it — especially when we see increases to post-secondary 
education limited from year to year to just a bare minimum. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And I think we had a situation like that in this year’s budget. 
My understanding is that the post-secondary institutions as a 
whole were looking at least at a 5 per cent increase in their 
funding to just, to maintain the sort of status quo. And in one 
instance I think the funding was in the two and a half per cent 
range; the other had about a 3 per cent increase. And as a 
consequence, Madam Minister, they aren’t looking at 
expanding their opportunities for post-secondary delivery. 
They’re looking at ways they can cut expenses and maybe cut 
back programs and hone certain expenditures to beyond the 
bone. They’re into the marrow already of some of their 
endeavours there. 
 
So if we’re going to see, if we’re going to see the province of 
Saskatchewan respond positively and successfully to the 
demands for greater post-secondary opportunities, I think one of 
the first places, and maybe one of the least expensive and most 
efficient places might be, is to invest money in the regional 
colleges. 
 
And that’s hard to do I suppose for a government unless there’s 
a rationale for it. And what I’m asking I guess with the line of 
questioning I’ve tried to develop this afternoon is a clear picture 
that your government has an understanding of this particular 
desire and need in the province, and that you are putting 
something in place to help address that growing need, and that 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

we will see a very active and developing post-secondary 
strategy to accommodate the increase in demand over the next 
number of years. 
 
Madam Minister, if you have a response to what I have just 
said, I would appreciate that right now. But if not, we’ll move 
into another area. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Okay I’m running out of places to put 
notes so let’s talk now and continue on. 
 
Back to the first part when you were talking, you were talking 
about a meaningful discussions which . . . And I’ve met a few 
of the people now through the sector, and I respect their ability 
to bring their issues to the table that they’re at and make those 
issues heard and move forward on them. So I have confidence 
that all the players and the partners in the education sector will 
do that. So I don’t think that they’re sitting around talking for 
the sake of talking. I do think that they will move forward on 
their issues. 
 
When you’re talking about students leaving, I think there’s 
some interesting things that we want to talk about in 
Saskatchewan that we are doing that are of interest to students. 
 
We have what we call Campus Saskatchewan which has a Web 
site. It was launched in the fall of 2002 and it offers a pathway 
to adult and post-secondary education via the Internet, and by 
television and video, independent study, off-campus courses, 
and other alternative methods. Through Campus Saskatchewan, 
post-secondary institutions in the province are working together 
to increase flexible learning opportunities that will extend 
across and enhance the quality of educational programs and 
services. 
 
In 2003 and ’04 the partners in Campus Saskatchewan will 
continue to expand on-line educational opportunities and to 
enhance services to learners, including access to computers and 
the Internet, counselling, and study support. Over 90 on-line 
courses and learning resources are now offered through the 
universities, SIAST, and other post-secondary institutions like 
the colleges, with more than 100 additional offerings under 
development. 
 
And a third point I want to make before you move on to your 
next group of questions is that regional colleges have seen an 
increase of 17.5 per cent over the last two years, I believe it is. 
Two years, 17.5 increase in financing, funding, compared to the 
Saskatchewan CPI (consumer price index) of only 5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I appreciate that response. I 
don’t mean to suggest that the individuals participating in the 
ongoing discussions and review are just logging time or 
spinning their wheels. But I guess they have to know that there 
is a vision on the part of your government and your department 
for the role they can play here. And I suppose that their 
discussions would be much more fruitful and much more 
energetic if they thought that there was a clear vision emanating 
from your department and your ministry for the benefits of 
post-secondary education to our, to our province. 
 
The reality is that post-secondary education is seen as an 
expense, as a budget item that costs the government a certain 

amount of money every year. And I guess I would like to look 
at post-secondary education in all facets and at all levels as not 
an expense but an investment, an opportunity, a means of 
promoting increased knowledge, increased development, 
increased participation in our economy, increased population. It 
might be a commodity we could sell. But I think that possibly 
the leaders of the post-secondary institutions in this province 
are looking for, you know, real impetus and real vision from 
your government. 
 
And I’m wondering if you can explain to us or give us an 
indication of what your strategy is, personally and as part of 
your ministry, to achieve the great benefits that post-secondary 
education can accrue to this province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — When I was first elected president of SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) in 1993, I went . . . as a nurse, 
I went to a public health conference in Edmonton, national 
public health conference in Edmonton, and they talked there 
about the social determinants of health. And one of the major 
social determinants of health is education, which certainly 
opened my eyes to what we should be focusing on. Health or 
health care does not make you healthy. What makes you healthy 
is what else you have in your life, like education. 
 
So this is an extremely important commitment on myself 
personally, from myself personally, for education and for the 
whole province to have access to a quality education. I think in 
anything I’ve ever said, we have always, I’ve always used the 
word investment in our children, in our individuals, in our 
province, in our communities, and an investment in education. I 
think all my colleagues have used the same language and I think 
we’re pretty clear that we consider education to be a 
cornerstone of economic development in the province as well. 
 
So we continue to make an investment year after year as an 
NDP government in education. This year, $1.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. 
Madam Minister, I’m happy to hear you say that, but I guess the 
proof is in the pudding. You know, the reality is that 
post-secondary education in this province has suffered as a 
whole at the behest of demands made on the government for 
investment in other areas. 
 
You know, if I remember correctly the increase in the spending 
of the provincial government dedicated to health this year was 
about $180 million. And it seems to me that that increase in 
health care spending was more than your government is 
spending at the University of Saskatchewan this year. 
 
You know, so while health issues are important, so is public 
education and so is post-secondary education. And I guess I am 
concerned for the future of the province when I hear the 
member, the minister say that education is important, but then I 
look at the commitment of resources by the provincial 
government to that sector. And somehow the spending doesn’t 
seem to match the stated desire or the point of view that the 
minister enunciates. 
 
So, Madam Minister, what we have is a situation where not 
only are costs for post-secondary institutions escalating, but so 
are the costs to students through tuition fees and a variety of 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

 

other areas. And we’re finding greater and greater competition 
to get into the seats that are available at our public institutions. 
We’re finding some funding cutbacks. We’re also finding 
student loans not keeping up with the costs of getting an 
education. These are all areas that restrict. Whether 
intentionally or not, they have the effect of restricting access to 
post-secondary education. 
 
I think that the significance of that may not be seen today but 
it’s the kind of thing that will come back to haunt us within the 
next decade, the next generation. And I don’t think we can 
afford that in Saskatchewan. We have a small population but we 
have great potential here, and I think the proof of successful 
societies has been in their commitment to post-secondary 
education. 
 
We need health care, but we can’t sacrifice the demands of 
post-secondary education for all the other budgetary needs that 
a government balances. And that’s why I’m getting back . . . or, 
that’s why I’d like to get back to the concept of investment in 
education. You don’t see the immediate benefit of putting that 
money in post-secondary opportunities for Saskatchewan 
residents but there is a very clear benefit in a short order, 
anywhere from three or four years to maybe ten years down the 
road. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I know that you say that the province has 
spent $1.2 billion in education this year and it’s the largest 
amount that the province has spent in that sector, probably in 
history. But it’s not enough. I guess, given the requirements, 
given the demands, given the opportunities that we have in this 
province that need to be explored by well-educated young 
people; it really is not enough. 
 
And if we want to benefit economically in the fullest sense 
possible from the opportunities post-secondary education will 
bring, we need to make sure that just about every last person in 
this province who wants to avail themselves of a post-secondary 
opportunity can do so as conveniently and as readily as 
possible, and maybe at as little expense as possible. I know that 
there’s some argument around that last part of the equation. 
 
But I guess, Madam Minister, I just want to state clearly that we 
believe in the Saskatchewan Party that post-secondary 
education is absolutely critical to the future of this province and 
we would encourage you to look at finding means and methods 
of making it more readily available to the people of the 
province at any level whether it’s, you know, whether it’s in a 
technical program or a university level program, whether it’s in 
the apprenticeship program, I really don’t care. I just think that 
we need to see that kind of commitment to our future in a very 
real and specific sense and that includes dollars and cents. 
 
Madam Minister, you talked about the Campus Saskatchewan 
initiative a few minutes ago. I was pleased to learn about that 
particular endeavour by the institutions that have come together 
to co-operate in the delivery of distance education. But earlier 
when we had estimates, we had talked about the role of SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network) and how distance 
education had been pulled back into the Department of 
Learning. And I’m wondering how the contraction or the 
change of delivery of distance education will affect the 
arrangements the government has with the department of media 

and technology at the U of S. 
 
It seems to me that they were very dependent on their 
relationship with SCN — it was a symbiotic relationship — and 
I’m just wondering how that particular change by your 
government will affect your working relationship with the 
media and technology department at the U of S. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m sure the member from Cypress Hills 
won’t be surprised that I’m not going to start with an answer to 
the question that he just posed. 
 
What I’m going to start with is going back to the beginning of 
your conversation. I’m very happy to hear that the 
Saskatchewan Party has now articulated a strong support for the 
post-secondary education system. 
 
And I’m assuming that you’re talking about the proof being in 
the pudding, you’re talking about a frozen pudding, since what 
we heard from you in your platform in ’99 was, freeze 
education. So this is quite a difference that we’re hearing now. 
 
And I appreciate your concern for the future of education since 
we do this daily in government when we talk about, how do we 
balance the priorities of the whole province — that is, balancing 
what we need in education with what we need in health, what 
we need in highways, what we need in social services, what we 
need in training, what we need in justice. We need to balance all 
of that. 
 
And it’s very easy . . . As a wise man said, nothing is 
impossible if you don’t have to do it. 
 
So what I’m happy to see is that you have moved off your 
freezing for education and have moved into realizing that it is a 
difficult position when you talk about what the whole province 
needs in all the areas I just articulated, and what do we put in 
education. 
 
And we as a government have made a major investment of $1.2 
billion this year, as we have made every year, an investment in 
education to do just the things you were talking about because 
we believe every person in Saskatchewan should have access to 
a quality education their life long. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I guess it might be important 
— if we’re talking about going on the record — it might be 
important to indicate that the 1999 election platform of the 
Saskatchewan Party indicated funding at the price or the cost of 
inflation, nothing over and above that. And I think that at that 
point, I think at that point we were very concerned about 
whether or not the resources would be in place to commit a 
whole lot more to funding . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
we probably have an ongoing dispute about that. 
 
But, Madam Minister, you didn’t answer my question about the 
relationship between your department and the media and 
technology department at the U of S. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Again I’m going to get to SCN in a 
minute, but I do want to talk about increasing funding to 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

post-secondary or to education in general at the level of 
inflation. 
 
If we would have done that . . . K to 12 got a 9.2 per cent 
increase over the last two years; 5 per cent was the CPI. They 
wouldn’t have been happy with your platform. Universities, 
federated and affiliated colleges, and Aboriginal institutions got 
8.1 per cent; the CPI was 5. They wouldn’t have been happy 
with your platform. 
 
SIAST got 10 per cent; the CPI was 5. They wouldn’t have 
been happy with your platform. Regional colleges, as I said, got 
17.5; the CPI was 5. They also would not have been happy with 
your platform. 
 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission and public 
libraries all got increases over inflation. None of them would 
have been happy with your platform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Just to remind hon. members a 
couple of points. One, there seems to be some private 
conversations going on that is distracting to the business before 
the Assembly, so I would ask hon. members to please curtail 
their comments. 
 
And secondly, the rules generally in the committee is to not 
have personal attacks between one another. And the Chair is 
loath to enforce that rule unless necessary, but I would ask 
comments to be directed to the Chair and through the Chair if 
the debate continues on in that continued vein. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Madam Minister, 
I’m still waiting for the answer on your relationship between 
the Department of Learning and the department of media and 
technology at the U of S. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When 
the preamble goes all over the political map, it does get our 
answers a little delayed. 
 
So the SCN question was, will the relationship change between 
the university media services and SCN under the Department of 
Learning? And the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well as I understand it, Madam Minister, SCN 
and the department of media and technology had a very close 
working relationship; they depended on each other. One 
provided services and the other provided equipment. There is 
some joint sharing of personnel and I would assume that since 
there is a change in the status of e-learning into the Department 
of Learning, that there must be some fallout for the university 
department of media and technology. You can’t just stand there 
and say no. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — SCN will maintain the technology to 
broadcast and the people that used to do the programming will 
still do the programming, and the program delivery will not 
change because the people are in Learning. The relationship 
will not . . . or the program delivery will not change. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Has the department, Madam Minister, 

considered expanding the opportunities of that arrangement, in 
terms of delivery of educational opportunities for the people of 
the province and maybe people outside of the province? Has the 
department looked at any particular opportunities that might 
exist to provide distance learning opportunities for the private 
sector, for instance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There’s a channel available for the private 
sector to use on SCN if their purpose is for education. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Would it be the Department of Learning that 
would promote the use of that channel as a, possibly a 
profit-generating opportunity, to underwrite some of the costs 
of delivering distance education opportunities for other 
purposes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The way SCN traditionally advertise their 
programs and their capabilities will not change with this new 
arrangement. They will do their own advertising. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Would your department be interested, Madam 
Minister, in promoting the use of that extra channel for 
profit-making opportunities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We have first opportunity to use SCN’s 
capacity and we’re pretty much at that capacity now for public 
education in this province. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I think with the importance 
of diverse methods of delivering education to a widely 
dispersed population in this huge land mass, e-learning and 
satellite delivery of educational opportunities is something that 
really needs to be encouraged. 
 
Is there a commitment on the part of your department to expand 
those opportunities maybe to small rural schools, maybe to 
individual students that are living in an isolated area, maybe to 
home-schoolers, to any group of people that might need 
educational opportunities that new technology would more 
readily provide, especially satellite delivery? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you for the question, actually, 
because this gives us an opportunity to talk about 
CommunityNet which is linking the province’s educational 
facilities, health facilities, and reaching small communities all 
over the province. 
 
For on-line learning there are 23 courses this year offered in 
places like Golden Plains, Gull Lake, Hudson Bay, Northern 
Lights School Division, Weyburn Central. So we are reaching 
out with our e-learning capacity to all areas of the province. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I appreciate your response. I 
guess if I could say anything about it, you provided the basic 
response, the basic answer to the question, but you haven’t 
delivered it with much enthusiasm, Madam Minister. And you 
know I think that one of the failures of our society in this 
province is that we haven’t really got enthusiastic about a lot of 
stuff. 
 
And you know I’ve had the privilege of being the critic for 
Post-Secondary Education for about six or seven months now. 
And I’ve learned a lot about post-secondary education in that 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

 

time, having visited the campuses of our universities and 
several of the SIAST campuses and some private 
post-secondary institutions. 
 
And you know I’m amazed, frankly, at the resilience of some of 
our institutions, their determination to provide a good education 
against all odds — the financial constraints that they face, some 
of the other issues that burden them down. 
 
And you know I guess I’ve been very impressed, Madam 
Minister, with what we have to offer here. And I think what we 
really need is a willingness not just to celebrate those successes, 
but a willingness to sell those successes to every person in this 
province and outside this province. I hope that as you continue 
in your appointment as minister of Education that you will 
become a lot more enthused about what we are offering in this 
province. 
 
I know that it’s hard to grasp all of the technicalities and details 
of your portfolio in a short few months and I think that that will 
undoubtedly come. But I think I’d like to see more energy in 
your support of education, Madam Minister. And I appreciate 
the time you’ve given me so far. 
 
I would like to turn the rest of this particular estimate session to 
my colleague to deal with K to 12 issues. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I’d like to thank the critic for 
Post-Secondary. Before we leave this I would like to just point 
out to him that perhaps we express our enthusiasm in different 
ways. 
 
I think this portfolio is extremely exciting. And as a member of 
this government, we are all enthused about the decisions we 
have made for the education system in this province. And we 
express our enthusiasm not by asking questions or condemning 
certain issues or bringing certain issues up in the minutiae. 
What we talk about is the big picture and our major 
commitment, where we can invest dollars, energy, and our 
enthusiasm as a government into post-secondary education. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister and 
to your officials. 
 
I’d like to start by asking you, Madam Minister, to receive our 
submission for the global questions. I didn’t have the 
opportunity last time to give you these questions so I’ll send 
them over to you. And perhaps you can have them filled out for 
the next time we meet or as soon as possible. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, my colleague from . . . is looking after 
post-secondary education was talking to you about enthusiasm 
and excitement. And the issue that I want to talk to you about 
this afternoon, and to your officials about, is the Role of the 
School. And I assure you that is causing a lot of enthusiasm and 
excitement in the K to 12 area and by a lot of parents and 
teachers and the general public. 
 
Because I believe I’ve heard you mention today a number of 
times lifelong learning, but I think that what we’re really talking 
about is learning for life. And that’s really what . . . I know that 
the Catholic school, the Public School Board in Saskatoon talks 
about learning for life. And I really think that states it very well 

because that’s what we’re doing right now. Everything that 
we’re doing is meaning that we’re going to have a better life, 
not only in Saskatchewan but wherever we decide to move to. 
 
And the SchoolPLUS came out of the Role of the School report 
that was commissioned by your department a couple of years 
ago, and I believe that that was based on the idea of the 
community school. Often people are still thinking about 
SchoolPLUS as a community school and in some ways it is. But 
it’s much more than that, much bigger than that, and I think it’s 
an opportunity to lead the country and perhaps the world in 
some of the areas of things that can be different. 
 
I had an opportunity to discuss the SchoolPLUS with a director of 
education not too long ago and she talked about it being 
something like a country school where the community looked 
after the child. Whether it was their health care needs or their 
social needs or their food or whatever it was, you came to the 
school and even though the school was there for the education 
of the student, we know that a child can’t be educated if they 
don’t have everything right in their background and in their 
home life, even when it comes to ensuring that their tummy is 
full. 
 
And so we have the SchoolPLUS initiative coming forward and I 
think you have heard nothing but praise from us, from this side 
of the House, talking about SchoolPLUS. The frustrating part of 
course is it’s not moving ahead very quickly. I did read . . . I 
was enthused to see that there was a commitment by four 
departments, I believe, on your — or it could have been six — I 
think it was four that have signed into an agreement that this is 
something that’s important. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Minister is indicating it was six? Seven. My goodness, I guess 
I’m going to have to get a list of them. Seven departments. 
 
I know that one that’s missing is Economic Development, but 
we’ll get into that later. 
 
But, Madam Minister, I think that to start I’d ask you to 
describe what the criteria is this year for becoming . . . for 
getting funding for SchoolPLUS. 
 
I know that there was more schools that received funding this 
year and, in fact, there was either two or three school divisions 
that received funding from the department only for SchoolPLUS. 
Through the FOG (foundation operating grant) grant, they 
weren’t able to get funding for teachers’ salaries or the 
operations of the school, but they did receive funding to initiate 
SchoolPLUS. 
 
So would you please outline for us what the criteria is for 
SchoolPLUS funding this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Before I answer the question, and I will 
answer the question, I want to read an excerpt from the 
Saskatchewan Bulletin from the STF. It’s quoting a teacher or a 
director of, division director of education from Davidson, 
looking at what SchoolPLUS might ultimately mean. He says: 
 

“A lot of lead work needs to be done, but . . . (he) see(s) 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

great potential. We can’t be overly rigid in how we 
approach this, and it’s important to realize there isn’t going 
to be one solution fits all. This can’t be a cookie cutter 
approach; we’re going to need to be flexible because the 
implementation process will vary from school to school and 
from division to division. 
 
Schools are very much individual cases, and they all have 
their own strengths to build on. The important thing is that 
they all fit in to a shared vision.”  

 
For the actual financing of SchoolPLUS, we have up . . . the 
financing is now $90 per student, totalling $9.5 million in new 
funding. And the community schools have also received $1.2 
million funding recognition for 10 new designated community 
schools. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I don’t 
think that the director that wrote that couldn’t have stated it any 
more eloquently because that’s exactly what we’re talking 
about. The old way of teaching students when everybody was 
supposed to come out with a cookie-cutter shape doesn’t work 
any more. We know it. And I guess I’m scared that this 
approach, if it’s handled from the top down, isn’t going to be as 
effective as if it’s handled from the bottom up. 
 
And I know that schools right across Saskatchewan — and I’m 
sure you know as well — are different. You can’t decide that 
what works in Regina is going to work in Meadow Lake and 
what works in Ile-a-la-Crosse is going to work in Cypress Hills. 
 
And when I talked about the criteria for becoming part of 
SchoolPLUS, I know that there was a first module where . . . In 
fact I think teachers, the schools had to complete three modules 
before they could be considered part of the criteria, and that 
scared me because that meant that as long as you could get 
through this module then you would be part of, you would be 
able to go on to the next module. 
 
Well when we’re talking about students and children and 
learning, it doesn’t work. So I’m wondering, could you again 
describe the criteria needed for becoming part of the SchoolPLUS 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There is no set criteria for becoming 
involved in SchoolPLUS. There are 21 school divisions who have 
come forward and are going to be the pilots for this right now. 
There are in-service programs; there’s three of those. Perhaps 
that may be what you are referring to. And there is an in-service 
on needs assessment for the community, so 21 school divisions 
are going to be involved in that and many more are coming 
forward as we speak. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, are school divisions applying 
for the right to become part of the pilot project? Are all schools 
encouraged to be part of it or how are they determining which 
schools are going to be given that right this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We asked for volunteers and 21 divisions 
came forward. Every school division got the funding. And there 
is nothing stopping other divisions from coming forward, and 
we would expect more to be ready to go next year. 
 

But they are moving at their own pace and some of them are 
using all schools in the division, others are concentrating on a 
cluster of schools. So there are different approaches, and 
different divisions are coming forward with different needs, and 
we are encouraging them and supporting them in any way 
possible. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, do they come forward with 
their own plan, an idea of what they could be doing within this 
school? Or are they . . . is it some set of criteria that they meet? 
I’m encouraged with some . . . the schools in BC (British 
Columbia), for example, that make contracts with divisions, and 
the only thing the government does, the department does, is 
measure the outcomes. They’re not concerned about how they 
get to this outcome. They’re worried about the special needs of 
each child and how that child is progressing through the system. 
And that’s what I’m hoping is happening here. 
 
So I’m wondering, when they come forward with a proposal, is 
it something that strikes the department’s fancy and says, hey, 
this is something that’ll work for children, I’m going to give 
you extra funding this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Each school division sets their own 
measurable objectives, and we work with them to set those and 
meet those and we have a collaborative monitoring approach. 
So each division comes forward and has done their own needs 
assessment and has identified what area they want to focus on. 
And we work with them through the process and assist them as 
they need. 
 
But as the school division person from Davidson said, this isn’t 
a cookie-cutter approach. Each division is going to need 
something different within its schools. And it’s going to be a 
slower process probably than some would want, but it’s the 
communities that are developing it so we will have to give them 
the time to do it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — You’re saying the right words, Madam 
Minister, because that’s exactly what people want to hear. But 
I’d like to be more specific. When you say I know that there’s 
these 20-some, 20-odd projects that are coming forward, do . . . 
For example, does one school said that they want to . . . crime is 
an issue in their school, or is there some of them saying that 
they’re going to need a language, another language available in 
their school? Is there some school division saying that food is 
an important part of their needs in that area? Can you give me 
some examples of what each . . . these different projects are 
working towards and how you’re going to measure their 
outcome? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There are six dimensions of effective 
practice in the SchoolPLUS model, and I’m going to name the six 
of them. There’s parenting, learning programs, partnerships in 
communities, assessment practices, caring and respectful 
schools, and early intervention and prevention. 
 
So any division could pick of those, of that menu, what they 
wanted to focus on after having done their needs assessment. 
And in say, caring and respectful schools, you may find a 
nutrition program. So they can . . . they insert into those 
dimensions and pick from those dimensions what they need to 
meet the needs of their schools. 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

 

And we don’t monitor the . . . We don’t do the monitoring. It’s 
a collaborative monitoring so that the measurable outcomes . . . 
It’s a collaborative approach that we help them with. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, thank you. I can write but 
not that quickly, so I guess I’m going to have to get you to give 
me a copy of that because I do have a couple of questions. 
 
A minute ago we talked about the different departments that 
had signed on to the SchoolPLUS belief. And I know that 
Education, Health, what was Social Services is now 
Community Services, Justice, probably Aboriginal Affairs, and 
I’m not sure what other two departments would be part of this. 
Could you please identify them for me? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The seven departments are Learning, 
Health, the Community Resources and Employment, Justice, 
Aboriginal Affairs, Culture, Youth and Recreation, and 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now I am sure 
that this . . . It covers a very broad spectrum. And when one of 
the big concerns that both the school boards and the teachers 
have is that although this idea is absolutely fabulous and it 
makes people wired with excitement, they’re saying, is this 
going to happen within the existing budget? 
 
You and I have had the discussion many times about the money 
that’s been going into education and I understand you just had a 
similar discussion with my colleague. So this isn’t the time or 
place to be arguing about how much money was or wasn’t put 
into it this year, but we do know that it’s going to take money to 
actually build this program. 
 
And the Role of the School report talked about it. They 
indicated how much money was going to have to come from 
various departments in order to make this actually work. I know 
that you’ve put some dollars into it this year, which of course 
took away from what was supposed to be teachers’ salaries. But 
I think that we . . . This is going to be an issue that is going to 
have to be dealt with. I haven’t seen other departments, the 
other six departments, talk about how they are contributing 
towards the Role of the School and their part in ensuring that 
our children are getting the education through this new type of 
learning. 
 
Can you give me some ideas of what you’re doing within your 
intergovernmental departments’ collaboration to ensure that the 
Role of the School is working between these seven 
departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Last year the funding per student was $33; 
this year it’s $90 — it’s almost tripled the funding. And the 
total budget for SchoolPLUS is $16.5 million. 
 
The question about the different departments supporting the 
initiative — there will be next year reallocation of programs 
that will be more appropriately delivered through this initiative. 
So we are looking at how we can best integrate and support 
SchoolPLUS through our department. 
 
Ms. Draude: — You know, Madam Minister, that’s just 
opened the door. And I’d like to know what you mean by, next 

year they’re going to have more work for the various 
departments. Please explain further. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This is something that’s in the discussion 
stage; that’s why I’m saying next year we should see some of 
the results. But we’re looking at things like our shared services 
mechanism that we have in place now — how we can better use 
that, or maybe use it differently to develop and deliver 
programs that are needed through this SchoolPLUS initiative. 
 
Ms. Draude: — That was a lot more sparse than I’d hoped for, 
Madam Minister, but I guess you’re working on it right now. 
My mother used to have . . . Her favourite saying was, next 
year’s country. Maybe it was because she was a farmer’s wife 
but it was always next year was going to be better. 
 
So I’m going to be looking forward to seeing what’s happening, 
and I’m sure that during the year now you are having meetings 
between different departments and seeing how you can be 
working together. 
 
I’m wondering now if there’s, if within the department you’re 
meeting or if it’s happening at the local level where public 
health is going over to the schools to meet with the school 
boards. Is workers within Community Services going to school? 
What kind of thought process do you have on working at the 
local level? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I think what might be more reassuring 
perhaps to the member is that there are some vehicles that these 
discussions are occurring through. And that is the Council on 
Children and youth committee and the human services 
integrated forum which brings the ADMs (assistant deputy 
minister) together from the different departments. 
 
So through those different working relationships, the programs 
that we’re talking about that could be identified for better 
integration into the SchoolPLUS will be talked about and 
finalized. And we’re thinking next year would be a target date. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Madam Minister. At the 
local level, of the 23 schools that are working in the projects, 
have any of them come together with ideas how they’re 
working with the different departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The 21 school divisions that self-identified 
to begin this process only did so in January of this year, so they 
are having many discussions about the process, the needs 
assessment, how they will develop their SchoolPLUS program in 
their area. So we’d anticipate they would be talking to the 
different partners in the community as necessary. 
 
Ms. Draude: — In some of my travels around the province, and 
when I met with the Tisdale School Division, I was impressed 
with the fact that they had a public health nurse within the 
school, that their recreation centre was part of the school, that 
they and that the community saw it as the heart of their 
community. 
 
Is Tisdale one of the schools that are a pilot project, and is this 
kind of work that other school divisions are working on? 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m actually going to read them off, the 
21, because Tisdale is actually one of them. In Region 1 — 
there’s Moosomin School Division No. 9, Scenic Valley School 
Division No. 117, Weyburn No. 97, and Weyburn 
Comprehensive school divisions. In Region 2 — there’s Swift 
Current School Division 94, Maple Creek School Division 17, 
Eastend School Division No. 8. 
 
In Region 3 — Davidson School Division 31, Moose Jaw 
Catholic 22. Region 4 — Saskatchewan Valley School Division 
49, Saskatoon East School Division 41, Humboldt Catholic 15, 
Saskatoon School Division 13, and St. Paul’s Catholic 20, joint 
core neighbourhood project. Region 5 — Melfort School 
Division 100, Tisdale School Division 53, Saskatchewan Rivers 
School Division 119. 
 
In Region 6 — Lloydminster Catholic 89, North West Catholic 
16, Meadow Lake School Division 66, Parkland School 
Division 63. And in the Northern Region — Ile-a-la Crosse 
School Division 112. That’s the 21. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One of the most 
exciting challenges we’re going to be facing in this province is 
the fact that we have a number of schools being built on 
reserves now, a number of our students are moving back and 
forth between reserves and our public and Catholic school 
system, and the fact that we are having a number of hidden 
children within the system as well. 
 
You talked about Aboriginal Affairs being part of the group that 
are making up the department initiative, and that’s great within 
your department but how is the buy in out in the province? Are 
the bands buying into working with any of the school divisions 
to ensure that they could be part of a SchoolPLUS? 
 
I understand that the funding is separate, that most of the 
schools on the reserves are paid for federally, but we still have 
children that are moving back and forth between the two 
systems. 
 
So have you had talks with FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) or any of the tribal councils? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Before we go into the more specifics of 
your question, I would like to at this time point out that there is 
a legislative secretary has been appointed to be the person in 
lead . . . the lead person on SchoolPLUS and that’s my colleague 
from Saskatoon, the MLA from Idylwyld. 
 
And basically . . . Now to your question. The band schools are 
constitutionally discrete, but we are having more and more of 
their participation in our education system as well. 
 
And one of those initiatives — it was the MOU (memorandum 
of understanding) that was recently signed with the FSIN and 
it’s the first provincial government-to-government education 
agreement of its kind in Canada. And Lindsay Cyr and myself 
signed this February 27. 
 
It formalizes the relationship between Saskatchewan Learning 
and the FSIN and allows the two organizations to 
collaboratively pursue a common work plan that will improve 
conditions for students in both the provincial and First Nations 

school systems. And working together we’re going to 
successfully ensure the future of all of our children and youth 
living in Saskatchewan. So this is one very exciting initiative 
that we do have. 
 
Also the directors of the band schools attend the regional 
directors’ meetings that we have throughout the province. And 
this is something that connects us all in our common goal of 
educating our students to the best of their ability and ours. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Again, Madam Minister, I thank 
you because you were kind enough to give me a copy of the M 
of U that was signed earlier this year, and I understand it was an 
important step forward. 
 
It also is something that’s again done at the top end and when 
we’re dealing with children I’m always afraid that we have a lot 
of top people getting together, and how is it really trickling 
through to the children and how is it affecting them at the end 
of the day? 
 
And I know that we talked about not having a cookie-cutter 
approach, but again when we’re excited about signing these 
agreements that have to be done, they aren’t the things that 
should be the highlights. The highlights are what’s happening 
out in the schools to the children. 
 
When you listed the seven departments that were working 
together, the one that I think was noticed by its absence is the 
one of Economic Development, because out in the community 
we have a lot of businesses that have knowledge and 
wherewithal that students could be gaining from. And I would 
like to be able to know that businesses are not only welcomed 
but encouraged to be part of the education system, because 
there can be a lot of learning acquired from life experiences and 
not necessarily something that has been taught in a book. 
 
So is there any working right now at the local level with 
businesses within the school system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There’s a couple of parts to your question. 
One was about Aboriginal support for students at the local 
level. We do have community schools which have been in place 
for quite a while. We have 14 co-management agreements 
between bands and our boards, and we have tuition agreements. 
 
And your question about the connection to business with the 
Industry and Resources connection at the provincial level for 
the department, our . . . we have a business connection already 
that’s in place with our curriculum and our practical arts 
program. So we’re already connected with the business 
community at the very local level. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I assure you, we’re not 
connected enough at the local level — not by far. There’s a lot 
of knowledge and experience that can be gained at the local 
level from people who are doing hands-on work everyday. And 
they drive by the school to go to their place of business and they 
have a lot of knowledge that can be given to young people that 
won’t necessarily be taught in a book. 
 
So I’m hoping that the doors open wider so that we can ensure 
that, if we are going to be having a school that is part of the 



May 8, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

 

community, the community feels like they are part of the school 
as well and they can start working within it. 
 
Madam Minister, there’s two more areas or two more questions 
that I’m going to ask you now. You talk about community 
schools and I know that there are still community schools there. 
Is there going to be sometime in the future when you’re seeing 
community schools are going to be just evolved into the 
SchoolPLUS model so that we won’t be having what is known as 
a community school separate from our whole public education 
system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The 100 community schools that we have 
at the moment, designated and funded, will stay as long as the 
need is there. It is the intent of the SchoolPLUS model that every 
school become a community school and address the needs of its 
specific community. 
 
And what we see in SchoolPLUS is that the school will be 
student-ready, instead of the student be school-ready — that’s 
the philosophy. 
 
Ms. Draude: —That’s correct, Madam Minister; so if the 
school is ready for a SchoolPLUS then you won’t need a 
community school because it will be there. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the cost barriers that we have in our 
education system is the bricks and mortar of the school system, 
and I know that the community schools have recognized the 
fact that there’s no point in having a school closed for 19 hours 
of the day or 16 hours of the day when it could be used for 
different functions in the evenings or most of the evenings. 
There’s so many . . . With so many departments involved in 
SchoolPLUS I would — especially Community Services and even 
Culture, Youth and Recreation — I would see that there should 
be an opening or an opportunity to use the schools for more 
than just the education of a K to 12 student. 
 
(16:45) 
 
How is your department and how is SchoolPLUS looking at using 
the bricks and mortar that we have in place in this province for 
more than just K to 12 learning? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Space isn’t always the issue. A lot of times 
it’s more the attitude of people working together. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Pardon me, Madam Minister? I think that’s 
what SchoolPLUS is supposed to be, is people working together 
and changing the attitude of people working together. 
 
So I think a two-word answer was not exactly what I was 
hoping for, not exactly what people were hoping for. There is 
opportunities here to make use of the buildings that we have for 
parenting classes, for cooking classes, for Teen-Aid, for lots of 
different issues. And I’m hoping that as we talk about building 
this province and growing this province, we start using these 
facilities for more than just schooling. So I’m sure, and I’m 
very hopeful, that when seven departments have got their heads 
together, they’re thinking we’ve got a school that’s not being 
used in the evening, is there something that we can use it for? 
 
I’m sure the minister would have another . . . something else 

she can say with response to this answer. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — My answer was short because I thought 
your issue was space. And what I’m saying is it isn’t the space 
that’s the issue, working together sometimes is what is the 
problem. And there are many schools who use their schools far 
more than just the 9 to 5, or 9 to 3:30, or whatever the hours 
are. They already have programs coming into their schools and 
they use them widely. And they determine — the building is 
theirs — they determine what they use in their facilities. 
 
But it is sometimes changing attitudes of how people work 
together. So different programs can come into the schools that 
maybe not traditionally were seen to be done through a school. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I know that you indicated 
earlier that over the next year there’s going to be more work 
within different departments. And hopefully by next year we 
will know . . . we’ll have answers that’ll show that there is a 
thought process where everybody is working like cogs in a 
wheel and we can make better use of not just our facilities but 
of our people. 
 
One other issue that I want . . . that I think is going to be 
affecting these departments as they try and work together is the 
issue of confidentially between departments and about students. 
I think you probably heard me talk about a student that I was 
made aware of who had a social worker dealing with him for an 
hour in the afternoon from Health. Later on he had another 
worker working with him from Justice for an hour, and later on 
he had another worker working from Social Services. This was 
not only a waste of time and a duplication, but it was very hard 
on the student. Nobody benefited from it and the education 
system itself didn’t benefit from it. 
 
So I know that this is issues that you’re going to be having to 
deal with to ensure that if there is an issue with Health, that the 
Health workers are allowed to give the information to the 
teachers so they aren’t . . . know how to deal with it. 
 
Is this something that you are working on at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We have an information-sharing policy 
that’s . . . among human services that was implemented in 1996 
that covers these issues. There is a complex, case-management 
strategy being developed right now that we would expect some 
new policies to come out of this fall. 
 
Ms. Draude: — That’s probably some of the best news that 
we’ve heard today and I imagine there are people right across 
this province are going to be doing a little jig for glee because 
this is going to be good for the students — good for everyone 
— and it’s going to save a lot of money in duplication of 
services and inefficiencies. 
 
Madam Minister, I really appreciate the time we’ve had this 
afternoon talking about SchoolPLUS. I think it’s one of the 
initiatives that we have an opportunity of making work if the 
thought process is right around it. I know that a lot of your 
department’s personnel are excited about it and are aware of 
how it should be working, and it’s a model that could be 
working right across Canada. 
 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2003 

 

So I thank your officials today for their help and I appreciate 
the fact that perhaps as we go into the future we probably are 
working on the same page. 
 
The Chair: — I ask the minister to move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I’d like to, before we do that, 
thank my officials for coming today and supplying very 
wonderful answers for the questions. And thank the members 
opposite for their questions. 
 
And I’d like to move that the committee rise and report progress 
and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 



  

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................963 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................964 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................964 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................964 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................964 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................964 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................964 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................965 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................965 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................965 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................974 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Junior Curling Champion Honoured 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................965 
 Mossbank Historical Society to Re-enact Debate of the Century 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................965 
 Volunteer Cleanup Campaign Underway in Swift Current 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................965 
 Regina Musician Wins Prize at National Music Competition 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................966 
 Math Students Test Nestlé Canada Brainteaser 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................966 
 Students Celebrate Century Festival 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................966 
 Weyburn Women Win at Hair Design Competition 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................967 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Financial Support for Education 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................967 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................967 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................968 
 Supply of Nurses 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................968 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................968 
 SaskTel Investments 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................969 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................970 
 Effective Use of Health Care Resources 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................971 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................971 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................971 
 Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
 Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
 Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés 

sans but lucratif 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
 



 

 

 Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
 Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
 Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
 Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
 Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................972 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 25 — The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................972 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................973 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................974 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................974 
 Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists Amendment Act, 2003 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................976 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................976 
 Bill No. 14 — The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................976 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................976 
 Bill No. 5 - The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................977 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................977 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................978 
 Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................978 
 Bill No. 14 — The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................978 
 Bill No. 5 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................978 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................979 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................979 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................985 
 


	Clause 1

