















































Hansard: June 16, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1695 
 June 16, 2003 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 34 —The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
evening, with me is Dawn Martin, executive director of culture 
and heritage for the Department of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Madam 
Minister; and welcome to your official. 
 
Madam Minister, in last year’s amendments they extended the 
waiver of residency clause to December 31, 2003, and now one 
year later we see the film industry is asking for yet another 
extension to December 31, 2004. What is the basis for this 
extension? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The extension applies primarily to the 
deeming provision of the Act. And deeming means that in the 
instances where we’ve got more production than we have 
skilled film crew in Saskatchewan, that people who are from 
outside the province are able to be deemed as long as they have 
a training relationship with someone in the province who’s 
training under their direction during that film production. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Okay. What specific areas of the industry have 
been identified as having a lack of crew available, and how will 
these amendments address this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. I would say it’s across the board. 
But what differentiates our program from some of the other 
places that have tax credit programs is that we also deem what’s 
called above the line, which I think you would classify 
generally as management — people who are producers, 
directors, that kind of thing — as opposed to people who are at 
the staff, technician level. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, could you tell me how many 
companies have been affected by this, how many have used this 
thus far? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Last year we administered 36 film tax 
credits to 18 different companies of which about 20 per cent of 
those actually used this aspect of the deeming provision. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, a while ago I believe I heard 
you say that managers were also part of this as well as 
technicians. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It goes right across all the job 
categories that take place in producing a film, but in some 

places the deeming is only allowed to apply below the, what I 
would call the comparable in the film industry of the 
management level. In our instance we also allow deeming at the 
producer/director level. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Okay, Madam Minister. Does industry 
anticipate having enough crew or talent in place by the end of 
next year, 2004, that it will no longer need the waiver of 
residency? And isn’t that basically the same argument that was 
used last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It really does depend on the level of 
production that’s going on, and I think one of the things you’ll 
find in Canada is because the levels of production are up right 
across Canada there’s also a very competitive field for a film 
crew. So as long as the levels of production keep going up, this 
will likely be a continuing need. 
 
There are film training programs at the high school level, at the 
post-secondary, at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology). But again it’s a competitive industry 
and it is growing right across Canada, so there’s a good chance 
that we will continue to have need for this program for a while 
yet. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Okay, Madam Minister. It is obvious that the 
industry is having a hard time attracting and retaining qualified 
crew and talent for its production. What other suggestions are 
recommended in addition to extending the sunset clause for 
waiver of residency? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the critical thing on retention of 
crews . . . We actually had a period a few years back where we 
lost our crews because we didn’t have a sound stage. So what 
happened was in order to work year-round they had to leave the 
province and some of them who left to work in Alberta and 
other places never came back. Now that we have a more stable, 
full-time, year-round industry here, we’ll likely see more 
stability rebuilding back in our film crews. 
 
But as well as that, like I say, the post-secondary institutions, 
the university, SIAST, are doing more training in these areas. 
There’s some independent companies doing training, and as 
well, JobStart/Future Skills has been used to provide trained 
people in this area. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
could you please clarify for me what the amendments in section 
24 will provide for and what your government’s intentions are 
as to these amendments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll attempt to answer this as my 
official looks for the detail, but my understanding of it is that 
the deeming provision would be dropped from the legislation 
and put into regulation so that it will be easier to either end it or 
continue it, depending on the actual needs of the industry, 
without having to return to the legislature each time to do this; 
keeping in mind that they can’t get this tax credit unless there’s 
actual economic activity supporting it, so there’s really not 
much to lose in terms of continuing with this kind of a 
provision. 
 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, so in effect, even if a waiver 
of residency claim is made after the closing date specified, it 
can still be considered for and subsequently granted for tax 
credit purposes, correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Only if in the regulations the change of 
date is affirmed. It would have to be affirmed in the regulations. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Okay. So does that mean that the legislation is 
basically open-ended? Like if you received an application in 
March 2005, could it still be accepted, considered, and 
approved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The regulation, or the legislation, 
speaks to a date of 2004. It’s only until we put a new regulation 
in that, that that date would actually change. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Okay, so you will specify . . . You will have a 
certain date specified in the regulations. Is that what you’re 
saying, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that’s the case. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I 
heard you mention that you had people that were considered 
management or above-the-line personnel that were considered 
eligible for this tax credit. Could you explain that a little bit 
better to me? Does that mean that the owner of the company 
could actually receive the tax credit? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now just to be clear, the deeming 
provision only applies to people from outside the province, so if 
it’s an in-province company they wouldn’t have to worry about 
the deeming provision. However, it’s only for the hiring of 
personnel related to the production of a particular film, not a 
generic coverage of a position or anything in the particular 
company. So it has to be those people who on the film credits 
would appear as being part of the production of that specific 
film. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I heard you 
mention, and I believe there was 18 companies involved in 36 
productions, so that would mean that a company would 
probably have a couple of films during the year where their 
crews and part of their management had part of their wages paid 
for through this film tax credit. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It is a tax credit that’s paid against the 
wages of Saskatchewan residents that are paid, and in the case 
of the deemed individuals, people who are deemed to have been 
necessary in order to produce that particular film. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, is it your department that 
decides that this person is deemed to be necessary to produce a 
film, or is it the managers, the owners, the person who is the 
above-the-line people have determined that these people are 
necessary? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, this was my understanding, but I 
wanted to check to be absolutely sure. SaskFILM, the film 
producer, and the union have to sign that they agree that the 
deeming is necessary, and they also have to sign that the 
agreed-on training plan is a legitimate training plan. 

Ms. Draude: — So could an employee, one specific employee 
that was hired, or whatever the word may be, for a film and then 
that film production is completed, could the same person be 
getting a tax credit if he was employed in the next production 
that came along? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s two instances where that might 
be the case. One is if they are a Saskatchewan resident, because 
it is for the purposes of creating Saskatchewan employment. 
But the other instance would be if they were training a different 
person in a subsequent film, because they have to have someone 
they’re training. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Madam Minister, when you . . . when your 
department and SaskFILM and the production company agree, 
or the union I believe you said it was, agree that this person is 
deemed necessary, is there anyone that actually checks to see if 
there’s somebody that actually has had a . . . that the province 
gets a, pays a tax credit on for the whole year because they’ve 
been employed in two or three different productions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Each production is considered a 
separate commercial enterprise. And that person, if they were 
already trained, would not likely be deemed because they 
wouldn’t be deemed as needing the training if they were already 
trained to a sufficient level to be operating independently. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Has your department in fact checked to see, or 
do you consider it your responsibility to check and see if there 
would be personnel that were deemed requiring additional 
training from going from film A to B to C during the year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The department does have the authority 
to audit both the training programs and the conduct of the 
training on the site, and they do do that from time to time and 
haven’t found an instance like the one you’re talking about. 
 
But it’s probably worth mentioning that, in the case of a person 
who’s from outside the province who’s in a training capacity, 
you might have the situation where they’ve trained different 
people, but not where the same person has been trained over 
and over again, because again . . . And that even would likely 
not happen very often because to be deemed you have to be 
from out of province. So they would likely come in for a project 
and then go away again. They would not normally be here all 
the time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Madam Minister, then we have . . . we 
actually have people that, if they could be considered to require 
further training, they could be actually employed by different 
productions and have their wages or salaries paid for most of 
the year if they are being trained further as each production 
goes on. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. I think it’s worth clarifying that 
because of the Saskatchewan employment component of the 
thing. If you’re from Saskatchewan, you qualify over and over 
and over again whether you’re being trained or not. It’s the out 
of province that are deemed as training someone. 
 
And again, because they’re from out of province, they tend to 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

 

do a project and leave again. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the minister to 
introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. With 
me today to talk about this Act is Mr. Ron Styles, the deputy 
minister of Finance, and we are more than willing to entertain 
questions. 
 
The second reading speech was, I think, quite explicit on this 
one in terms of the direction of this particular piece of 
legislation and we look forward to the questions from the 
members opposite, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and I’d like 
to welcome the minister and his officials this evening . . . or 
official. 
 
To the minister, concerning Bill No. 11, the Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Plan, what is the monetary impact of the 
changes being contemplated in this Bill on the employer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the impact on the 
GRF (General Revenue Fund) is none, if that was the specific 
question. The impact to the plan, of course, when you’re 
looking at the total allotment of funds within a plan, they’re 
obviously to deal with the minor issues around recognizing the 
10 months of service for the part-time employees. 
 
In terms of pro-rating this, the impact on the overall plan would 
be negligible. So really the financial impact is very minimal and 
certainly there is no impact to the GRF with regard to this plan, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. How many employers 
are covered by this particular pension plan and how many are 
being affected by this change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, with regard to this 
pension plan, there are 752 employers and over 10,000 active 
members within the plan overall, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There’s a change in the 
composition to the commission being contemplated in this Bill. 
What changes will the pension plan members notice with this 
change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, what this Act does is it 
allows for a more balanced approach between the 
representatives from the employer and employee groups. This 
of course was a recommendation from the consultant, Mr. Terry 

Stevens, who did extensive consultations with the employers 
and employee groups within the plan to come up with a better 
governance management structure that allowed for a more 
balanced approach to the concerns with regard to representation 
on the plan. 
 
Also this Act allows for the employer-employee representative 
group, the board, to select its own Chair whereas in the past the 
Chair had been appointed by the government. 
 
So in essence it’s a more balanced approach. It’s a more 
democratic approach to the management of this particular 
pension plan and certainly is endorsed by the vast . . . in fact the 
governance management is endorsed by the vast majority of the 
stakeholders that were consulted by Mr. Stevens with regard to 
these changes, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister, how do this plan 
and the changes compare to how other provinces administer 
their plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, that if you 
look at this particular plan, this is an extremely diverse group 
with at least five, four or five different union groups 
representative. Of course, non-unionized staff, they’re provided 
supports for their pensions from their employers. 
 
Numerous employee groups on the municipal side, on the 
school division side, — firefighters, for example — are 
included in this group. So if we were to make comparisons to 
other jurisdictions, I would suspect that this is a very unique 
group of employers and employees. 
 
But the structure of the plan in terms of the governance 
management, the greater democratization in terms of the 
representative groups, and of course the administrative 
components would be very similar to other plans that are 
managed throughout Canada by and the responsibility of 
provincial governments, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, I guess 
my next question is maybe twofold. What is the current 
composition and how will the changes benefit the members? 
 
And I guess I want to use the example of employees on the 
Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster, on the Alberta side of 
Lloydminster. We live in a competitive world and provinces 
compete for employees. And I just want to know is there an 
advantage as he changes the level of the . . . created a level 
playing field as far as . . . to attract employees. And if not, what 
are the differences between Saskatchewan and Alberta or 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba, for that matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
With regard to the employers’ groups, there’s the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association; the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association; the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities; Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association of 
Saskatchewan; the Saskatchewan Association of School 
Business Officials; the Urban Municipal Administrators’ 
Association of Saskatchewan; and representatives of the 
regional colleges. So those are the employer groups. The 
employee groups of course have their representation to the most 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

part. 
 
(19:30) 
 
And with regard to how this would compare in the cross-border 
jurisdictions, such as Lloydminster and even on the closer to the 
Manitoba side, it is a statutory requirement of these particular 
employer groups to provide these pension plans. So once an 
individual is hired by a particular employer then it’s a 
requirement that they participate in the plan and that the 
employer also participate in the plan. 
 
We believe that because of the nature of these defined 
contribution plans that they are competitive in cross-jurisdiction 
analysis. So really it comes down to if you’re an employee of 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association working in 
Lloydminster, then you would — in an administrative capacity 
or otherwise — then you would be under this plan, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My next question is, 
can you explain the consultation process leading up to the 
change in the commission we are considering here? And also 
could you elaborate on did the pension plan administrator put 
forward any recommendations as far as these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The consultant that was hired to 
provide the consultation proceeded to meet with stakeholders 
across the province from October 2001 to April 2002. 
Subsequent to those individual stakeholder meetings there was 
a joint meeting of all stakeholders in May 2002 where there was 
an opportunity for all groups to see different perspectives from 
the various groups that had been consulted. 
 
Once the consultations were completed and the joint meeting 
had been completed, then basically the consultant provided a 
report. The report was widely circulated to the stakeholders that 
had been consulted and also to the administrator of the plan, 
which is PEBA (Public Employees Benefits Agency) in this 
case. 
 
Once the report had been produced, the recommendations were 
provided to PEBA. These recommendations by and large to the 
vast majority, based on the consensus of the stakeholders, were 
incorporated to the Act that we have before the Assembly 
today, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, were 
further consultations on this Bill taken with the view to possible 
changes after the Bill was introduced earlier this session? And 
were the concern raised after you introduced the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Since 
this piece of legislation was introduced and second reading 
done in May of this year, I had been approached and the 
department had been approached by one of the employee 
groups, one of the unionized representatives who were asking 
for further changes. However there was no consensus amongst 
the majority of the stakeholder groups, employee and employer 
representatives. 
 
So really the Act does not go far enough in terms of what would 
have liked to have been seen by this particular employee group, 

but certainly meets the consensus requirement that the 
consultant had recommended. So there is one particular group 
that would have liked to have seen further refinements to this 
particular Act in terms of their plan, but it did not meet the 
requirement in terms of a consensus approach, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to thank the minister 
and his official. That’s all the questions we’ll have at this time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d 
just like to thank Ron Styles for being with us this evening and 
for the opposition members for their questions with . . . 
regarding to this Act. And with that I would move to report the 
Bill without amendment, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and my officials 
with me tonight are . . . next to me is Mr. Hal Cushon, who is 
the assistant to the deputy minister. To my immediate left is Mr. 
Doug Matthies, who is the general manager of crop insurance. 
And directly behind me is Mr. Rick Burton, who is the director 
of policy branch. And right beside him is Mr. Dave Boehm, 
who is the director of financial programming. Those are my 
officials, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I want to 
thank the minister for coming tonight, and his officials. And the 
first question that I have is, when does he tentatively plan on 
signing the agriculture policy framework? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I have 
been consulting with my colleagues across the country. As you 
know, Alberta has already signed the agreement a couple of 
days ago, or probably a week or so ago now. On Friday, British 
Columbia signed the agreement. I’m anticipating in speaking 
with Ms. Wowchuk who is now back and is the Agriculture 
minister, that Manitoba will soon be signing the agreement. 
Newfoundland-Labrador has already signed the agreement. And 
I’m anticipating to hear probably within the next couple of days 
from the Maritime provinces who are also interested in signing 
the agreement. 
 
My timeline was to wait until probably the ministers’ meeting 
in July. We’re meeting in Manitoba, the first week in Manitoba 
— first week of July in Manitoba as opposed to the first of 
Manitoba in July — and we’ll be then giving consideration for a 
signing likely in the early part of July, is my intent. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister tell us if any compensation 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

 

that may be negotiated with the federal government for the 
cattle industry due to the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy), is it contingent upon him signing the APF 
(agricultural policy framework)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well initially — this is a very good 
question that the member asks me, Mr. Chair — initially it was 
certainly rumoured that the federal government would be 
insisting that provincial administrations would have to sign the 
implementation agreement in order to receive any 
compensation, if compensation were being made. 
 
In fact in the early life of the discussions, the federal 
government said to us that the package would be administered 
through NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) and the 
funding would be delivered through NISA, which we all as 
provincial ministers and then the premiers’ option, with the 
industry, said that that wouldn’t work and that NISA should not 
be the vehicle in which to deliver the compensation package. 
 
If there was some pleasantries exchanged at the meeting on 
Friday, it was the notion that the program would not be attached 
to NISA. 
 
Now I think in a compensation package when farmers go to do 
their accounting for the course of the year, and then make 
application for their NISA payments, what will happen is that 
the compensation package will be accredited as income to the 
farm and then would show up then in the evaluation of what 
your NISA payout might be. 
 
But clearly the federal minister did not suggest at all that we 
would need to sign the NISA agreements in order to receive the 
compensation packages. And I expect within the next day or so 
when we actually have another conversation with the federal 
minister, as they get prepared to roll out their overall package, 
there will be no mention that we’ll need to be tied to the NISA. 
My sense is that we will not be. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister tell us, if he indeed signs 
the APF in July, which tentatively he may do, when does the 
new NISA kick in? When does it take place? 
 
I know I’ve already received my NISA forms. So what happens 
to the old NISA, the existing NISA program? When does the 
new program kind of take over? How soon are we being 
expected to withdraw funds from the old NISA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the forms that producers are 
getting now, they’re really applying for 2002. The new NISA 
would really be . . . It would take effect for the year 2003 but 
would be effective 2000 . . . or would be effective 2004. 
 
The member might ask the question, I expect, in follow-up to 
what happens to the accounts that are currently in place. The 
federal government is recommending and suggesting that they, 
that those accounts be exhausted over a period of five years. 
And the process for that is still currently being sorted out 
amongst the officials and amongst the ministries. 
 
So the current application forms that we’re receiving today as 
producers are really for our 2002 agricultural year. 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister tell us, when the old funds 
are exhausted over the course of five years, which is what I’ve 
been hearing as well, what is the income tax implication? 
Because of course a huge part of business management is to 
manage your income, your expenses accordingly. If you took 
the funds out in one sum in any given year, much of it would be 
clawed back in income tax. 
 
Is there any way that . . . or any protection for the producers as 
they take this money out, for the income tax implications? Can 
they roll it straight from the old NISA to the new NISA with no 
income tax implications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — As the member will know, that there is the 
producer account and the government account and what will 
happen is that over a period of five years, those accounts will be 
exhausted equally at the same time. And what will happen is 
that, because the producers have already paid the tax, there 
won’t be any tax on that account but there’ll only be a tax on 
the . . . only on the money of which the government has 
contributed over the years. So then that will occur in the given 
years. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister tell us if there is any 
particular producer group in all of the agriculture sector that’s 
endorsing the APF and encouraging him to sign it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the livestock industry, particularly 
the cattle industry, and I expect the hog industry, would be one 
sector that would be favourable to signing the implementation 
agreement. There is clearly some very visible and vocal groups 
like the agricultural . . . APAS (Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan) producers who believe that we 
shouldn’t yet be signing the agreement. SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), Mr. Neal Hardy, clearly is 
one of the people who has been quite vociferous on this front 
who believes that we should be signing the implementation 
agreement. 
 
And there are a variety of individuals who provide me advice, 
both in the favourable and in the negative, about signing the 
agreement. So this is a mixed bag of people who believe that we 
should sign it versus people who believe we don’t sign it. 
 
Clearly, the new problem that we’re dealing with in agriculture 
today with the BSE is one where people are looking for 
protection down the road, and so there is some interest here. 
And your earlier question about . . . at the end of the day will 
there be an expectation here that we have some kind of safety 
net for producers as we head into the new year? There’s a sense 
here that we’ll need to have it, and if the federal government 
and the provinces are finished their negotiations, then without 
signing the agreement you don’t have any protection for the 
producer groups. 
 
The other important piece here is that I know you’re familiar 
with because you talked about it to the press recently, and that 
is that as we move ahead with this BSE issue there’ll be a 
number of requirements that governments will need to attach 
themselves to in terms of ensuring that we have higher 
environmental standards — in my view, and I think in that of 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

the national government — and that there will be higher 
standards that will be required for surveillance in the food 
safety area. 
 
And in the next couple of days when we get an opportunity to 
see the report from the international community, or in the next 
little while when we get the opportunity to see the information 
from the international community, we’ll see I think a list of 
expectations that we’ll need to meet. And in order to meet them, 
you’ll need to put them into the new categories of food safety, 
science and technology, and environment. And to each of those 
pillars there will be federal attached money, and the only way 
you’ll get it is by signing the implementation agreement. 
 
So to some degree in order to move ahead in meeting the kinds 
of standards that will be necessary, I think it will be important 
for provinces to sign the agreements. And I think that’s the 
argument that Alberta is making already; that’s the argument 
that British Columbia has just recently made, that in order for 
us to ensure that we have a high standard of delivery of the food 
system, that the implementation of the agreements will be 
necessary. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. And I 
know the minister has told me before but the unfortunate part is 
that we are being requested to sign the agriculture policy 
framework in its entirety and not each package separately which 
would be kind of . . . Well it’s very important, quite frankly, 
because there is areas, I agree with him, that are quite essential, 
and the major concern seems to come in the area of the risk 
management envelope. 
 
Concerning the risk management envelope or the new NISA, 
the minister said, and I’ve read literature on it and listened to 
what Mr. Vanclief has said, that the allocation of the federal 
funding will be on demand-driven basis, and so that means that 
the pool of federal money to producers will be based on 
participation and the national programs will not be based on the 
relative size of the agriculture industry — which is a positive 
sign, I do believe. 
 
But what happens if the funding, because there is sort of one 
sum of funding that Mr. Vanclief is saying is going to be the 
risk management envelope of the agriculture portfolio, what 
happens if that funding is used up, if the demand or the need 
uses the funds in the first two to three years? Then what is the 
backup plan here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well this too, Mr. Chair, is a very good 
question that the member asks. And when we attempted to 
negotiate with the federal government and some of my 
colleagues across the country, our greatest interest was to make 
sure that first the pool of money that we’re working with would 
be increased. 
 
As you know, we’re working with $1.1 billion. And what will 
happen is that — to your question — is that if in fact we were to 
have a disaster in Canada that were equally applied across the 
country, clearly the fund would be exhausted. And what would 
happen then of course is that the national government would 
pro-rate the level of funding that would occur across the 
country because you have the limited pool. 
 

And so what we were suggesting in the signing of the 
implementation agreement is two things that should happen. 
One is that we should continue to press for trade injury into the 
future because that $600 million per annum ends this year. And 
so . . . and the goal forward beginning 2004, we should be 
working with our colleagues across the country and the federal 
government to try and get that $600 million back on the page. 
 
And secondly, we should be talking to the federal government 
in the weeks and months ahead here about indexing the safety 
net, so that it isn’t capped at 1.1 billion, but that it increases 
over the years so that we can make the kinds of adjustments that 
will be necessary. 
 
If we’re not able to convince them to do that then it will be the 
pro-rating. And what will happen of course is that if you get a 
national disaster that applies across the country in a significant 
way, then you use the pool of money that you have and then 
you pro-rate it against each of the claims that you have, which 
could reduce the amount of coverage that people would get. 
Now hopefully that won’t be the case but clearly that that 
option remains out there. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — There’s a couple of the details of the new 
NISA program that’s being proposed that . . . You know there’s 
been so many questions that haven’t been answered and there’s 
terms used like, it will give deeper coverage, and I believe I 
understand how that works. But I would like the minister to 
explain what is meant by deeper coverage. How is this going to 
give the producers deeper coverage and how is the advantage of 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Under the old CFIP (Canadian Farm 
Income Program) program the margins were at . . . covered 
about 40 per cent of the total revenue. Under the new NISA 
program, the coverage now is about 60 per cent of the total 
revenue. So when they talk about it being deeper you can see 
that under the previous program it was at 60 per cent. Currently 
it’s now — under the new suggested NISA safety net — it’s at 
60 per cent. And that’s a simplified sort of version of what we 
talk about when we talk about the deeper coverage. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Originally the federal government said the 
new NISA would not be covering negative margins. Has that 
changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, that hasn’t changed under the 
new program either. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — One further question. The new NISA, in a 
lot of the explanation that I’ve seen from the federal 
government — and they give an example — and the suggestion 
is that the producer would have to put 26 per cent in the 
program in order to receive 100 per cent coverage. Has that 
changed? 
 
Twenty-six per cent is relatively steep, quite frankly, for a 
protection program. I realize that it’s not paid annually, which 
is a positive thing. But nonetheless it’s going to be somewhat 
difficult for a lot of the producers to get their 26 per cent into 
the program, particularly after a number of depressed years, 
both in price and due to the lack of production because of the 
drought. 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

 

So does that still remain at 26 per cent? Is it solid or is it still 
negotiable and subject to change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer, Mr. Chair, is that it still is at 
the 26 per cent; they haven’t moved from that point. But there 
are some negotiations, of course, that are taking place in terms 
of how you might seed the initial portion and the . . . To arrive 
at the 26 per cent full seed, you have a period of three years to 
get to it. And there’s some discussions that are going on with 
financial institutions right now to see if you might be able to 
take a loan against that and then seed your NISA account from 
that perspective. And then of course as a producer, we can 
claim it back as an expense on our tax. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister tell us what’s left to 
negotiate on the new NISA program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, did you ask the question about 
what’s left on the APF or of NISA? . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . APF? 
 
What is left is the administrative process in terms of how the 
program will be administered across the country, and there’s 
still some discussion that’s going on about the linkage between 
crop insurance and NISA. So there’s some work being 
undertaken on that front yet which we think would be very 
helpful from the point of view of being able to look after the 
negative margins which crop insurance would assist in. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. It was suggested to 
myself from some Manitoba producers that perhaps the federal 
government would look at the producer paid portion of the crop 
insurance premium being considered an expense. 
 
Was the minister aware that that was being requested by any of 
the provinces, and does he endorse that suggestion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials tell me that they 
believe that it already is a cash expense that the farmer claims 
against his crop insurance — his crop insurance premium. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would just like to clarify that. The 
farmer-paid portion of the crop insurance premium is 
considered an expense for the margins for the new NISA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials tell me that it is an 
eligible expense. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and his officials, and I 
have no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I see the minister has no new officials. 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister tell us how the changes 
being made in this Bill will benefit crop insurance? What kind 
of enhancements . . . or are there any enhancements that will 
kick in with this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There are sort of two objectives of the 
crop insurance program of which the changes we think will be 
significant. They’re on these areas, and I might just read them 
into the record. 
 
For the future flexibility of program design, this producer is 
saying that one size doesn’t fit all and to be able to explore a 
variety of new insurance products and ideas. Looking at the 
weather-based derivatives may or may not be the answer but it 
opens the doors for some creative thinking here on the way in 
which we’ll do administrative expenses into the future. 
 
And we’ll be looking at replacing the current individual 
coverage programs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not — sorry 
— not looking at, not looking to replace the current individual 
coverage programs for producers who like that product. 
 
(20:00) 
 
And then the rest will just be administrative changes, 
housekeeping, where we’ll do things like Sask Justice has 
suggested, that crop insurance would be improved if additional 
specific authorities be provided and that crop insurance 
generated about $228,000 in revenue from services of third 
parties. 
 
So those are the, sort of the specific kinds of changes that we 
would be looking at. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister tell us if there will be any 
more funding for crop insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer is that this year we had more 
money for crop insurance. Our share was 100 million and the 
federal share was 150 million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Yes . . . or excuse me, but under the APF, 
will there be additional funding for crop insurance or do we 
know that yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The crop insurance program will now be a 
demand-driven program so if the feds . . . and we require 
additional dollars for the crop insurance program, then it will be 
our requirement then to match it. So it will be on that process of 
which it will work. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Within the Bill there’s mention of 
administrative fees. Can the minister tell us what fees these will 
be and what they will cost the farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’ve had a . . . really a request from the 
Justice department to look at third party fees that we’re not 
currently charging and that we should be. And so it’s these . . . 
These are the areas of which there has been a recommendation 
in our proposal that we have now a charge for third parties. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The other thing that I see is a clause within 
the Bill that talks about Crop Insurance entering into contracts 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

with outside organizations for the administration of crop 
insurance. Could the minister expand on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The kind of authority that we’re getting 
requests to enter into are these, is that the Canadian Wheat 
Board, we currently do some audits for the Canadian Wheat 
Board. Another example might be the administration of the 
spring cash advance. Those are just a couple of examples of 
where we would be involved in the kind of contract discussion 
that the member talks about. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and his officials, and I 
have no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I see the minister has no new officials and so 
we’ll proceed with the Bill. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. How will the 
changes that we see in this Bill protect those who are part of the 
feeder association as far as liability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the amendments that we’re 
making are the ones that the feeder associations have actually 
asked for us to make on their behalf. 
 
What we’re doing in the legislation are two things. One is that 
we’re clarifying The Personal Property Security Act, and 
secondly, we’re adding administrative powers to the department 
that the association has now . . . will have cattle as security. 
Those are the two major, significant changes that we’re making 
to the legislation. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Did the minister consult with anyone other 
than the feeder association itself, and were there any specific 
problems that prompted the changes that this Bill will make? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In respect to the clarity on the personal 
property securities, really the request was driven by both the 
lenders, the associations themselves wanted clarity, and we 
have, as you know, a producer advisory group that we meet and 
speak with on a regular basis; and so it would have been those 
three groups in respect to whether or not there’s been any 
ongoing problems within the livestock program. We don’t 
believe there has been any, but it’s sort of looking forward by 
making amendments as we go along to improve the level of 
services that we provide. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister tell us how often in the 
recent past the government’s had to cover its 25 per cent 
guarantee on financing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, in the year 2002-2003 we paid 

out $116,000 net. And it would have gone to nine associations 
my officials tell me, and it could have gone back over a period 
of about five years. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — There’s reference in the Bill to changes to 
the rights to inspect records, so can the minister expand on this 
a little bit more and tell us how this will help the feedlot 
industry, and particularly those involved in feeder associations, 
and how the rights to inspect records will be expanded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There are really a couple of areas that are 
important here. One is that the importance of maybe reducing 
the level of financial loss that the member asked about earlier, 
which is the $116,000 over that period of time that we talked 
about, the five years. So we think that by making these kinds of 
changes that there will be significant sort of improvements or 
enhancements. Not that there’s a huge problem with it today, 
but it’ll just simply improve the way in which we do our 
financial record keeping. 
 
And secondly with the branding of the livestock too, because 
this then provides I think significant powers in order to have 
due diligence done on the individual feedlots that we’re talking 
about here. 
 
So it’s about improving the financial for financial purposes and 
also a more restrictive process in terms of branding of the 
livestock. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, just 
referring back to the 25 per cent guarantee and the minister had 
mentioned a hundred and sixty-some thousand dollar loss the 
government had to write down. What was the total amount of 
losses to the associations? 
 
There’s the insurance fund that would be taken first and then 
the individual that had lost the money. I understand the loan 
would try to be recouped from the individual and then the 
guarantee would kick in. So could you just clarify the losses 
and the different stages and the amounts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what we don’t have is that we 
don’t have the record that sort of dates back over each of those 
years that the member asks for. But what we could do is in this 
given year what those loses that the member talks about might 
be. But we don’t have a method today to go back deeper than 
that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Next question is 
concerning actually how the new association . . . or what this 
Bill is intended to do. Right now we have the feeder plan where 
the member puts in 5 per cent. And then we have the breeder 
plan; member puts in 10 per cent which is the assurance fund. 
And you can do rollovers from the breeder to the feeder or vice 
versa depending on the circumstances. 
 
Could you just explain more fully the relationship of this new 
change to the feeder association, how they interact among the 
other two . . . between the other two identities, and also how 
participation between existing members in one association will 
have with the feedlot loan guarantee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the difference in this legislation is 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

 

that what it does do is it recognizes that you don’t need to be 
part of a larger feedlot operation as we have currently today. 
But you could actually do your lending now as an individual 
feedlot operator. 
 
And it’s been our view that . . . And our timing is bad, if I might 
say, given the kinds of difficulties that we’re experiencing 
today with the BSE. But my interest here — and I think would 
be yours — is that we’ll get by this particular issue, and we’ll 
start to see again individuals who are interested in growing the 
feedlot industry. 
 
And what I have been keenly wanting to do for some time, 
because we have a number of feedlot family operations across 
the province, of which I know that you’d be familiar with being 
one yourself I believe. What would happen, of course, here is 
that we could start to promote those individuals. And there are 
probably a couple of dozen, if what my records or what my 
information tells me, in the province where people would be 
able to move from their current size to a larger feedlot size, and 
currently with the direct funding levels. This would really, we 
think, would be helpful. 
 
And in consultations with the industry, they tell us that by 
making these kinds of changes it would be useful for them in 
order to be able to then loan the money that they need, or 
borrow the money that they need, to grow the feedlot industry. 
And in this province you know well that there’s a huge need for 
us to value-add in our grain side and this would be one of the 
ways that we think would be helpful. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate the fact 
that we’ll be asking — and I assume you’re answering — the 
questions all pre-BSE situation. So I appreciate that. 
 
I guess my question is more fundamental to this, to the 
amendments and how the feedlot loans will be granted — how 
many members are needed; the limits; the phase-in period; or if 
there are any, just information along how actually to set up this 
feeder association. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well the way in which the legislation is 
portrayed is that you could be one member. So if you were an 
individual today who wanted to get into the feedlot business, 
you could get into the feedlot business based on this kind of 
legislation that we’re putting forward. We think that this is one 
of the ways to address those couple of dozen or so feedlots in 
the province today that might be running at 1,000 or 1,500 head 
that might want to double their operations in the province, and 
they could do that on an individual basis. So there’s no 
requirement here to be part of a larger association. We could do 
that on an individual basis. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you to the minister. Could you give me 
an estimate of how many feeders there are in the province, 
again I guess pre-BSE, but just the rough numbers that we were 
looking at possibly on May 20 when the BSE situation 
happened? And could you give an estimate of what your 
officials thought the sign up would be into the new feedlot plan 
on . . . based on those numbers; and again, pre-BSE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we have about 128 associations 
in the province, when that would include about then 6,000 

members. We’ll get a more accurate number for you, but we 
think that feedlots that are over 1,000 animals, we probably 
have somewhere in the neighbourhood of 30 to 50 such 
operations between the numbers of 1,000 animals. 
 
The number of feeders that we have in the province today are 
roughly about 200,000 and about another 600,000 that are being 
fed outside the province that likely . . . and likely the largest 
number of those are in Alberta. 
 
So in total we probably would have about 800,000 head that we 
would have feeding capacity for, if they were all in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just for the interest 
of those who might be watching tonight, and I have been very 
impressed quite frankly with the citizens of Saskatchewan for 
recognizing and understanding the impact of the bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy that’s been discovered in a cow in 
Alberta. 
 
But I want to give the minister the opportunity for a few 
moments, He just described the number of associations, the 
number of members, the number of cattle that this involves, and 
he may want to further expand to how this discovery has 
impacted the number of jobs in our province and just how 
serious it has been. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I took a little longer 
because I was practising how to say BSE in its long form and 
it’s good for you to be able to say it. So I’m going to stay with 
just saying BSE and to say to you, Madam Member, that there 
are a lot of people who are impacted by the BSE in 
Saskatchewan without any question. 
 
And Saskatchewan people have been most, most appreciative of 
the work that has happened in this legislature, on both sides of 
the House I must say, in trying to find a solution to this very 
difficult issue. The fact that we have had about 2,700 or so head 
of livestock been put down in the province, we have a huge 
appreciation. Those of us who’ve been around the livestock 
industry for many years will know how difficult it is to part 
with parts of your herd or all of your herd, particularly when it’s 
done so in a unexpected fashion as this has created for a number 
of farm families in the province. 
 
Secondly, the impact that’s occurred on not only the individual 
family farms, whether it’s been loss of loss of the animals, but 
what’s happened in communities where people have had to rally 
around each other to assist one another as they go through this 
very difficult time for those people who lost livestock. 
 
When you take a look at the impact that it’s had on the trucking 
industry for example and the number of people today who are 
unemployed, because in fact the trucking industry isn’t moving 
in my part of the province, which is not unusual to where you 
live or others in this Assembly who are from rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You can draw a circle around a 100-mile radius and probably 
find, you know, 15 . . . 10 to 15 auction barns that are not 
operating today. Many of those people who work in those 
auction barns are farmers. In some instances it’s an additional 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

revenue to them. The auctioneers who work there, people who 
work in the yards, the people who supply feed to the auction 
barns either in the form of hay or grain. None of that is moving 
today. 
 
Those people who are working in packing plants in Moose Jaw 
or those who are working in rendering plants in the province, 
there’s been very little activity to none in some of those areas. 
So it’s meant in some households in the province people have 
been unemployed now for the better part of five weeks, are 
carrying in some instances . . . those who have their own trucks, 
or those who have large capital investments in buildings or 
property, they’re looking for ways in which they can get 
compensation programs. 
 
And so it has had a huge, huge impact in this province and in 
this country — sorry in this country. And it’s only now that 
we’re becoming to recognize how important this industry is to 
our country — not just to our province, but the kind of impact 
that it has on us as Canadians, and clearly in this province a 
significant impact. 
 
And so it’s a tribute to work with the livestock industry in 
Saskatchewan who have been promoting, for example, their 
option in terms of providing some solution. It’s been a privilege 
to work with them as we work with our national government to 
try to get an agreement out of the US (United States) to open 
our borders again. 
 
But there’s no doubt that this issue will resolve itself best by the 
opening of the border, and it’s from that perspective that we 
really hope in the next few days we’re going to get some signal 
from the US to begin to see our livestock moving again into the 
United States. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that. And the 
members on this side of the House are totally in agreement of 
the importance of the livestock sector and how we must work 
together to make this very, very awful situation as positive as 
we can. 
 
So with that I have no further questions. I thank the minister. I 
will more than . . . or be more than happy to give him lessons 
on how to say bovine spongiform encephalopathy. And I want 
to thank his officials for being here with us tonight. I have no 
further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(20:30) 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 

officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce and to welcome here this evening: on my immediate 
left, Mr. Jim Engel who is the executive director, policy and 
planning; and on my immediate right, Fiona Cribb who is the 
manager of policy and legislation. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, Bill No. 
31, Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act. It 
appears that the main purpose of this Act . . . or of this change 
is to give Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing the authority 
to regulate and the only part that the Government of 
Saskatchewan would play is in the appeal process. Could you 
just clarify that and indicate if that is correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. This 
amendment is merely to allow the commission to hear appeals 
as is in other cases. Right now they don’t have that opportunity. 
What it will do is provide the Liquor and Gaming Licensing 
Commission the authority to hear appeals from First Nations 
gaming licensing authorities once First Nation licensing 
authorities have been authorized — only once they’ve been 
authorized to regulate and license on-reserve charitable gaming. 
So it just allows a vehicle for appeals to be heard. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Correct. You 
indicated that this is not in place at the present time. But is not 
the issue that Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing does not 
have the authority yet to regulate, so there was no need for an 
appeal body that could hear concerns, and this is actually being 
put in place to enable Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing 
to be able to regulate gaming on-reserve? Otherwise we would 
not need the commission to be able to hear appeals because we 
only have one body that is allowed to regulate today in the 
province of Saskatchewan, which is Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming and they already have an appeal process. 
 
So is this not the next step after Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Licensing receives approval to go forward and to regulate 
gaming on-reserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, this is a 
step in preparation of and in anticipation of the licensing body 
to have their own licensing on-reserve. 
 
If I might just read into the record, Mr. Chairman, in the 2002 
Gaming Framework Agreement the provincial government 
committed to introduce amendments to the Act, as 
expeditiously as possible, to authorize the Liquor and Gaming 
Licensing Commission to hear appeals from the licensing 
authorities. 
 
The amendment fulfills that obligation and will facilitate the 
eventual — the eventual — authorization to license and regulate 
on-reserve charitable gaming. So for the gaming licensing 
authority . . . So it’s the eventual authorization. It’s not there as 
yet, but it’s in anticipation of. 
 
So it’s a work in preparation, I suppose, for sometimes down 
the road, if I can describe it that way. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I appreciate that 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

 

you have again reiterated that it’s to expedite this to happen. 
 
And I guess the main concern around this whole issue goes 
right back to the issues that happened prior to the 25-year 
agreement being signed from year 2000 with all the problems 
with Indian gaming and knowing full well that only 7 of the 19 
recommendations have been met, and yet the government chose 
to go ahead and sign a new 25-year agreement. Within the 
25-year agreement there is cause to go forward and work 
towards full jurisdiction for First Nations, and part of First 
Nations having full jurisdiction is that they have their own 
licensing body. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I know I’ve questioned you about this on 
numerous occasions and I do not believe we’ve ever had a clear 
answer. What does full jurisdiction mean? 
 
Perry Bellegarde, the chief of the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations), indicates that it’s the jewel in 
their crown. And I would like the minister to explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan, what does full jurisdiction in the 
25-year gaming agreement mean, and then how does it tie into 
the Saskatchewan gaming and licensing body that is now being 
given the authority to go forward and to become the licensing 
body, and then the only part that the Government of 
Saskatchewan will play is in the appeal process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member 
refers to some of the benchmarks and the progress that’s been 
made. I regret that there’s no recognition given to the 
significant changes that have in fact been made and recognized 
across not only Canada but North America, how First Nations 
partnerships with this provincial government has far . . . can be 
used as a model, not only in Canada but throughout North 
America. 
 
So we believe we had . . . There were issues that were 
addressed; they were met. The auditor has recognized the 
improvements that have been made. And there are still some of 
those benchmarks to meet and, yes, we need to do more work 
on it but we are working in that direction. 
 
Now with respect to on-reserve gaming, it is not the province’s 
ability to authorize approval. It’s still a matter of the federal 
government’s approval on First Nations reserves. 
 
So what we’re doing is following the commitment that we made 
with First Nations, with our partnership, to pursue the eventual, 
perhaps, authorization by the federal government to allow 
gaming on reserves, to authorize gaming on reserves. And when 
that comes to pass we will have bodies in place to deal with it. 
Up to this point in time nothing indicates that the gaming on 
reserves, under the Criminal Code, is in fact a fait accompli. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
indicated that there has been recognition given to First Nations 
across the country for their gaming in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Minister, you also indicated that they are a model. 
 
And I guess I take exception to the fact that you are 
downplaying that only 7 of 19 recommendations that the auditor 
referred to and reported on in the year 2000 have been met; that 
there is further misspending of public funds in the year 2002, 

according to the Provincial Auditor, some $550,000. And yet, 
Mr. Minister, you as a government have chosen to turn a blind 
eye to these issues and to go forward and to give First Nations 
even more authority for on-reserve gaming. 
 
And not only is the general public of Saskatchewan outraged at 
this idea, but especially First Nations people themselves are, 
because there is not accountability for the dollars that are spent, 
firstly, as expenditures in casino gaming on-reserve; and 
secondly, how those dollars are spent once they are generated. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, you also indicated that on-reserve gaming 
is the federal government’s . . . only allowed with the federal 
government’s approval. The federal government gives 
jurisdiction to the province to regulate gaming. And the gaming 
agreement is signed between the FSIN and the province of 
Saskatchewan, not with the federal government. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you as a Government of Saskatchewan are 
not only endorsing this but you are also taking taxpayers’ 
dollars and giving them to the First Nations, to the FSIN, to 
forward their goal of full jurisdiction and also to forward their 
goal of having . . . regulating their bodies on-reserve. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I would like to still know what does the 
meaning of full jurisdiction mean to this government. And what 
are the implications for all people in Saskatchewan should it be 
achieved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry. I have to 
take some exception with the fact that the member continues to 
insist that progress is not being made under our agreement with 
First Nations. I have a whole list of changes that were made 
since we worked together to determine what issues there were. 
Those issues were addressed. There were investigations. There 
were forensic audits. 
 
And I want to send this over to the member, Mr. Chairman, 
because it’s not fair to say that only 7 out of 19 benchmarks 
were met and that nothing else was done. This has been 
accomplished. There has been a great deal accomplished. There 
is more to accomplish, and we’re working together to do that, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
And when I refer to right across the country, people recognize 
the types of associations we have. Let me just . . . a notation 
here of Sue Bailey from the Canadian Press talks about Casino 
Rama in Ontario: 
 

Native gambling in Ontario should be as transparent as it is 
now in Saskatchewan, she said . . . 

 
So, you know, it’s totally unfair. And I also want to point out to 
the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, that every effort and every 
attempt — if there is some sincerity to determine what this is 
actually all about — there have been significant efforts made by 
my officials, by myself, to meet with that member and go 
through some of these very technical aspects that she’s 
questioning us on this evening. But she chooses not to want to 
do that, so I question the sincerity in that member’s comments, 
negative comments, with respect to the FSIN agreement that the 
province has signed. 
 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

Now with respect to jurisdiction, the jurisdiction clause in the 
new agreement was a commitment made in the 1995 agreement. 
It says the province will work with FSIN over the next several 
years to develop proposals that we can jointly take forward to 
the federal government on to this particular issue. The FSIN and 
the province will together propose to the federal government 
options for how First Nations people can be given a clear role 
for governing and operating gaming on reserves in Canada. 
Currently that does not exist anywhere in Canada. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
guess we’ll agree to disagree. And I think the people of 
Saskatchewan will judge accordingly when they realize that the 
Government of Saskatchewan went ahead with a new 25-year 
agreement, signed it, and when the conditions that were put 
forward by the Provincial Auditor had not been met. Not only 
did they sign a new agreement but they gave more authority to 
the FSIN and to Saskatchewan Indian Gaming at the same time. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you indicated that there have been accolades 
about the transparency of Indian gaming in Saskatchewan and 
yet I have asked in this legislature repeatedly, what does full 
jurisdiction mean in the gaming agreement, and we have yet to 
have a definition. I’d ask the minister one more time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again, slowly 
and deliberately, through the agreement we will agree to work 
on proposals jointly with the FSIN over the next number of 
years. 
 
We’ve also agreed that when these proposals are ready, we will 
jointly present them to the federal government. What the First 
Nations is looking for is full jurisdiction on reserves which . . . 
It’s not up to the province to allow that jurisdiction; it’s the 
federal government. 
 
And I hear . . . the member looking at me quizzically; she 
doesn’t understand. Well once again . . . once again, if I’m not 
answering your question clearly enough, I am offering, I’m 
offering a meeting with the member to sit with officials to go 
over specifically each concern she’s raised. 
 
We have agreed in the agreement to work with First Nations to 
make a presentation to the federal government. Their ultimate 
goal is to have control on gaming on reserves. Currently the 
Criminal Code does not allow that. It’s provincial jurisdiction. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
keep indicating that I should meet with your officials off the 
record. The questions I am asking at this time are for . . . the 
answers for all people of Saskatchewan to hear and I’m asking 
them in a public forum where the answers will be recorded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have chosen to work with the FSIN, but not 
only have you chosen to work with them towards full 
jurisdiction, the people of Saskatchewan are paying for this. 
Could you please explain why are the people of Saskatchewan 
paying for the First . . . FSIN to work towards full jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure exactly 
how to explain it more explicitly. Part of the agreement that we 

entered into goes back to 1995, and re-signed in 2002. 
 
The member does not need to be concerned about anything off 
the record, Mr. Chairman. We have been clear and upfront 
publicly and any comments, any explanations that are given to 
that member in an office outside of this chamber, we’ll be 
happy to have them all documented and recorded and mailed 
out, and mailed to everybody. We have been transparent in all 
our works and our efforts with First Nations in this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I may have to . . . Even her leader, the 
Leader of the Official Opposition agrees what a good 
framework, what a good agreement we have with FSIN. Do 
they not talk to . . . And I’ll be happy to read that into this 
record time and time again tonight in case the member hasn’t 
heard that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, just for the record, when the 
minister is referring to the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, 
and I believe the comments that have been read over and over 
again in this legislature, they were made prior to the 25-year 
agreement being signed, not after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are the implications for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan should the FSIN receive full jurisdiction over 
gaming on-reserve in Saskatchewan? Will they still receive a 
percentage of the proceeds? Will it still go into the General 
Revenue Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just want to . . . 
Once again, any of the monies that were shared with FSIN in 
this agreement was negotiated and agreed to. That agreement 
recognizes First Nations’ unique and important part to the 
future and the history of this province, Mr. Chairman. And it 
certainly enhances their future in this province. 
 
The commitment we’ve made with FSIN is consistent with the 
province’s overall policy on First Nations and Aboriginal 
people, Mr. Chairman. This is a significant step in First Nations 
moving towards self-regulation. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, again I’d ask you, what are the 
implications for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? Will they still 
receive the same percentage from the gaming revenue that is 
now generated on-reserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, we currently do not receive 
any revenue from charitable gaming on reserves. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I should clarify that, Mr. Minister — casino 
revenue that is generated on reserve. Will the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan still receive that percentage? Will it be put into 
the General Revenue Fund as it is today after full jurisdiction is 
met on-reserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, what the member is talking 
about is an event sometime, could be well into the future. 
Currently what happens is SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority) casinos give money to the General Revenue Fund 
and the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation transfers monies to 
the First Nations Fund. 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

 

I guess when I say that what the member is referring to will 
happen sometime in the future, there will be other discussions 
I’m sure will be necessary and other agreements when it comes 
to pass. It is not a process that is just within a matter of days, 
weeks, months, or even years. 
 
This may take some time to evolve to that stage, and as partners 
at this point with the agreements we have and the options of 
revisiting and reviewing those agreements, that will also come 
to pass. So I can’t give a definitive answer when that happens in 
the future what the arrangements may be as a result of 
negotiations and partnership agreements. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, this is exactly the whole issue 
around this gaming agreement. 
 
I find it absolutely alarming that you would stand in the 
legislature and tell the people of Saskatchewan that: you have 
signed a 25-year agreement; you have given the FSIN the right 
for full jurisdiction; you are also committing, I believe it’s 
$875,000 this year, to Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing 
to go forward to promote this; you’re also giving money to the 
FSIN to promote full jurisdiction; and that you stand here 
tonight and tell the people of Saskatchewan that you have no 
definitive answer to what this is going to mean when it happens. 
And yet it’s written into a 25-year agreement. 
 
So basically what you’re telling us tonight is that the 
thirty-seven and a half per cent now that goes to general 
revenue from profits on casino for Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming, you do not know where that money is going to go 
should they reach full jurisdiction. Would you please clarify 
that? 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Just to remind hon. members that 
in committee the rules are generally relaxed a bit, but if I do 
find that the word you is being overused, or is becoming 
pointed. I would ask that members direct their comments to the 
Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I would first of all ask that 
member to withdraw the allegation that the province has given 
First Nations full jurisdiction on reserves. I don’t know how 
many times I’ve said it. We do not have the authority to do that. 
It’s a Criminal Code, it’s a federal government matter. 
 
I want her to make sure that the people who may be listening 
and who will read these comments — without question, I 
guarantee that — to make sure that she withdraws the allegation 
that through that 25-year agreement we allow First Nations 
people jurisdiction on reserves. That’s what she said, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, I would just like to reiterate that the 
Government of Saskatchewan today is paying . . . has written in 
the 25-year agreement to allow the FSIN to work towards full 
jurisdiction. 
 
Yes, the Criminal Code of Canada must be changed. But they 
are enabling this to happen and are actually helping the FSIN 
towards making this a reality. They have put it in the agreement 
and we are also as taxpayers paying for this. 
 

And, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Chair, to the minister, I would ask 
him to repeat again and clarify. He said that he had no definitive 
answer as what proceeds would go to the General Revenue 
Fund should full jurisdiction be reached. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, we have an agreement with 
First Nations. We believe that we are able to work with those 
people. We’ve developed a mutual respect. I’ve mentioned 
earlier that working with First Nations people will be very, very 
important in as far as their history is concerned, as far as the 
history of this province is concerned. 
 
Mr. Chairman, rather than sit back with our heads in the sand 
and not know what’s happening, we have chosen to enter into 
an agreement with First Nations to work with them to determine 
the application process, if you wish, the presentation that will 
be made to the federal government to ensure that we 
collectively . . . I mean, good grief, Mr. Chairman, we’re all 
citizens of this province: First Nations, Métis, Aboriginal, 
non-Aboriginal. It’s absolutely important that we all work 
together for the benefits of all citizens of this province into the 
future. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, once again, the efforts, our joint efforts . . . 
yes, we’ve entered into an agreement with First Nations to work 
towards ultimately, sometime into the future the fact that the 
Criminal Code may be changed by the federal government 
allowing First Nations jurisdiction on reserves in this issue. 
 
As we all know, First Nations are working towards 
self-government. Is that member suggesting that that should not 
be allowed to happen either? 
 
Ms. Bakken: —Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. Chair, to the minister, 
again there has been no answer to my question. Mr. Minister, 
the whole issue that we are talking about tonight is 
accountability. 
 
Over the supper hour, I happened to see part of a program on 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) TV. And the whole 
issue around the program was the lack of accountability of 
dollars that are flowing to First Nations, and the grassroots 
people having access to them or even having answers to how 
they are spent. 
 
And what has happened in this agreement is now that you are 
telling the people of Saskatchewan is that the government that 
. . . Mr. Chair, the minister has indicated that they have, the 
government has signed a 25-year agreement and, first of all, the 
minister indicated that the new Act that we are speaking about 
tonight, Bill 31 — amendment to the Act, Bill 31 — is to 
expediate the appeal process. 
 
(21:00) 
 
And now you are, Mr. Minister, you have indicated that this is 
sometime off in the future and that the whole details are 
unknown and that the people of Saskatchewan are just supposed 
to say, whatever happens, happens. 
 
And the more I hear the minister’s answers, Mr. Chair, it leads 
me to believe that when Perry Bellegarde, the chief of the FSIN 
said the 25-year agreement and the full jurisdiction clause in it 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

is a jewel in their crown, I’m afraid that he was probably right. 
Because the minister is unable to clarify whether there will be 
any dollars that will flow, once full jurisdiction is achieved, 
whether there will be any gaming dollars flow to the General 
Revenue Fund and be used for all people in Saskatchewan. And 
the minister has failed to answer that. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would like you now to explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan why it is necessary to have two bodies, 
two regulating bodies in the province when, as it stands today, 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming are the regulatory body. 
Why are we going to duplicate this, and what are the cost 
implications as we go forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, our agreement with 
First Nations is an indication that we want to get them 
significantly involved in order that they may participate. We’re 
being proactive in our efforts to meet what down the road may 
come to pass. 
 
Still, I’m completely baffled here, Mr. Chairman, by that 
member’s continuous attack on the integrity of First Nations 
people. She, by asking her questions, and I hope she continues 
to ask them because — in that fashion — because it underlines 
the negative, the very negative aspect that that Saskatchewan 
Party, that member has towards First Nation; no trust, don’t 
trust them any more. We can’t; look what happened. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have already come a long way. We have an 
agreement with our First Nations and I just want to quote from 
Hansard on May 30, 2003. I’m very, very appreciative of 
comments from the Opposition House Leader when he said, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote: 
 

. . . that’s a recognition of the need for long-term stability, 
just as signing a long-term agreement with FSIN to provide 
on-reserve gaming, that’s a recognition, Mr. Speaker, of 
long-term stability in the province, of the economy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if that member is individually on the 
attack of First Nations but it seems to be that way regardless of 
the efforts we make to try and explain very specifically about 
being open, transparent. 
 
And I again offer, if there’s some confusion about the way that I 
answer questions, and perhaps I’m answering the questions in a 
way that’s confusing to people, and if that’s the case I’ll be 
more than happy, and it will be on the record — I will invite 
someone to come to the meeting with a recorder and record the 
proceedings of our meetings — because I want to very 
definitely make sure that my responses and our efforts in 
showing our confidence in working together with First Nations 
for the betterment of their future and all people in this province 
is successful. 
 
You don’t just shut people out without affording some 
opportunity to work together to make things happen that are 
good for all the people in this province — as I said before, not 
just First Nations, not for Aboriginal people, non-Aboriginal 
people, Métis, but for everybody, Mr. Chairman. This is a 
collective province. This is a caring province that cares for all 
its peoples. 
 

We’re looking for the long-term stability and future of this great 
province of ours. Mr. Chairman, in order to be able to do that 
we have to be all-inclusive. But I’m a little concerned about 
where that member’s coming from. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, well the minister is concerned 
about myself and the Saskatchewan Party and where we are 
coming from. Well I would like to clarify it for him. 
 
Mr. Chair, the people of Saskatchewan, and especially First 
Nations people, are very concerned about the actions that have 
taken place in the last few years within gaming in 
Saskatchewan, whether it be First Nations or otherwise, and 
they are asking for openness and accountability. 
 
Tonight I’ve asked the minister several questions. Two of the 
main questions that I’ve asked and have not been given a 
complete answer to are: what does full jurisdiction mean as far 
as the Government of Saskatchewan is concerned; and what 
will the dollars be that will flow to the General Revenue Fund 
should the FSIN receive full jurisdiction. And again, as usual 
we receive no answers. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I agree with the minister that this is one 
province, we are one people, we are all from Saskatchewan and 
we should be working together, not dividing; not having one 
body over here to look after Saskatchewan Indian gaming and 
another body over here to look after Saskatchewan gaming. 
Why can we not work together with one common goal? And, 
Mr. Chair, the main concern amongst First Nations people in 
this province is the lack of accountability for the expenditures 
that take place in casinos in Saskatchewan as well as where the 
dollars that are generated go to after they are generated. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, the only way that Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming, that SIGA has any authority to have gaming in this 
province is with the blessing of the province because the 
province is the only jurisdiction that can have gaming in the 
province. And they are given the authority to do so by the 
province. And the only thing that they can run in the casinos 
legally are table games. The slot machines are owned by the 
people of Saskatchewan and the profits from the slot machines 
are to go to the people of Saskatchewan. But SIGA is allowed 
to charge back the expenses that they incur to operate the slot 
machines. 
 
Well just so the people of Saskatchewan know, there is no 
profit shown from SIGA’s table games or from their food and 
beverages or from their gift shops. They show a negative 
balance. And so they are charging the losses against the slot 
machines. So the only profit that they are making is on the slot 
machines which are given to them by leave from the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And yet the minister has indicated tonight that if SIGA receives 
full jurisdiction . . . or FSIN receives full jurisdiction for 
on-reserve gaming that he doesn’t know if any of that revenue 
will ever come back to the General Revenue Fund; whether the 
people of Saskatchewan as a whole will have access to any of 
those profits. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, at this time I would like to ask the minister 
if the Ernst & Young report, which was commissioned 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

 

internally following the Dutch Lerat scandal of 2000, was ever 
made public. And if it has been, could he table it tonight or 
make it available to myself? And if it has not, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not certain what . . . 
how this relates to the Bill that we have before the committee. I 
really don’t. I’m at a bit of a loss. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, it relates directly to the Bill because 
the minister has indicated that they are making great strides 
towards meeting the recommendations of the Provincial 
Auditor, that he can justify to the people of this province that 
they could . . . why they could go ahead and sign a new 25-year 
agreement. He’s indicated that it’s fine for them to be not only 
negotiating with the federal government but also taking 
taxpayers’ dollars to make possible full jurisdiction for the 
FSIN. 
 
And I would like to know, if that is the case, then will he table 
the Ernst & Young internal audit to show the people of 
Saskatchewan that indeed the problems lay outside of 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority? And the people 
of Saskatchewan paid for this report. They have a right to know 
what is in it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the freedom of information Act 
indicates that those reports that were carried out, that were 
confidential, are not to be released publicly. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, if Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority has nothing to hide from the Ernst & Young 
report and the findings that took place following the Dutch 
Lerat scandal of 2000, why will the minister not release his 
report? Why should the people of Saskatchewan have to go 
through freedom of information? And I believe, as the minister 
has just indicated, even if they did do that it would not be 
available. I think it is time for this government to come clean on 
this and to show once and for all to the people of Saskatchewan 
what part they played, if any, in this scandal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the Provincial Auditor has 
looked through that report and has reported on it. And I trust 
and I believe the Provincial Auditor. I’m not so sure about the 
member opposite. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, I take exception to that. The 
Provincial Auditor is the one that brought forth these issues in 
the first place. It is the Provincial Auditor that continues to 
indicate that the recommendations have not been met from the 
year 2000. He also indicated in his report in the fall of 2002 that 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming still is allowing SIGA to 
misspend public funds. There are also problems within SIGA as 
to who has signing authority on cheques, how they are spending 
money on publicity, and the list goes on. 
 
And so for the minister to indicate that I do not have respect for 
the Provincial Auditor, I think that we need to re-look at this 
whole issue. 
 
I’m asking once again, if this Government of Saskatchewan has 
nothing to hide as far as Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority is concerned, to do with the whole issue around SIGA 
and the Dutch Lerat scandal, will they table the Ernst & Young 

report so all people of Saskatchewan can see it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, under the freedom of 
information Act we are legally bound not to release it. And 
again that member totally does not understand the processes. 
And once again, I offer the opportunity, with someone to record 
proceedings, to make all these explanations that I’ve made in 
this House. And I’ll continue to make, I offer that opportunity 
to sit down with officials because it seems that my responses 
are not being understood. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, the minister’s responses are not 
understood because there are no responses to the question. The 
question about the Ernst & Young report is, would the minister 
table it? And if he will not, it is obvious that this government is 
hiding the facts of what really went on to do with the whole 
scandal around Dutch Lerat and SIGA. And it’s very clear by 
the Justice department’s decision not to lay charges because 
everyone knew what was going on. 
 
Well I guess it is clear tonight by the minister’s answers that 
everyone that knew included Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
and the Government of Saskatchewan of the day because he 
refuses to put the Ernst & Young report on the table for all 
people in Saskatchewan to see. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the minister 
what, if anything, full jurisdiction implicates as far as the 
Saskatoon casino issue. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to once again, 
slower perhaps this time, under the freedom of information Act, 
we cannot release that report, legally. Of course I know that 
member is not aware of what legal processes perhaps mean 
when it applies to freedom of information Act. 
 
The Provincial Auditor, Mr. Chairman, has verified that his 
report captures everything of substance in the Ernst & Young 
report, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And finally, the jurisdiction issue relative to the Saskatoon 
casino is totally unrelated. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, if the minister chose to put the 
Ernst & Young report on the table for the people of 
Saskatchewan to see, he could do so. He’s hiding behind . . . 
he’s hiding behind . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, he is 
hiding behind the issue that, we don’t want to put this on the 
table because it’s a conflict. 
 
But the Government of Saskatchewan, if they wanted to clear 
up the accountability issues around the Dutch Lerat scandal, 
would gladly lay the Ernst & Young report on the table for all 
to see. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe . . . or, Mr. Chair, the whole issue 
around the Saskatoon casino is relevant. The 25-year agreement 
is working towards full jurisdiction for on-reserve land. And the 
FSIN is attempting to open a casino in Saskatoon or in the area 
and this amendment to the Act, this Bill, is directly related to 
the 25-year agreement and moving forward with an appeal body 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

before we even have Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing in 
place. 
 
And I ask the minister what, if any, implications this has 
towards the Saskatoon casino issue. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Leave to introduce visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to take a moment to 
welcome three visitors up in your gallery here tonight enjoying 
the debate here. And I think it’s appropriate that we give them a 
warm welcome. 
 
So please join us all in welcoming the three guests. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 
sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de 

hasard 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I truly regret that that 
member is not informed. I truly regret that. 
 
The agreement has nothing to do with the Saskatoon casino, 
Mr. Chairman. I want to go back and quote from Hansard, and I 
very much appreciate the recognition from the Opposition 
House Leader. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a recognition of the need for long-term 
stability, just as signing a long-term agreement with FSIN 
to provide on-reserve gaming, that’s a recognition, Mr. 
Speaker, of long-term stability in the province, of the 
economy . . . 
 
The minister of Gaming provided leadership in this. We 
may not necessarily agree with all of his leadership and all 
of the ways it was done, but he did step forward and do it 
. . . 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I believe that this 
does pertain directly to Saskatoon casino because of the issues 
surrounding the Saskatoon casino where there is a plebiscite 
that is going forward. Should the plebiscite be successful and 
FSIN are unable to go forward with their plan of building a 
casino in downtown Saskatoon, does this issue of full 
jurisdiction then give them the authority to go forward and to 
build a casino when and where they choose, as long as it’s on 
reserve land? 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to begin with, with 
all due respect, this Bill has absolutely nothing to do with the 
Saskatoon casino, Mr. Chairman. Any casino to be built 
requires municipal approval. There requires to be market 
studies. There has to be approval given by the community, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again, no answers. Mr. 
Chair, I would like to read into the record a quote from Randy 
Burton of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix from last December, 
December 2002. And I quote, and it’s referring to the 25-year 
gaming agreement and the lack of accountability for gaming in 
Saskatchewan. And the quote: 
 

All of which raises the question: if jurisdiction doesn’t 
mean anything, why is it in the agreement? 
 
From the FSIN’s point of view, the answer is plain. 
 
It wants complete control of casinos on reserve, wherever it 
should choose to put them. 
 
The government’s motivations are less clear, but it’s pretty 
obvious the NDP would like to benefit on both ends of the 
equation. 
 
Facing the growing probability of defeat in the next 
election, one of the NDP’s emerging electoral strategies is 
to court the Native vote at every opportunity. 
 
Anyone looking for proof of the government’s strategy 
need look no further than the debate in the legislature over 
the past few days where (Minister) Osika has equated any 
opposition to a 25-year . . . (gaming) agreement with 
anti-Indian sentiment. 
 
(Minister) Osika’s use of racial . . . (policies) and murky 
definitions constitutes a new low-water mark in the 
government’s handling of the gaming file. 
 
Based on this performance, it’s easy to believe that 
jurisdiction is just another word for giving away the farm. 
 

Mr. Chair, Randy Burton could not have said it better. And the 
whole issue which we have explained over and over again is 
that we must have accountability and the people in this province 
that are most concerned about that are the First Nations people. 
And the Saskatchewan Party has championed on behalf of First 
Nations grassroots people who want accountability from their 
leadership and they want accountability from the Government 
of Saskatchewan and they have failed to receive that. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Chair, the First Nations of this province 
and the people of Saskatchewan are asking, when is enough, 
enough? When is the government going to start demanding 
accountability and quit giving away more and more authority 
when the recommendations of the Provincial Auditor have not 
been met and there continues to be misuse of public funds? 
 
When are the NDP going to start speaking on behalf of the First 
Nations people in this province and quit playing games with the 
FSIN? 
 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well there is something in that 
commentary, Mr. Chairman, that included things like mistrust, 
misspending, and how can we trust these people. That’s what I 
gather from that little dissertation. And it’s sad, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Financial mismanagement that occurred at SIGA prior to June 
2000 has been well documented. The Provincial Auditor 
identified issues. Problems were documented through an 
independent audit. The Provincial Auditor, Mr. Chairman, 
issued a report making detailed recommendations to address the 
problems at SIGA. 
 
SIGA and SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) 
adopted all of these recommendations and have been working 
together — together, Mr. Chairman — to implement these 
changes. We’ve adopted . . . SIGA adopted a new board 
composition structure, Mr. Chairman, that includes both FSIN 
and provincial government board members. SIGA hired a new 
CEO (chief executive officer) and a chief financial officer. 
SIGA appointed the Provincial Auditor as its external auditor. 
SIGA has developed and implemented a number of key 
governance and accountability policies on a list that I tabled and 
sent over to the member. 
 
SIGA continues, Mr. Chairman, to make progress on 
implementing all of the recommendations of the Provincial 
Auditor. Once again, it’s working to implement all of those 
recommendations and we have made significant progress. 
 
The Casino Operating Agreement, Mr. Chairman, signed by 
SIGA, also clearly sets out that SIGA must continue to meet the 
benchmarks set by the Provincial Auditor. This government, 
Mr. Chairman, has been, has been open and accountable on this 
file. We’re continuing to work with SIGA, our First Nations 
partners, to ensure continued First Nations involvement in a 
well managed and successful casino operations here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, the minister has indicated that the 
government and the people of Saskatchewan and the FSIN must 
work to meet benchmarks, but . . . and that is absolutely correct. 
But what is the penalty for not reaching the benchmarks? 
 
The benchmarks have not been achieved, and since the 2000 
auditor’s report showing the misappropriation of funds, there 
has been further misappropriation of funds. And yet in light of 
all of that, the government has chosen to sign a 25-year 
agreement to allow the FSIN to work towards full jurisdiction, 
not only to allow them to do that to work with them, but also to 
take taxpayers’ dollars and to put it towards that goal. 
 
Mr. Chair, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming and the 
Government of Saskatchewan are the ones that are responsible 
for regulating gaming in this province — not SIGA. The blame 
lies squarely on the shoulders of Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming and the government who have allowed this to go on 
and have chosen to turn a blind eye and to not make those that 
have the authority to run SIGA casinos, have chosen not to 
make them accountable. 
 
And the First Nations people, the grassroots First Nations 
people who depend on the dollars that come from gaming are 
the ones that are being hurt by this government’s lack of 

integrity to go out and make sure that the expenses are 
accounted for and also the expenditures of those gaming dollars 
are accounted for. It is not SIGA’s responsibility. 
 
That’s what this Bill is all about, is working towards giving 
SIGA the right to regulate and also and only allowing Liquor 
and Gaming to appeal. At this time and in the past it has been 
the total responsibility of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
and the Government of Saskatchewan to regulate gaming in this 
province and it is the responsibility therefore of what has gone 
on in the past of Liquor and Gaming and ultimately of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, once again in that 
dissertation there were a couple of comments that were made 
that made outside this House might prove to be a challenge for 
that member. But I do want to say, Mr. Chairman, that SLGA, 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, with all its astute 
and hard-working people and dedicated people are working, 
continue to work with SIGA as it develops and implements all 
its effective accountability mechanisms, Mr. Chairman, and 
we’re working in order that we benefit all the people of this 
province. I take some exception to the attack on some of the 
people that that member has chosen to take. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clauses 19 and 20 agreed to on division. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 
minister and his officials for their participation tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you. I too would like to thank my 
officials. I want to thank the member for the questions. The 
discussions sometimes get somewhat heated, but that’s the 
freedom of democracy and this House for open debate. And I 
want to express appreciation to my officials once again for their 
support. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is Brent Cotter, the deputy minister of 
the department; to his right is John Reid, the executive director 
of policy and operations; Wanda Lamberti, who is executive 
director of finance and administration, is behind Mr. Cotter; 
Keith Comstock, who is the policy manager for the department, 
is as well with us; Jim Engel, the executive director of policy 
and planning . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . there you go, okay; 
and Fiona Cribb is the manager of policy and legislation and 
sits in the second row to my right. 
 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and officials. We did spend some time last day 
speaking about this Bill, and I just have a few more questions, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
At the end of the session on June 12, you indicated that 
individual band members have the ability to contact their 
elected people the same as anyone else in the province has 
access to their elected officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t know if you were available to see a 
documentary tonight on CBC TV which indicated exactly what 
we were speaking about on June 12, which is that members of 
First Nations feel that they have no avenue to go to to request 
information about funds that are available to them, where these 
dollars are actually spent; and if they do try and find out this 
information that they can run into considerable challenges for 
themselves and their families. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Minister, how the changing of the fund to 
a trust will enable First Nations people more access to 
information regarding the dollars that are owed to them, and 
how these dollars are spent, and how they can as individuals 
and communities access these dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I’m told by the officials and the process that’s 
described for me would be very much, I think, an improvement 
over what we had before the trust and before this proposal was 
put in place, in that the trust requires that the beneficiaries 
would report to the bands, who would report to the trustees, 
who in turn report to the government. The information that the 
government has is accessed by the Provincial Auditor to 
determine the appropriate expenditures. 
 
So I think what we have here is very much a process that has 
addressed a lot of concerns that you may have. I would want to 
say that looking on this I think the process certainly should give 
us all comfort that beneficiaries will have to report that they’ve 
expended the money in the appropriate fashion, that from the 
bands the right information has to come to the trustees. 
 
I would want to say to the member, I’m told by my officials that 
there were instances just in the last year where funds were 
withheld because the appropriate reporting was not used and the 
trustees, before they would allow funds to be released to . . . in 
these circumstances, had to have the assurance that the money 
was spent for the appropriate purposes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister, and that is 
encouraging to hear. Again, as I indicated on June 12 when I 
was questioning, it’s good to hear that the beneficiaries of the 
funds will have to make an accounting for how they spent the 
dollars. 
 
The question still remains, Mr. Minister, how does the First 
Nations person on-reserve or off-reserve have access to these 
dollars in the first place and then how do they as individuals 
receive an accounting for how the dollars are spent? It’s one 
thing if you are in receipt of the dollars and you have to account 
for how they are spent, and that’s a good thing. But how does 
the First Nations person on-reserve or off-reserve that is not 
receiving these dollars, how do they know what is happening to 

this money? How do they know how they can access some of 
these dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Chairman, we went 
through this the other day, to a degree, although we may spend 
more time on it this evening and that’s certainly appropriate 
from my perspective. 
 
I would want to say that the First Nations have duly elected 
band councils and a duly elected chief who would be the 
recipient of funds from the First Nations trust fund, and who 
under the guidelines of . . . that are set out in the requirements 
for the specific purposes, would then put that money to work in 
their reserve. I would say that elected people on-reserve are 
accountable to the people who elect them. 
 
I would think it’s fair to say that an analogy would be that we, 
as elected provincial officials, are elected by people who trust 
us and who entrust us to appropriately spend provincial money. 
And that would be I think a fair analogy as it relates to First 
Nations governance structure. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister. 
Well I hear what you’re saying, but the fact remains, Mr. 
Minister, that First Nations people on-reserve and off-reserve 
are very concerned about where the dollars are actually going 
from gaming revenue that is supposed to go to them. And they 
fail to receive answers from their elected officials. 
 
And it is no secret that many First Nations people in this 
province are living in poverty. And they want to know why they 
are not receiving any of the benefit from the gaming dollars that 
are generated and that flow to the First Nations. They want to 
know where these dollars are going and why they do not have 
access to them. And I do not . . . I fail to see how the changing 
of the name First Nations Fund to First Nations trust and what 
you are doing within that change is going to benefit the First 
Nations people of this province. 
 
And I would like you to explain to the people of Saskatchewan, 
and especially to First Nations people who are listening, how is 
this change going to make the dollars that are flowing from 
gaming, how are they going to be able to find out what happens 
to them? How are they going to be able to access them as 
individuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think what I would want to 
do is take the member opposite to some of the purposes for 
which the trust money can be expended and the purposes for 
which First Nations are charged with spending these dollars. 
 
I would also want to say, Mr. Chairman, that these funds have 
to be accounted for and there has to be, to the trustees, a 
reporting of how the dollars are spent. I would also want to say 
that the purpose, Mr. Chairman, is not to be putting funds to 
individual band members but rather to initiatives that are good 
for the common goal and the common good on-reserve. 
 
The purposes are economic development, social programs, 
justice initiatives, education, and education facilities. Some of 
them I guess would be more clearly visible to all the band 
members than perhaps others. If it relates to justice initiatives, 
I’m not sure that that might be as transparent in terms of the 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

 

expenditures as would education or an education facility. 
 
It’s easy to see a new school. It’s easy to see youth programs 
that have been developed as it relates to cultural and spiritual 
development which is part of what these initiatives are for. 
 
I think it might be better understood or better, you know, better 
dealt with if we’re looking at an economic development. 
They’re better explained if we’re looking at an economic 
development initiative on a reserve. It may be the purchase, as 
an example, of a manufacturing facility, a small manufacturing 
facility, or shares in a large one. These are the types of 
programs that are funded under the gaming and under the trust 
fund monies. 
 
But I want to say to the member that these were never designed, 
and the program was not designed, that you would take a per 
capita count of First Nations and then divide that money 
equally. That’s not how the program has been designed. It’s 
been designed so that we can further economic and social 
development, so that we can have facilities in the reserves and 
on the reserves from the gaming proceeds that can help to 
support a better lifestyle and a better education for First Nations 
people. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister. Just 
for clarification, you indicated that it’s not on a per capita basis. 
And yet when I asked that very question on June 12, you 
indicated that there would be a base of, say, $10,000 and then 
that the rest of the money was divided up on a per capita basis 
and was paid out accordingly to each band in Saskatchewan. 
Could you just clarify that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I did explain the 
other day that there is a base of $10,000 and the rest is divided, 
and the amount is determined based on per capita as it relates to 
the reserve band members. 
 
But what I want to explain perhaps a little further, when we do 
a per capita funding for municipalities, it doesn’t mean that the 
money is divided amongst the people who live in that 
municipality and a cheque is sent to each individual person. 
What it means is there’s a formula devised that will determine 
how much the global amount of dollars that would be received 
by that municipality. 
 
Similarly, the trust fund and the allocation of trust fund dollars 
would be based on a $10,000 base that we spoke of yesterday, 
and the global amount would be determined based on the 
number of First Nations people who are part of that reserve, 
who live either on or off that reserve. 
 
But it’s never . . . it never was designed, nor was it intended, 
that the money would be split up on a per capita basis and 
everyone would receive a cheque. This is for larger initiatives, 
social and economic development, justice initiatives, 
cultural/spiritual development, but for a larger, you know, a 
larger expenditure. If it were divided up it may be, you know, it 
may be that there wouldn’t be the kinds of capital available to 
do the larger things that I believe the First Nations people are 
looking for. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, for 

that clarification. So you’ve indicated that individuals would 
not receive a percentage of it and that’s fair. That is the way I 
understood it. I just wanted to clarify that. 
 
So what is the criteria that you must meet in order to apply? If 
you cannot apply as an individual, who can apply? What 
regulation do they have to meet in order to be able to apply for 
funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 
member that the process is not one where applications are 
received. I think it’s more a matter of communities generating 
ideas and generating thoughts similar to what happens in 
off-reserve communities around this province. People in my 
community determined that they felt there was a need in Prince 
Albert for a cultural centre, for a performing arts centre. 
 
And that idea grew into a group of people who started working 
with local politicians to see if we could work at finding some 
funds to capitalize the project. So basically it started as a 
thought; it started as an idea in our community and it became a 
reality based on that. I mean it’s part of what I think 
communities do. 
 
There may be a community that would feel some kind of a 
recreational facility — a skating rink, perhaps a curling rink — 
might be an appropriate expenditure. And what people do is 
they work together to build on that idea, to gain community 
support for that idea, and that would be the process that I would 
assume would be as appropriate on First Nations as off First 
Nations kinds of developments. 
 
Communities are strong, strong entities, and they can drive 
ideas and they can drive thoughts. And it’s rarely that one 
person can put together a thought or a train of thought or an 
idea without the support of the people who live around him or 
her. And these I would assume would be very much based on 
what the First Nations communities would require in order to 
enhance economic and social development in their 
communities. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. If I 
understand you correct then, you are indicating that the dollars 
received by a reserve — a band — are similar or are handled 
the same as dollars that flow to a municipality, or to either an 
RM (rural municipality) or a urban municipality, and that 
applications are not submitted or approved. 
 
You’re indicating that the decisions are made the same as a 
council in the city of Weyburn, or the city of Regina, or the RM 
of Brokenshell, or whatever, makes a decision. They go forward 
with the project, they pay the expenses to see the project 
through to completion. And am I correct? Is that how these 
funds are handled or are there applications that are made for 
these dollars, the dollars flow in a block to that group, and then 
they pay the bills? I’d like a clarification on this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, as I said before it’s a formula funding based on per 
capita, and it could be that a First Nations governance structure, 
a band and the council, could choose to have applications put 
forward. They could choose to do that. 
 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

They could choose to do it by knowledge of the community. It 
could be that there would be a specific proposal crafted — 
drafted and put to the council and the chief — but that would be 
their decision in terms of their process. They would be the ones 
to choose. I think that’s a responsible approach to take. 
 
They have elected leadership on First Nations across this 
province and they would choose a process that would work I 
think best in their community, whatever that might be. It may 
be a written proposal; it might be a verbal proposal. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So, Mr. Chair, to the minister, then there are 
actual applications that people make for these funds? I’m trying 
to clarify whether the elected officials of each individual band 
determine what the dollars are going to be spent on; they pay 
the invoices; they have total control over the finances. Or can an 
individual, a company, or a group come to the band and indicate 
that they have an idea and they are awarded, say, $50,000 in a 
lump sum, and then they go out and spend that money and after 
the expenditure then they give accounting for it? Which is it, or 
is it a mix of both? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, I mean, I think it’s fair to say 
that the process of putting, I guess, an initiative together would 
be determined by the band council, by the chief and the council. 
Then they would look at the criteria that you and I have 
discussed — socio-economic development, justice, education. 
 
But under this criteria those dollars would have to be expended. 
After those dollars are expended, the band and the people in 
that community have to report back to the trust to ensure that 
the expenditures were under these categories, these purposes 
that were set out to ensure that we can have gaming revenues 
support those communities in a positive way. 
 
They will determine what the process would be and I think it’s 
pretty clear that the different reserves, different First Nations 
may work in different ways, just as different communities 
off-reserve will work in different ways. 
 
But what is important is that they have to fit the criteria that we 
outlined for you here tonight and earlier on last week and that 
there is a reporting mechanism to ensure that the dollars are 
spent appropriately under those guidelines. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister. 
Well under municipal government they receive dollars from the 
provincial government and through other sources, through 
taxation. And they are accountable to their ratepayers and once 
a year they must file a statement of the dollars that they have 
received and how they are expended and that is available to all 
of their ratepayers within their jurisdiction. 
 
This is the whole issue around which First Nations people are 
concerned is because they are not receiving an accounting of 
how the dollars that flow to the individual reserves are spent. 
That is what they are asking for, is they want to know how the 
gaming dollars are spent; they want answers. 
 
I would like to know how the change from a fund to a trust is 
going to make that a reality. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chair, let me just, let me 

go through this and explain it this way. The trustees require that 
each beneficiary provide certain reports to them that outline 
how the money that they received was spent. In turn the trustees 
must ensure that they provide each beneficiary with certain 
reports, and that would include annual reports, audited financial 
statements. 
 
The annual reports and audited financial statements of the trust 
can be requested by others directly through the trustees. The 
reports that the beneficiaries provide to the trustees will also be 
accessible to the provincial government. This information 
would be available to the general public through the province, 
as permitted by The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act. 
 
As we previously stated, the province is comfortable that the 
money that will be received and the necessary documentation to 
show how the money is spent under the more stringent 
reporting provisions be done. So that’s the process and that’s 
how the information could be received. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister. So 
if we take an individual reserve and say they received, say 
$300,000 — I have no idea what an individual reserve would 
receive — but say they receive $300,000. Could each and every 
individual on that reserve, by asking, receive a full accounting 
of how each one of those dollars were spent, and by whom and 
for what purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Annual reports and audited 
financial statements of the trust can be requested by others 
directly through the trustees. So they are available through the 
trustees. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister. So 
the trustees have to release these, this information, or is it going 
to be accessible as in municipal government where it is 
mandatory that the information be given to the ratepayers, 
which is no different than the First Nations people on-reserve? 
These dollars are allocated to them and they should have an 
accounting. Is that going to take place, is my question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And the answer is what I just 
explained to you. The annual reports and audited financial 
statements of the trust can be requested directly through the 
trustees. That’s the process. The beneficiaries report to the 
trustees who will put the information forward. 
 
It should be noted as well that the Provincial Auditor has access 
to the information, the same information that comes to the 
provincial government, so clearly there is access to the 
information through the trustees. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister. 
Well I guess I don’t see how there’s going to be improved 
accountability because it is no different that what is happening 
today, is where First Nations people are asking for 
accountability of their leadership, and they are not receiving 
answers. And they want to know where these dollars are going. 
They want to know how they’re being spent because many of 
them have failed to see how they and their communities have 
benefited. They are living in poverty, in very despicable 
circumstances, and they are wanting to know why there are 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

 

millions of dollars in gaming revenue which are to flow to First 
Nations, and they do not see the benefit of it, nor do they get an 
answer to how these dollars are spent. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, at this time, I have no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I 
report the Bill without amendment — and I will — I would like 
to thank the member opposite for her questions. I would also 
like to thank my officials for their work and their diligence on 
putting these amendments to what I believe to be a very good 
arrangement for First Nations people in our province. And with 
that, Mr. Chairman, I move we report the Bill without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 
minister and his officials for their participation tonight. Thank 
you. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
11 now be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
36 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
37 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
38 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
31 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 35 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:08. 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1710 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 34 —The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1695 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1695 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1696 
 Bill No. 11 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1697 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1697 
 Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1698 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1698 
 Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1701 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1701 
 Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1702 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1702 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1702 
 Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/ 
 Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1704 
 Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1711 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1712 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 34 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
 Bill No. 11 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
 Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
 Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
 Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
 Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/ 
 Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1715 
 Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1715 
 
 
 


