















































Hansard: June 27, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2005 
 June 27, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to stand once again today to present petitions on behalf 
of the good citizens of Saskatchewan. And this petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
No. 47 South in order to avoid any serious injury and 
property damage. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Estevan and also Langbank and Bienfait. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to present a petition on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that . . . may be 
pleased to cause the government to repair Highway 23 in 
order to address safety concerns and to facilitate economic 
growth in Porcupine Plain and surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures come from Porcupine Plain, 
Somme, Nipawin, Carragana, Wadena, and even the fine 
community of Invermay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to improve Highway 23, signed by citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 23 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in Porcupine Plain and 
surrounding areas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are primarily from 
Porcupine Plain and Hudson Bay, and I am pleased to present 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
again today to rise on behalf of people in my constituency who 
want the government to recognize the need to fix Highway No. 
23. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 23 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in Porcupine Plain and 
surrounding areas. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Porcupine Plain, 
Lintlaw, Carragana, and Chelan. I thank you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to be able to hear these petitions. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
signed by Saskatchewan people who are concerned that 
deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry is 
causing electrical rates to increase dramatically in other 
jurisdictions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by people from 
Raymore, Lanigan, Colonsay, Wadena, and Ituna. 
 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
issue of problematic and difficult roads just will not go away. 
So this morning I present a petition on behalf of individuals 
who are concerned about roads in the Porcupine Plain area. The 
prayer reads as . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order please, members. I would ask members if they want to do 
a little visiting, perhaps they could do so behind either bar and 
let the proceedings in this Assembly take place. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This reminds me of 
my days in radio. You get to take a second run at it after you 
blew it the first time. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and 
surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this has been signed by the good citizens of 
Porcupine Plain. 
 
I so present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition, actually a large number of petitions, signed by 
individuals concerned with the crassness and carelessness of 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

this NDP (New Democratic Party) government with regard to 
the lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Moose Jaw, Regina, Marquis, Caronport, 
Briercrest, Saskatoon, Caron, Mortlach, and many other 
jurisdictions within this province and from outside of it. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are 
many pages to my petition as well. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from my constituency, 
namely Estevan, Lampman, and Bienfait. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
here on the issue of Highway 43. It’s of concern to these folks 
as they drive around the Southwest to check out the prairie and 
some of our forest fringes. They like to drive on safe roads, Mr. 
Speaker. And the prayer of this petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the 
communities of Glenbain, Red Deer, the city of Swift Current, 
Mr. Speaker — my constituency — as well as the town of 
Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition. In fact I have a number of petitions that I 
will submit today from people who are extremely concerned 
about the condition of Highway 43. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the number of petitions here are signed by 
citizens from all over southern Saskatchewan, from the forest 
fringe area, and from as far away as Germany. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
rise again in the House today to present a petition regarding 
health care and the deplorable condition in west central 
Saskatchewan, the long waiting list. The prayer, Mr. Speaker, 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and 
to ensure the current specialty services are sustained to 
better serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks from Kindersley, 
Saskatchewan; Eston, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens basically from all over North America that are 
appalled at the roads leading to Harbour Golf Course. 
 
Wherefore at the Harbour Golf Course we depend on tourism as 
our livelihood . . . As you can see by this petition there are a lot 
of people complaining about our roads, especially the one 
south. Some have said they won’t come back because of them. 
A lot more would be out if they were better. 
 
Signed by citizens from Biggar and Saskatoon; Calgary, 
Alberta; Regina, Elbow, Central Butte, Moose Jaw, Eston, 
Rolling Hills, Alberta; Elstow, Shoal Lake, Marquis, 
Shaunavon, St. Walburg, Loreburn, Calgary, even one from 
Scotland, Red Deer, Edmonton, St. Julien, Wood Mountain, 
Strongfield, Prince Albert, Delisle, Glenboro, Manitoba; Pense, 
Maple Creek, Eston, Spiritwood, Winnipeg, Blaine Lake, 
Riverhurst, Phoenix, Arizona; Swift Current, Eatonia, Toronto. 
 
I so present. Numerous other places. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the 2003 premium increases to 
crop insurance rates for farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

 

Signed by the citizens from Biggar and Perdue. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition for the citizens that are concerned on 
the condition of Highway 14. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair the highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by people from Wilkie, Tramping 
Lake, Saskatoon, Scott, and a number of other communities in 
west central. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
concerned with the water level in the Qu’Appelle Valley lakes. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to its normal level and 
end the economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has 
caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Cupar, Southey, Dysart, Pasqua Lake, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, and Lebret. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the government’s 
handling of the premiums, the increase to farmers. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Shell Lake 
and Saskatoon. 
 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 18, 21, 35, 41, 100, 114, 120, 124, and 140. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all it gives 
me great pleasure to introduce, on this historic occasion, Mr. 
David and Grant Karwacki who are sitting in the visitors’ 
gallery for the last time this morning. This will be their last 
time. They’ve viewed the proceedings here a number of times 
from the visitors’ gallery. This will be their last time in the 
visitors’ gallery as we prepare to welcome them. 
 
Another person who is also with us this morning as a visitor but 
not for long, Mr. Allan Kerpan, and I certainly want to offer my 
welcome and personal congratulations to Mr. Kerpan as he 
takes his seat in this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too would 
point out to all members of the Assembly that we have a guest, 
Allan Kerpan, sitting behind the bar. We want to welcome 
Allan Kerpan back to public life. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Allan Kerpan served as Member of Parliament in two separate 
federal constituencies — the riding of Moose Jaw-Lake Centre, 
at the time when I was a Member of Parliament. He 
subsequently served the constituency of Saskatoon Blackstrap. 
And he’s received support and platitudes and congratulations 
and support from many people throughout Canada as diverse as 
the Canadian Police Association and the former premier of 
Saskatchewan, Roy Romanow. 
 
But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, he has been affirmed by the 
people of Carrot River Valley who overwhelmingly sent Allan 
Kerpan to represent the Saskatchewan Party in this Legislative 
Assembly. So I invite all members to extend a warm welcome 
to Allan Kerpan, MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), 
for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I too want to join my colleagues in welcoming Allan 
Kerpan to the legislature. I’m very much looking forward to 
taking that . . . seeing him taking his place on the other side of 
the House. 
 
I expect that we will be looking at Mr. Kerpan and his 
colleagues from that side of the House for a long time to come. 
I know that he will serve his caucus well as a member of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. Welcome, sir. And we look 
forward to the swearing in. 
 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, someone sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, for the 
first time and that is Mr. Marty Wenzell of San Francisco, who 
I had the pleasure of meeting with earlier this morning. And Mr. 
Wenzell is associate partner of Goodby, Silverstein & Partners, 
the advertising agency of the Oakland A’s baseball team.  
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And as members will be aware, Mr. 
Wenzell’s agency designed an ad campaign for Oakland’s 
subway and bus system encouraging folks who weren’t fans of 
the A’s to move to Saskatchewan. It was a fun campaign and no 
one took any offence to it. In fact we counterattacked by taping 
our own message from the Premier and some little leaguers and 
sending it to the A’s where it has been played a number of times 
on the coliseum’s giant screen. 
 
The Phoenix Group and local tourism businesses have brought 
Mr. Wenzell to Regina to sample Saskatchewan’s wide open 
hospitality, to visit a province that’s also baseball country, and 
to take in tomorrow’s Roughrider game. In fact Mr. Wenzell I 
understand was greeted by some of the Roughriders’ fans and, 
in particular, Gainer at the airport yesterday. So that would have 
been quite an experience. Mr. Wenzell will also have a few 
minutes to experience one of Saskatchewan’s other spectator 
sports — question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wenzell is on record as saying his agency 
chose Saskatchewan because the name was long, beautiful, and 
visually interesting — a lot more exciting than boring Detroit or 
Toledo. I trust that in his two days in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Wenzell will see that there is a beautiful, visually interesting, 
and exciting place behind that name — a place that welcomes 
A’s fans and non-A’s fans alike to explore its many tourism 
attractions, a place that loves its baseball and football, a place 
that has a wide open future. So please welcome Mr. Wenzell. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kowalsky: — Members of the Assembly, I too have 
two very special guests in the Speaker’s gallery today. My wife, 
Olesia, is seated there today and with her is our grandson, Sam 
Wilkinson. Sam is on the move as well. He’s on the move from 
grade 2 to grade 3, and as a special celebration Sam has come to 
visit the legislature and he’s come to see the parade, saw Mr. 
Speaker in the parade, and I think he wants to try on the 
Speaker’s tricorne after all is done. 
 
So I want all members to welcome my wife, Olesia, and our 
grandson, Sam Wilkinson, to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Band Settles Land Claim 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the House 
today to say a few words about the land claim agreement signed 

yesterday between Kahkewistahaw First Nation and the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the land claim settlement of 94.6 million is the 
second largest ever signed in Canada. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
isn’t why it is noteworthy. This agreement is noteworthy 
because Kahkewistahaw agreement addresses an historic 
injustice. It provides compensation for financial losses the band 
suffered as a result of the loss of reserve land in 1907 when 
over 33,000 acres of land were illegally taken from the reserve 
so they could be sold to people moving in the area. 
 
And it is noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, because, in the words of 
Chief Louis Taypotat: 
 

For nearly a century the Kahkewistahaw First Nation have 
suffered the consequences of not having this land for our 
use and benefit . . . We can now look forward to a 
promising new future for all.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the band will now be able to invest in economic 
development and job creation. Some funds have been set aside 
for housing. There are plans to build a school and recreational 
facilities and now, Mr. Speaker, the band will be able to provide 
services and programs that previously would have been 
impossible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members of this Assembly will want 
to join me in congratulating Kahkewistahaw First Nation on 
taking this historic step into their wide open future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Condition of Highway No. 42 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
about the concerns of the residents living along Highway No. 
42. On June 25, Mr. Rick Billett, general manager of the co-op 
in Tugaske, sent me copies of two letters that he sent to the 
Minister of Highways regarding the deplorable condition of 
Highway No. 42. 
 
Mr. Billett has worked hard to raise awareness of this bad 
highway to the government and help individuals and businesses 
who rely heavily on this route. In the first letter Mr. Billett talks 
about the advertising blitz suggesting that the current 
government is building better highways. By referencing 
Highway No. 42, Mr. Billett correctly points out that Highway 
42 is not among those highways the government is bragging 
about in their ad campaign. 
 
However Mr. Billett also points out that there is a significant 
amount of highway improvement being done in the 
constituency of Meadow Lake, one of the few rural ridings the 
current government now holds. 
 
In the second letter the co-op general manager outlines how 
important Highway No. 42 is, an important route for 
individuals, farm businesses, and the growing tourist industry 
along Lake Diefenbaker. Most importantly the highway serves 
as a link between residents and their hospitals, as well as a 
major school bus route. 
 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

 

Further to these concerns Mr. Billett has informed me that he 
would be faxing up to 150 letters of concern about Highway 42 
from area residents to the Minister of Highways this Friday 
morning. I would suggest that the Minister of Highways ensures 
that his fax machine has plenty of paper in it today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Economy 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Day 68, the last day of 
this session. And what has happened in our province over the 
last year where our future is wide open? How has the 
Saskatchewan economy responded? 
 
Here are some facts, Mr. Speaker. Jobs are up 13 months in a 
row, year over year. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please, 
members. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, more good news for Saskatchewan. 
They can’t stand it. 
 
Here are some facts, Mr. Speaker. Jobs are up 13 months in a 
row, year over year; youth employment is at a 10-year high; 
kids are working and staying in Saskatchewan. The Bank of 
Montreal says Saskatchewan will lead the country in growth 
this year. So does the ScotiaBank. The TD (Toronto Dominion) 
Bank and the Royal Bank also predict substantial growth. 
 
Add the word up to each of these items, Mr. Speaker: retail 
sales up; urban housing starts up; value of building permits up; 
department store sales up; natural gas and oil well drilling way 
up; land sales record up; potash sales way up; manufacturing 
sales up. All that’s down is doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This good news just didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
lowered taxes again. We improved the royalty structure in the 
natural resource sector, and we invested in highways and 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we began a very successful Our Future is Wide Open 
campaign, Mr. Speaker. The future of Saskatchewan is wide 
open, Mr. Speaker, for all of those that continue to live here. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kipling Water Treatment Plant Opens 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I wanted to take a moment to congratulate the people 
of Kipling and the surrounding area. 
 
Yesterday I was pleased to join with the mayor and many 
business leaders and people of the community as they officially 
opened their upgraded water treatment plant. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I know the community as well was pleased to have the Minister 
for Intergovernmental Affairs join with them for this special 
opening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years we’ve heard a lot of 

issues that have arisen across our country when it comes to 
water quality. We’ve seen the situation in Walkerton, closer to 
home in North Battleford, and certainly many communities in 
our province have been facing difficulties as they try to deliver 
quality water to their communities and surrounding areas. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, with the official opening of this water 
treatment facility, the community of Kipling will continue to 
provide quality water to their community, to the residents of 
that community, and it will be there for a long time to come. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the mayor and his community 
really have welcomed this facility and welcomed the 
participation of the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to acknowledge the work of 
the Kahkewistahaw First Nation and their chief, Louis 
Taypotat, in the signing of this very historical agreement. And I 
know that they have indicated that they’ve set this money aside 
to work on behalf of the members of their First Nation. 
 
Congratulations to the Kahkewistahaw Band. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health and Social Policy Developments 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today and acknowledge the good news for Saskatchewan 
residents with regard to health care, social services, and 
education during this session. 
 
In recent weeks we’ve witnessed the major expansion in critical 
care services at the Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. 
We’ve increased the funding to the College of Medicine. And 
I’m also happy to report the acquisition of two replacement 
linear accelerators to support cancer services in this province. 
 
But I won’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. The provincial government 
has also invested in the building of new hospitals and health 
care facilities in Moosomin, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Swift Current. 
 
In social services, Mr. Speaker, the largest childcare expansion 
in history is occurring this year with 500 new licensed childcare 
spaces; 1,400 housing units will be added over the next four 
years for an investment of $40 million; and $1.85 million in 
new funding has been allocated to support persons with 
disabilities to move from Social Services to the workforce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in education we have a record spending of $1.2 
billion. And our commitment to K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 
12) includes 10 new community schools and of course 
SchoolPLUS, and our partnership with Lindsay Cyr of FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), a bilateral 
agreement to improve education for all of Saskatchewan 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are on a roll and this is a sign that our 
government is committed to securing a wide open future for all 
of its residents. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

Recognition of Legislative Interns 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to rise to congratulate a group 
of young women and men that have been involved in this 
legislature for the last five months, and that’s our interns, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Our interns were Corinne Barnett, Cameron Baker, Bill Cooper, 
and Lee Weiss. These young people had the opportunity to see 
how the legislature works from the inside by participating on 
both sides of the House — half of their internship on one side, 
half on the other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these young people, in my opinion, have done a very, very 
competent job, a very proficient job, a very professional job, 
Mr. Speaker, in an area that is fraught with some difficulties 
because they have to be very conscious that the information and 
knowledge they have gained on one side is not imparted to the 
other side of the House when they switch. And I believe that 
they have done a very, very excellent job, Mr. Speaker, in doing 
that. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, I think the members themselves 
have done a very good job in not putting the interns in a 
position where that confidentiality could be challenged, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think it shows a maturity not only perhaps of the 
interns, but also, Mr. Speaker, of the members as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to wish the interns well in their future, be 
it to continuation of their studies or as they seek employment. 
Congratulations interns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 

Performance of Opposition 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you’ve 
heard a small sample from my colleagues of the successes of 
this government during this session. Now what about the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker? Not one new idea — not 
one. They’ve welcomed bad news and gave new definition to 
doom and gloom. 
 
In the dictionary, I think their leader’s picture is beside doom, 
and the member from Cannington’s is beside gloom, and the 
member from Swift Current’s picture was whited out. 
 
Their agenda consists solely of a headlong grab for power for 
the sake of their friends and hiding their true plans from the 
public. But slowly, slowly their plans are becoming more 
evident, Mr. Speaker. They will cut taxes for the well-to-do, 
freeze spending on health and education, fire civil servants, 
privatize liquor stores, and sell off the Crowns — not to 
mention cutting $50 million from the department that serves the 
poorest of the poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government makes tough decisions every day. 
They had only one decision to make and they got it all wrong. 
They turned their backs on the democratic decision of 1,200 of 
their own members in Melville-Saltcoats nomination. 

When Grant Schmidt was considered good enough to be the 
Sask Party constituency president, he said Sask Party MLAs 
don’t have enough experience or education and are too easily 
taken in by simplistic right-wing dogma. For speaking the truth, 
he was banished. 
 
Since the Premier took office there have been seven 
by-elections — four for us, three for them. The people will 
decide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Performance of Government 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, well, Mr. Speaker, no one needs to 
wonder why the Premier didn’t call an election this spring. 
Support for the NDP is dropping like a rock and last night we 
saw the results in the Carrot River Valley by-election. 
 
But all over Saskatchewan, people are saying it’s time for a 
change. This NDP government is failing and it’s failing in every 
area. They’re wasting millions of taxpayers’ dollars on foreign 
investments, bad foreign investments. They’re driving 
thousands of people out of Saskatchewan, year after year after 
year. They have the longest waiting list for health care in the 
entire nation, Mr. Speaker, and they can’t balance the budget 
any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — What is worse, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
government has done nothing in the past year to address any of 
these problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Why has this session been such a utter 
failure on the part of the NDP government here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, only the Leader 
of the Opposition could say that things can’t happen in 
Saskatchewan when we just had a report from the Bank of 
Montreal that said Saskatchewan has what — the fastest 
growing economy in Canada; the fastest growing economy in 
Canada. 
 
And the people will see through the doom and gloom and 
hysteria of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. They know that 
when there are 13,000 new jobs in the last year, they know 
when there’s a projection for thousands of new jobs in the next 
year, when oil and gas drilling is up 67 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
when in retail sales we’re leading the nation, when housing 
starts are up very significantly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people know that we’re going in the right 
direction. And when you’re going in the right direction, Mr. 
Speaker, what do you do? You just keep on going. And we’re 
going to keep on going, notwithstanding the negativity of that 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

 

Leader of the Opposition over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of wishful 
thinking on the part of the minister. But let’s look at the facts of 
this past session. It started with the Throne Speech that was so 
bad that the Premier ended up going into his cabinet and 
screaming at his ministers. Mr. Speaker, that’s how it started 
up. 
 
It ended up with an overwhelming . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. I’d 
just ask members to tone it down so we can — order, please — 
so that we can hear the words distinctly. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The session 
started with the Premier screaming at his ministers after a 
terrible Throne Speech. It ended up with a Saskatchewan Party 
overwhelming victory in the Carrot River by-election. 
 
And in between the NDP lurched from disaster to disaster. If it 
wasn’t the $28 million lost at SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company) and the apology from the 
minister for hiding the facts from the people of Saskatchewan, it 
was the $8 million mega bingo loss, Mr. Speaker. It was the $17 
million lost at an insurance company in Ontario. It was $10 
million lost on a cable company in Manitoba. They lost $9 
million in the Bahamas, Mr. Speaker. Where have they been? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why support for the NDP is dropping like a 
stone all across the province of Saskatchewan. That is why this 
session was such a wreck for the NDP. How could they allow 
the last session to become such a disaster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, the Leader 
of the Opposition is all puffed up about his by-election win. But 
the people of the province know that there have been several 
by-elections in the last number of years and the party that won 
their seat in the last general election has won the by-election, 
and it’s not all that noteworthy. 
 
But I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition that he may 
have won a battle in Carrot River but the war is coming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The war is coming. And we’re going to go 
out and we’re going to contrast the record of this government 
and the growing number of jobs, the growing retail sales, the 
growing economy, with the doom and gloom, reward the rich, 
with big tax cuts for the rich strategy the opposition . . . and the 
plan to privatize the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They say the Crown corporations don’t work. We say, ask 
young people who have to buy insurance in Alberta whether 
Crown corporations work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, we 
don’t believe a word that the NDP says any more and neither do 
the people of Saskatchewan because they said they were going 
to make a comeback in the forest belt ridings in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact the NDP invested a lot of political capital in the Carrot 
River Valley constituency and that investment turned out like 
all their other investments, Mr. Speaker — they lost again and 
they lost big time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP can’t balance the 
budget. All their investments are losing money. They have no 
plan for agriculture. They have no plan to fix the health care 
system. They have no plan to grow the province. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier of Saskatchewan and his NDP team are absolutely 
out of steam. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do they realize — has it dawned on them — that 
it’s time for a change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well for the information of the Leader of 
the Opposition who’s so busy listening to his own rhetoric he 
doesn’t have time to listen to the facts, Mr. Speaker, the reality 
is in the last year, what has this government done? Continued 
personal income tax reform, Mr. Speaker; the largest personal 
income tax in the history of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Reformed oil and gas royalties, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Reformed mining royalties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And what do we see? We see the banks 
saying, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan economy will 
outperform their beloved Alberta economy more than 2:1 this 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And then we . . . if we compare it to the 
Leader of the Opposition’s great friend, Gordon Campbell in 
British Columbia, we know that the Saskatchewan economy is 
going to outperform the British Columbia economy three times 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So nothing happening in this 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

Carrot River Valley By-election 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Carrot 
River Valley by-election showed just how desperate the NDP 
has become. Mr. Speaker, they can’t run on their dismal record. 
They have no plan for the future. And so instead they resort to 
launch a dirty personal attack on the Saskatchewan Party 
candidate. 
 
They ran newspaper ads that were nothing but a personal attack 
on Allan Kerpan. And worse than that, they weren’t true. Mr. 
Speaker, this is the lowest kind of gutter politics. 
 
But do you know what, Mr. Speaker? Do you know what? It 
didn’t work. It didn’t work because the people, the voters of 
Carrot River Valley, rejected those personal attacks and they 
rejected the NDP, and they voted for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, is this the kind of dirty gutter politics 
that we can expect from the Premier in the next provincial 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I never thought that I 
would rise to the defence of a new member of the legislature, in 
particular one that’s going to be joining the opposition. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there’s internal attack on 
this new member that we’re about to see. And I want to quote 
from a February 21, 2001 article in which the Government 
House Leader says: 
 

“The Saskatchewan Party has no involvement with Mr. 
Kerpan.” 

 
And then he goes on to say: 
 

As for Mr. Kerpan’s political future in the Saskatchewan 
Party, D’Autremont suggests (and I quote) his attendance at 
the Yorkton meeting (this is a separatist meeting) likely 
didn’t help. 

 
And then he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

While the Saskatchewan Party would never blackball 
someone seeking the nomination, D’Autremont suspects “it 
will be an issue” . . . (and I quote, Mr. Speaker.) 
 

Mr. Speaker, these people have a history. I say to the member, 
the new member being sworn in from Carrot River, you’re into 
a nomination on July 3 which is only a few days from now. You 
better be careful of the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. He’s 
got a history of nailing his own people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have got a great 
burden to carry into the next provincial election, but the greatest 
burden they have to carry is that member from Prince Albert 
and his record. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, this is how desperate the NDP have 
become. They can’t talk about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, this is how desperate the NDP have 
become. They can’t talk about their record because it is a 
disaster. They cannot talk about their plan for the future, 
because they have none. So instead, they run ads that are 
nothing but dirty personal attacks on the Saskatchewan Party 
candidate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it did not work in Carrot River Valley and 
it’s not going to work in the next provincial election. But I say 
to the Premier and his crew, go ahead if you must. The Premier 
and the NDP can go ahead and they can choose to spend the 
next election in the gutter if they wish. Because the 
Saskatchewan Party will be on the doorstep of voters, telling 
people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order, please. Order. I ask the member for Humboldt to 
go directly to her question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to see the same result as we did last night. We’re going to 
see it in Saskatoon. We’re going to see it in Regina. We’re 
going to see it in Prince Albert and Moose Jaw and Meadow 
Lake and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this the kind of gutter campaign that we can 
expect once again in the next provincial election from the 
Premier and the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m appalled. I’m 
absolutely appalled. I want to say to the member opposite that 
I’ve never seen such a thin skin anywhere. The Saskatchewan 
Party can dish it out, but you know what, Mr. Speaker? They 
can’t take it. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, a former premier of this province once 
said, you never say whoa in a mudhole. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that opposition has been mired in a mudhole for a 
long, long time — misinformation, half information, Mr. 
Speaker. I say to them, whoa. 
 
You know, there’s a question, there’s a question that needs to 
be asked here, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell you, the New 
Democratic Party has won 11 out of the last 15 elections. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has won zero. And I want to 
tell you that after the next election their record will be 
consistent because they will still have won zero. They’ll be 
sitting over there still mired in the Grant Devine mudhole, 
which is nothing more or nothing less than what they are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine 
Spongiform Encephalopathy 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order, members. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I knew the NDP 
had an appreciation for me; I just didn’t know how much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, last night the international 
panel of scientists reviewing the CFIA’s (Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency) investigation into the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) case released their written report. 
 
As expected, the scientists made several recommendations 
including that Canada ban all animal tissues that can host BSE 
prions from the food chain, and they want that implemented 
immediately. Mr. Speaker, they also recommended a review of 
the animal feed restrictions, stronger tracking and tracing 
systems for livestock, and increased disease testing and 
surveillance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister was participating in a conference call 
with the federal minister and his provincial counterparts this 
morning. Would he fill the Assembly in as to what happened 
this morning, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and the 
Minister of Agriculture are still on the conference call. We 
began the call about 25 minutes after 10, and we anticipate that 
that call will go for at least another 40 minutes before it’s 
completed. 
 
What the minister had not gotten into yet when we started the 
conversation prior to the House beginning is the fact that there 
are five recommendations, as the member points out. It appears 
as though there will not be a mandated requirement, as the 
committee puts it, to implement all five of the conditions that 
have been set out by the committee. 
 
What in fact the committee has done is recommended a number 
of areas of which both Canada and the US (United States) 
should proceed down. And it’s my view — and I expect will be 
the view of the Minister of Agriculture federally — that we 
should proceed with these changes collectively, not only as an 
individual country of Canada, but collectively we should move 
together on all of the five recommendations. Now this will 
require a variety of different changes. It will require policy 
changes and investment, but it would be my view that this 
would be done collectively with the US. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
summer once this legislature adjourns we’re going to be a gap 
and we aren’t sure about the representation coming from the 
government members on that side. 

Will the government do the right thing and convene the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture to work on these changes 
beginning next week, as members of the Saskatchewan Party 
represent just about every farmer in this province, Mr. Speaker? 
Will they do the right thing and convene the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture through July? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ve said in this Assembly a couple of days 
ago, I said to the media, we’ve said publicly, Mr. Speaker, that 
this government through its association with all of the other 
provinces will continue to work on this file throughout the 
summer. The industry will be connected as we will take advice 
from the industry in moving ahead with this piece. The federal 
government, the provincial government, the industry, and 
through our association with the national governments in the 
US, and the states, will be continuing to work through the entire 
summer. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, that on other occasions I’ve also said 
and will say again today that in the time that I’ve been in this 
Assembly as the Minister of Agriculture, I have not yet received 
one iota or one snippet of paper from the opposition opposite on 
agricultural policy — not one. And it is a political, it is a 
political, it is a political composition of the, of the standing 
committee and I don’t see anything coming from over there, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t expect anything to come from over there. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has lapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Beef Industry 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the 
member for Thunder Creek suggested that the government 
should use its influence as a major shareholder in Centennial 
Foods to support our Canadian beef industry. The Minister of 
Agriculture called that a ridiculous idea and refused to talk to 
Centennial about using more Canadian beef. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all we are saying is, wherever possible companies 
should use more Canadian beef and Canadians should buy more 
Canadian beef. But for some reason the NDP is against this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP think using more Canadian 
beef is a ridiculous idea? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the question from the 
member yesterday — from Thunder Creek — was whether or 
not the government would intervene, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite first of all, first of all, Mr. 
Speaker, there wouldn’t be a Centennial Foods in Saskatchewan 
if it were for the Saskatchewan Party because they don’t believe 
in any investment, Mr. Speaker, at all. And so there wouldn’t be 
a Centennial in Saskatchewan to start with because they 
wouldn’t put any public money into Centennial. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it is idiotic, if I might put it that way, 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is idiotic for the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we’re on a . . . we’re 
currently on a trade discussion right now with the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, talking about a relationship that’s 
integrated. And you have the member from Thunder Creek and 
today the member from Weyburn stand in her place and say 
what we should be doing is we should be placing a ban in the 
movement of beef from the US (United States) into Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s exactly what the member said yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
Should business be doing business in Canada today on their 
own and importing beef and associating Canadian product, Mr. 
Speaker? And that the answer is absolutely yes and they’re 
doing it and we support it from that perspective. 
 
But will this government intervene . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, there are some companies in 
Canada that think using Canadian beef is a pretty good idea. 
 
In the past few days I have been in contact with the head office 
of Dairy Queen Canada. This morning Jean Champagne, the 
executive vice-president of Dairy Queen Canada, informed me 
that he agreed with our suggestion and Dairy Queen Canada 
will be switching to 100 per cent Canadian beef. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — This is great news, Mr. Speaker. That means 
that they will be directing their suppliers, which includes 
Centennial Foods, to start producing 100 per cent Canadian 
beef burgers for every Dairy Queen in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous show of support for the 
Canadian cattle industry, and the Saskatchewan Party was able 
to accomplish this with just a few phone calls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP refusing to support our Canadian 
cattle industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government on this 
side of the House is refusing to support the beef industry and 
that’s why we just finished negotiating an agreement for 
Canada of which this province will be committing its $30 
million to that industry, Mr. Speaker. That’s how we’re not 
showing our support, Mr. Speaker. That’s why, on this side of 
the House last year, Mr. Speaker, we put $25 million into a herd 
retention program so that in Saskatchewan we’d have a 
continued herd program for the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why we implemented a range of programs and crop 
insurance, Mr. Speaker, to be able to grow the beef industry in 
Saskatchewan for the future, because we’re not interested, Mr. 

Speaker; that’s why we did it. And not one speck of information 
from that side of the House to support the agriculture policy, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today the member stands up and says look at what we’ve 
done in terms of beef product in Saskatchewan. Centennial 
Meats, Mr. Speaker, is making that change on their own. 
They’re bringing in additional Canadian beef, integrating it into 
their policy, and it will help the member from Weyburn begin 
her job in the Dairy Queen again, Mr. Speaker, when she gets 
defeated in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, according to Jean Champagne of 
Dairy Queen Canada, the Saskatchewan Party was the first to 
raise this idea with them. Dairy Queen thought it was a great 
idea. They wanted to do whatever they could do to be a good 
corporate citizen and we applaud Dairy Queen, and we applaud 
the Dairy Queen operators for doing their part to support the 
Canadian cattle industry. Mr. Speaker, we hope Dairy Queen 
will be the first of many restaurant chains to take this step. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will be writing to 
McDonald’s, Burger King, Wendy’s, A&W, and others to 
encourage them to move to 100 per cent Canadian burgers as 
well. 
 
And we are encouraging all Canadians to support our Canadian 
beef industry by choosing restaurants that use 100 per cent 
Canadian beef. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not about closing the border; this is about 
choosing to support our Canadian cattle industry. Why is the 
minister opposed to supporting our Canadian cattle industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I just went through a whole 
issue of initiatives that this government has put in place in order 
to assist the beef industry, Mr. Speaker. And I can go through 
them again, that litany, Mr. Speaker, if the member would like 
me to repeat them. 
 
And on any of those occasions of which we’ve introduced any 
of those initiatives, Mr. Speaker, we have not had any, any idea 
from the members opposite as to what we should be doing in 
terms of enhancing the beef industry today. 
 
Today the member opposite stands up and says, look at what 
we’ve done with the retail industry in Saskatchewan. We’ve 
written them all a letter and we’re asking them to use Canadian 
beef, Mr. Speaker. They are using Canadian beef, Mr. Speaker; 
they already integrated Canadian beef in their product, Mr. 
Speaker. And they will continue to integrate more Canadian 
beef into their product if in fact they can choose to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But to say, Mr. Speaker, that what this government should do is 
intervene and decide in the marketplace from where the 
commodity should arrive will be a trade action, Mr. Speaker, 
initiated by the US. And we are not about to get into that action, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for Election 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just as this day 
has been an absolute disaster for the NDP, this entire session 
has been a disaster for the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, they have so utterly failed to 
answer our questions. There’s really only one more question to 
ask, and that’s when’s the general election going to occur in the 
province of Saskatchewan? When are Saskatchewan’s voters 
going to have the same opportunity that the Carrot River Valley 
voters had last night, not just to boot an NDP candidate but to 
boot the NDP government out of office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Saskatchewan people want a brighter 
future, Saskatchewan people want hope, and all they get is 
heckling from the NDP. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 
want a plan and all they get is platitudes from the NDP. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan people want a government and all they 
get is a goofy NDP group over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the Premier — the unelected Premier of 
Saskatchewan, the Premier who has never had the courage to go 
to the people of this province — when is he going to do the 
right thing and call a general election so the people of 
Saskatchewan can boot that group out of office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
Leader of the Opposition stands in his place today and he calls 
for an election and there’ll be an election in Saskatchewan in 
due course, Mr. Speaker — absolutely. And the member 
opposite can change his colour and change his spots but at the 
end of the day, Mr. Speaker, there will still be a Conservative 
and Alliance Party in Saskatchewan, and that’s who they 
represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at the end of the day — and at the end of the day, Mr. 
Speaker — when we have a general election in Saskatchewan 
we will find that Saskatchewan people will support us. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the polling, Mr. Speaker, that 
member only had one decision to make, Mr. Speaker — only 
one decision, Mr. Speaker. He had a decision to make around 
the Melville riding, Mr. Speaker, and he blew that, Mr. Speaker, 
he blew that. 
 
Come the next provincial election, Mr. Speaker, we will see on 
this side of the House greater representation, Mr. Speaker, and 
we will find members on that side of the House exactly where 
they are today, Mr. Speaker, because Saskatchewan people 
don’t trust that leader. They don’t trust him and they don’t . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Why is the member for Saskatoon Mount Royal on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Ministerial statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Changes to The Securities Regulations 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity to tell you and the members about recent 
changes to the Saskatchewan Securities Regulations that came 
into effect on June 16. The changes will make it easier for 
small- and medium-sized businesses to raise capital in 
Saskatchewan while continuing to protect investors. Mr. 
Speaker, these changes represent a significant step forward in 
ensuring that our future is wide open for businesses and 
investors in our province. 
 
Under the new rules, companies will be able to raise capital 
without the expense of preparing a prospectus and will have 
access to a larger group of potential investors. There are 
situations where investors either do not need the information set 
out in a prospectus or are able to obtain that information 
themselves through direct discussion with the company. For 
instance, the exemption could apply to distributions to 
sophisticated investors called accredited investors or to family 
members, close personal friends, and close business associates 
of a company’s directors or senior officers. 
 
The new rules also permit the use of an offering memorandum 
in place of a prospectus. An offering memorandum does not 
contain the broad, detailed disclosure found in a prospectus and 
will be much less expensive for businesses to produce. 
 
Our government is strongly supportive of the set of rules that 
have been adopted by the Saskatchewan Financial Services 
Commission. The exemptions, Mr. Speaker, will significantly 
benefit small- and medium-sized businesses and could 
potentially create thousands of jobs. 
 
Similar exemptions in Ontario have been credited with the 
creation of more than 35,000 jobs since 2002 and have added 
approximately $3.5 billion to Ontario’s gross domestic product. 
This is good news for Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 
like to thank the minister for providing a copy of his ministerial 
statement before the House began. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we’ve looked through the province of 
Saskatchewan and heard from people across this province, one 
of their very great concerns is that this province lacks 
investment of funds from outside of this province. We need to 
grow this province and we need to achieve growth by changing 
a number of things. And it’s interesting that the minister stands 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

today and talks about regulation changes. 
 
Every one of us in the opposition is responsible for a critic 
department and we have a great deal of difficulty trying to get a 
clear change to regulations and what kinds of things are done to 
regulations outside of this Assembly. So it’s interesting that the 
minister stands today and has a ministerial statement about 
regulation changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that these regulation 
changes, as we’ve first had the opportunity to see this morning, 
I believe will encourage the province of Saskatchewan to move 
into a new millennium. We have been behind on so many things 
in this province, it’s about time that we’ve started to look 
forward. 
 
The minister has given an example of Ontario, where Ontario 
since 2002 has made this change and we’ve finally seen some 
growth in that area. No question, the province of Saskatchewan, 
if we can make things easier for businesses, if we can attract 
investment and allow investment groups to put together large 
sums of money that will allow small businesses to come to 
Saskatchewan to grow, is of course beneficial to us. Everyone 
realizes that small businesses create 80 per cent of the job 
opportunities across Canada and I’m sure in the province of 
Saskatchewan that figure is no different. 
 
So for government to create the environment, to create the 
climate that allows private businesses, private investment, to 
come into this province and grow this province and succeed in 
our goal as an official opposition — soon to be government — 
of growing this province by 100,000 people in 10 years, we 
applaud that and we support this decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cumberland on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Before orders of the day, I’d like to have leave 
from the members to make a personal statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 
say thank you for the members from . . . all the members of the 
House for giving me leave to make a personal statement. 
 
Today will probably be my last day of sitting in this legislature. 
I’ve had 17 years of tremendous experience. And I did a lot of 
learning, you know, over the years from all members of the 
House in all these times, being in opposition, being in 
government, being in cabinet. But also learning a lot from the 
people of this province right through from northern 
Saskatchewan, my fellow Aboriginal people, and all peoples in 
this great province of ours. 
 
As I look back, Mr. Speaker, and all members, I wanted to say 
— I wanted to go back a little bit on the historical side — and 
say I was a very, very lucky guy. I was raised in a very 
tremendous community of Cumberland House. And as I was 

growing up I was in the fishing and trapping and hunting 
industry. And in many cases, you know, our parents were 
dreaming that one of these days that I could become a teacher. 
You know the hope and dream and the jobs that I saw in the 
community was that I would become a teacher. 
 
Later on I was able to fulfill my dream, although my mother 
died when I was 16. You know she was in the school trustees 
and she did not see that I would later become a teacher in the 
classroom. I taught grades 2, 3, and 4; grade 6 for a couple of 
years. I was teaching at the university by ’71 and then did 
teacher education programs; became a community college 
principal out of Gabriel Dumont Institute. So I had about 19 
years of varied experience which included my Bachelor of 
Education and Master of Education. 
 
And it was quite a unique experience for a young person, a 
young Cree, Métis person, you know, growing up in 
Cumberland House and being exposed as I went through this 
whole experience. And I went through and I was debating as to 
what I should do, you know, after my time in the educational 
scene and . . . but my goal was working in the educational field. 
 
And a lot of people started asking me to enter politics, you 
know, as all of the members in the House have been asked. And 
it took me a whole term to think it over, you know, before I 
finally made a decision, yes, that I was going to run. And I 
finally made my decision in ’86 and I ran, and with the good 
graces of the people of Cumberland constituency, you know, I 
was elected in this House. 
 
I as a member, like all members, combined, you know, a sense 
of awe and, you know, a sense of grandeur coming into this 
House, you know, for the first time. And you had a tremendous 
sense of drive and idealism, you know, mixed with the common 
sense of pragmatism. And you had all these feelings, you know, 
that were with you as you entered the House. 
 
And as I look back into those areas I had very, very tremendous 
experiences. I mean, I was an opposition member. I was lucky 
to be an opposition member. You know, I learned what it was to 
be, in the fine traditions of democracy, what it means to be a 
member of the loyal opposition. We debated the debates of the 
day, whether it was privatization or whether it was this and that 
issue in the North. We debated these issues in grand style and I 
saw a lot of the eloquence by the different members of the 
House on both sides, you know, talking about the issues. 
 
And I looked back and look at those days that were my 
formative days in politics, you know, that gave me, you know, a 
sense of depth on what this institution was about and what 
democracy was about. And as I got elected and became a 
government member it was very, very strategic times in 
histories — whether we were dealing with the Charlottetown 
Accord, you know, when I was a Provincial Secretary, and 
dealing with that aspect at the national scale. 
 
And it was very, very important for me to be not only learning 
about our great province but our great country. You know, we 
were looking at one of the leaders in the world, you know, in 
terms of our own country and our own province. And I was 
very, very proud of that but, like every other politician, I always 
felt we could do better; you know, that we had to make the next 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

 

step and move forward in that regard. 
 
As I look back on some of these challenges on the first time, I 
learned about such things as what a balanced approach was. 
You know, we were in a great big challenge on the financial 
side and we had to deal with a misuse of taxation, debt, and 
spending. And we had to do those types of actions that were 
necessary for the people of this province and that we had to do 
it in a sustainable fashion. And those were the hallmarks of that 
time, you know, when I was looking back on it — balanced 
approaches, sustainability — and those are still reverberating in 
my brain, even though my opposition days were in ’86 to ’91. 
 
And as I look forward to the future, the question that a lot of 
people will ask you as a politician is, well what have you 
succeeded in doing with others as a team, you know, as you 
look in because it’s not only an individualist view that you are 
here in the legislature, you are here a part of committees, part of 
teams, part of cabinets, part of this MLA committees, and the 
caucuses, and part of the government of the whole. 
 
And it was very, very important for me that being a young Cree, 
Métis from the North, I knew that economic development and 
education were key, you know, for our people. We went into 
this situation on tough times and I was proud to say that we had 
moved in, just on the mining sector alone, we went from $20 
million worth of contracts for northern businesses to 200 
million. It’s been 180 to $200 million worth of contracts for 
northern businesses in the past five years. And that to me was a 
tremendous feeling that I had when I knew that that was the big 
challenge. 
 
I’ve always made speeches that economic self-determination for 
Aboriginal people will be key in this century, and I firmly and 
still strongly believe that. When I looked at that issue, 
combined with it, we needed an approach on education. When I 
was a person growing up in the North: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
In my way of thinking when I was speaking in Cree, my first 
senses of love, my first senses of knowledge — the love of 
knowledge — was mixed in into my brain and into my actions 
during that period in time. And in that sense as I was growing 
up, it gave me the strength, you know, to carry it on. I knew that 
there was challenges to that. I knew that there were people that 
were worried about the R word here and the R word there. And 
that the racism was there and I knew and I saw it. 
 
And to me, we have improved on that. I can say that we have 
improved. We have a long ways to go on the partnership side on 
that. You know, partnerships not only with First Nations and 
Métis people, but with all peoples of the province and the new 
immigrants who come here as well. And to me it has widened 
my view as to who I was as a person in this House. 
 
(11:15) 
 
And I saw success in education. Therefore we had about 1,000 
. . . 1,200 people going to post-secondary in 1991. I was proud 
to say that last year we had 2,600 people going to 
post-secondary education in our areas of the two constituencies 
in the North. 

I was also very, very pleased on our sewer and water because, 
you know, before Walkerton we had made a decision in 
northern Saskatchewan to put in sewer and water systems, and 
we had two projects which totalled over $40 million. These 
were tough times in terms of our budgeting but we went ahead 
with it. I thought of the children as they were taking a wash, 
taking a bath. You know my grandparents and my . . . and 
everybody like that, the cleanliness that is required you know as 
we lived on. That’s what I thought about when we went into 
these programs. And we were able to do those things. We still 
have a ways to go but we were able to do those types of things. 
 
And there are many things that I would talk about on Aboriginal 
people, like treaty land entitlement, you know, that we 
partnered with the federal government, First Nations, and all 
citizens, on behalf of all citizens to have this TLE (Treaty Land 
Entitlement) Agreement, you know the 2 million acres. 
 
And I must say that the land use policies of the past, even for 
the settlement here, were good. We had a settlement with land 
where we had 31 million acres of free homesteads in this 
province. It provided a basis and a sense of strength for many 
people from all parts of the world. We had 6 million acres of 
paid homesteads. We protected our forests. We protected our 
parks, about 5 million acres. Our community pastures were 8 
million acres. Our amount of land for the railroad companies in 
this province were over 15 million acres of land. We had, for 
example, 7 million acres of land for Hudson’s Bay Company in 
Western Canada, 3.4 of which were in this province. 
 
When we did TLE of 2 million acres it was with a sense of 
pride that we were able to do and finish that. We still have a 
ways to go on it and we still have some process questions and 
other questions but we have to know that even if people 
question, have a question mark on treaty rights, that indeed it is 
a sense of fairness for all peoples in regards to have a base to 
work from; a base of land in terms of economic development; a 
place to call home; a place to say yes, this is where we can work 
from and yes, we are welcome in this province and this land. 
And I think that in that sense that I felt that indeed this was 
very, very, very important. 
 
And I’d like to say as well that I’m very well looking forward to 
the future as I look to the politics of inclusion in this great 
province of ours and our country. We have many steps to take 
and I’ve always felt that economic development and education 
were the key. 
 
I’m going back to my first love of education. I did 19 years and 
then prior to that, and I did 17 years in politics. So I’ll be going 
back into education. I want to do probably my Ph.D. (Doctor of 
Philosophy) and try and do a study . . . go back to the 
community level and work with the people from Cumberland 
House and do the Cree concept of land — you know, something 
that’s very, very dear to their heart. 
 
And I want to be able to do some other works in creating a 
strength of partnership. Weechiyauguneetowin is the word we 
use in Cree — partnerships. And it’s a very important word in 
our culture and it’s also an important role, word in all 
languages. It is something that has to be meaningful, realistic, 
and planned; and this is the way of the future. 
 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

So as I sit here in the legislature, I’d like to say thank you again, 
you know, to the people of this great legislature, you know, and 
all the people that are in this House — the new member and 
everybody — because democracy is an important part of this 
system. 
 
And as I look forward I’d like to say as well thank you to my 
wife Linda and my daughters, Koonu and Danis, who are very, 
very important in terms of your political lives. Had a tough 
time, you know, as a politician living up North and coming over 
here and trying to be a father and a politician at the same time. 
And it’s sometimes very, very testy in terms of what you’re 
able to do as a father; and a lot of people sometimes don’t fully 
understand that. But I think I want to say that I understand that 
very much as a person who has raised children. And now that 
they have grown up and, you know, I’ve watched and know the 
. . . I’m very, very appreciative of their support — you know, 
my children’s support, my wife’s support, my family’s support, 
my friends’ support. 
 
And lastly I would like to say that indeed I want to express a 
tremendous thank you to the people of Cumberland 
constituency. You know, they have treated me well, you know, 
as a politician. You know, that in many ways I left with a great 
deal . . . I started with a great deal of positive feelings. And 
today I leave with a great deal of positive feelings. Certainly 
there was steps that we were able to do but there’s always 
unfinished business. You always have to have faith and trust in 
the people, that the next generation of leaders will carry on the 
torch of progress and the torch of partnerships and the torch of 
inclusion. 
 
Those are the wishes and the dreams that I have, that whether 
we are from the farm or whether we are from the city or 
whether we are from the North, this province will grow together 
in a true spirit of partnership. And I really, fully believe that 
that is indeed possible. In this new century as we move forward 
on the self-determination, the co-determination aspect with 
Aboriginal peoples and the public determination of our system, 
my dream is that we all come together as we move forward. 
 
Yes, there will be challenges; yes, there will be naysayers, but 
we will indeed move forward. 
 
So, on behalf of my family and everybody, I would like to 
thank everybody that’s here in the legislature and all the people 
who have supported me over the years. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions 782, 784, and 785. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 782, 784, 785 have been 
submitted. 
 

Mr. Yates: — Ordered for return, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — 783 has been ordered for return. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave to move a 
motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture is requesting 
leave to move a motion. Would the member just indicate what 
the motion is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Leave, Mr. Speaker, to move a motion, 
Bill No. 45, The Carrot River Valley Constituency By-election 
Act, to be introduced the first time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Carrot River Valley Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 45, The 
Carrot River Valley Constituency By-election Act, be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Carrot River Valley Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 45, The 
Carrot River Valley Constituency By-election Act, be now read 
for the second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Carrot River Valley Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Carrot River Valley Constituency 
By-election Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
Bill be read a third time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

 

(11:30) 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 11:31 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 20 - The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 3 - The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 26 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 21 - The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 13 - The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 28 - The Health Information Protection Amendment 

Act, 2003 
Bill No. 4 - The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 15 - The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 27 - The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 29 - The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 

2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 
les sociétés sans but lucratif 

Bill No. 16 - The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 32 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security 

Management) Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 33 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Security 

Management) Amendment Act, 2003(No. 2)/Loi 
corrective (gestion de la sécurité) de 2003 (no 2) 

Bill No. 8 - The Youth Justice Administration Act  
Bill No. 17 - The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 30 - The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
Bill No. 23 - The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 40 - The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003  
Bill No. 41 - The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 24 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 39 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 

Act, 2003 
Bill No. 34 - The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment 

Act, 2003 
Bill No. 11 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 

Act, 2003 
Bill No. 36 - The Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 37 - The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 38 - The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 31 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 

Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 
sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 
des jeux de hazard 

Bill No. 35 - The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

Bill No. 301-The Western Christian College (Amendment) Act, 
2003 

Bill No. 43 - The Forest Resources Management Amendment 
Act, 2003 

Bill No. 45 - The Carrot River Valley Constituency 
By-election Act 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:36. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request the leave of the 
House to recess for a swearing-in ceremony. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
I hereby inform the Assembly that pursuant to an Act of this 
Legislative Assembly respecting a by-election in the 
constituency of Carrot River Valley, which was assented to 
earlier this morning, Mr. Allan Kerpan is authorized to take his 
seat as a member for the constituency of Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present 
to you, Mr. Allan Kerpan, member for the constituency of 
Carrot River Valley, who has taken the oath and signed the roll 
and now claims his right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Kerpan, I want to say welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly and I hope your time here will be one that 
serves as a record of honour to yourself and to your 
constituents. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly, and let the 
hon. member take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Centre on her 
feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to introduce some guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Up in the 
gallery opposite is seated Erin Crowe. Erin comes from a long 
line of people interested in politics in all parts of Saskatchewan. 
She’s the granddaughter of Lorna Standingready and David 
Acoose, as well as the daughter of Donna Standingready. 
 
So would everybody please join me in welcoming Erin to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Carrot River Valley 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave for this House to 
allow me to introduce guests that I have in the gallery today. 
 
Leave granted. 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to 
introduce through you to this House, three guests that I have 
with me. And I’m very proud to have with me today three 
people who are very, very important. As anybody knows who 
has ever run in a political election those people that work with 
you on a daily basis become more than just volunteers — they 
become friends and they become confidants. And I have three 
such in the gallery today: my campaign manager, Shelly 
McCrea; my office manager, Gai Mlazgar; and my business 
manager, Mr. Vic Allen. 
 
Thank you so much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvotes (SP01), (SP02), (SP03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Vote 53 

 
Subvote (SP02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01), (HI02), (HI04), (HI10), (HI03),(HI06), (HI11) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 145 
 
Subvote (HI01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 145 agreed to. 
 
(12:00) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 
Vote 16 

 
Subvote (HI03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, with regard to the General 
Revenue Fund I would move the following motion, no. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2003, the sum of $137,872,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I have a second resolution 
with regard to the General Revenue Fund, no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2004, the sum of $4,330,368,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
rise and the Chair report that the committee has agreed to 
certain resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I move that the resolutions be now 
read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Centre on her 
feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I see that my guests are 
just still coming in, but seeing as the legislature is in its last few 
minutes for this session I want to make sure that I get a chance 
to introduce them before we’re done. 
 
Today we have in the gallery a group of Catholic 
Homeschoolers of Regina that live in the constituency of 
Regina Centre. And I welcome you all here to the legislature 
today. The coordinators of the Catholic Homeschoolers are 
Teena Boomhower and Pam Milas. And everybody else, I think 
as you can readily see, are either parents or children. 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

 

So I ask everybody in the legislature to join me in welcoming 
this excellent group of people today. Thanks very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 44, The Appropriation Act, 2003 (No. 3) be 
now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly and under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now 
read a second and third time. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:08 until 12:17. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Addley Crofford Hagel 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Osika 
Lorjé Kasperski Goulet 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Thomson Junor Nilson 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Yates McCall Iwanchuk 
 

Nays — 22 
 
Hermanson Toth Heppner 
Julé Draude Bjornerud 
Elhard Wakefield Stewart 
Eagles D’Autremont Bakken 
Wall Huyghebaert Brkich 
Wiberg Weekes Lorenz 
Hart Allchurch Kerpan 
Hillson   
 
The Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 12:21 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 44 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Years ending respectively on March 31, 
2003 and on March 31, 2004. 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:22. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would rise in this House and I would like to ask for 
leave to make a few remarks before we adjourn the House. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to begin 
my remarks with a promise, and that promise is to all my 
colleagues that I’m going to be very, very brief. I know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well sure, that’s the only applause 
we ever get around here. 
 
I know that it’s been a long session. We’ve done I think a good 
job in terms of serving the people of Saskatchewan once again, 
and I know we’re also anxious to get home to spend the 
summer in our constituencies and around the province, 
spending time with our family and with our constituents. 
 
And I want to say a few thank yous before we leave today. I 
want to begin by thanking our Pages, who have done very good 
service for the members of the legislature. And I want to as well 
thank the Clerks of the Assembly. It’s sometimes, I guess, 
difficult to keep us on track but the Clerks always do a very 
good and a very professional job and I want to thank them for 
that. 
 
I want to make mention of course of the interns who were 
introduced earlier today in the gallery. And I hope that they 
enjoyed their time working with members of the legislature. I 
think it’s a good program that we’re all really quite satisfied 
with. Certainly the government members are. 
 
I also want to say a big thank you to all of the Legislative 
Assembly staff and all of the staff who work for Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation in this building. During the 
session they work particularly long hours and I want to thank 
them for their diligence and the work that they’ve done on our 
behalf. 
 
I’d like to as well thank all of our caucus staff, the people who 
work in the caucus offices, the ministerial staff. And by the way 
I see two of mine up here today and I want to give them a 
special thank you for the work they do — Allison and Shirley. 
And that was just a little personal thing, Mr. Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
I also want to thank government departments and all of 
Executive Council, the people that work very long hours in 
order to help us carry on our duties. And there are some people 
who we don’t see around here but who do equally as important 
work — our constituency assistants who represent us, who 
represent this government in this province, in our 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

constituencies, in our offices. And I know they put long hours 
in too so I want to thank them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you on the work that 
you’ve done during this session. I think all members of this 
legislature will agree that you show fairness and a respect for 
the institution that really is appreciated by all members. And 
those of us that have been here for a while will understand that 
the job that you do and your position is one that is a difficult 
one — adjudicating the debate; ensuring that we follow the 
rules. Sometimes we stray a little but you’re always there to 
bring us back on side. And I know all members appreciate what 
you do. 
 
I would just want to say that in the years that I’ve spent in this 
legislature, I have seen Speakers’ rulings challenged, rarely, but 
I note that that doesn’t happen and it hasn’t happened in your 
tenure. And I think it’s because you’ve ensured that you do 
represent all of us as members of the legislature fairly. And so 
thank you for that. 
 
I want to as well say a special thank you to our partners, our 
spouses, and to our families. And I guess it’s fair to say that in a 
lot of ways this session is probably as hard on them, if not 
harder, than it is on us. As members of the legislature we’re not 
around for some of the events that happen in our family life that 
we would probably like to attend to, and I know that our 
partners, our spouses, do show a lot of flexibility which allows 
us to do our jobs. And I want to thank all of them, on behalf of 
the government members for sure, and I know this would be 
echoed by members of the opposition as well. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank members of the 
Legislative Assembly. I want to welcome our new member, Mr. 
Kerpan, to this House and I know he will serve members of his 
constituency, the people of his constituency, well. 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly I think sometimes are 
involved in what we believe to be at times a thankless job, but I 
do believe the people of Saskatchewan very much appreciate 
the institution and the members who have chosen to take times 
out of their lives, out of their work lives and out of their family 
lives, to do the job of a member of the Legislative Assembly. 
And surely it doesn’t come without some sacrifices. I think all 
of us can relate to having missed perhaps a wedding 
anniversary or a family function, a soccer game; and so, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank all the members for their commitment 
and dedication to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, this may be the last session before a 
general election in our province, and I want to make special 
mention of one MLA who I’ve had the pleasure of serving with 
since 1986, and that’s the member from Cumberland. He has 
made a personal decision that he will be moving on to other 
things in his life. He won’t be back here unless there’s a session 
before the election, and that could happen. But I want to, Mr. 
Speaker, just say a personal note and thank Keith for the many 
years of public service. 
 
Keith was the first Aboriginal person elected to this legislature 
and I want to say that he has been very much a strong voice for 
Aboriginal people all across this province. And I want to say 
that we will miss him in a personal way and I think this House 

will miss him because he’s been a very strong member and he’s 
become a very good friend to many of us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, before I move the adjournment motion I 
want to wish all members of the legislature a good summer. 
We’ll be gearing up, I’m assuming, for an election campaign. I 
want to wish all members good luck, but I want to wish some 
members more good luck than others, and I think you’ll 
understand what I am saying. 
 
(12:30) 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, with that, I would 
ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion of adjournment, 
and it would be seconded by the member from Cannington. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Cannington: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and the time set by 
Mr. Speaker upon the request of government and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice if 
possible of such date and time. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise today on this 68th day of the 
session. It hasn’t been a long session as far as Saskatchewan 
legislatures go, but I think it would be fair to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that it, at times, has been fairly intense. 
 
And I would like to thank first the members, Mr. Speaker, for 
their dedication to the Assembly and to the people of their 
constituencies which, on both sides of the House, they have 
been . . . have so ably represented in this province and in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there’s another group of people — and my 
colleague, the Government House Leader, has mentioned them 
— that don’t get the recognition that they should do in this 
Assembly. And I can see everybody kind of looking around and 
wondering just who I’m talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our families. They put up with a lot when 
we’re in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. We’re not at home, be it in 
your home in Regina or wherever across this province. But our 
families, especially our spouses, have to pick up the load that 
we’re not there any longer to be able to support them on. 
 
And, you know, just an example of my own case last weekend, 
our water quit on Thursday night. I’m in Regina, Mr. Speaker, 
and so my family had to put up with no water for a day. And 
needless to say, they were anxious that I get home, Mr. Speaker, 
not to welcome my pleasant company home but so they could 
have a bath, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And those are the kind of things which each and every family 
across this province has to deal with, Mr. Speaker, when the 
members are in the Assembly doing their duties, Mr. Speaker. 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

 

I’d also like to thank those that support us in making sure that 
the Assembly runs as it should do, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the Clerks for their hard work and dedication, for their 
knowledge in ensuring that we carry out the procedures of the 
House in the proper manner in the traditions that have been 
established in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to thank the Pages for their hard work, for doing their 
job unobtrusively and doing their job in a very, very 
professional manner. Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the interns 
earlier; they have done an excellent job as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and his 
crew for their hard work. And in fact I’d like to thank all of the 
legislative staff, Mr. Speaker. No matter what area they work 
in, their hard work, the work that they perform makes our job so 
much easier. It makes our job . . . makes us able to have our 
debates and still carry on the business of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to thank the Government House Leader and his staff for 
their work, for their co-operation at times and for challenging us 
at times, Mr. Speaker. We all need to be challenged from time 
to time to rise to our potential. And in dealing with the 
Government House Leader, he has challenged me in that 
manner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened very attentively to the words of the 
member from Cumberland. And I’d like to thank him on behalf 
of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, for his dedication to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Seventeen years is a long time to serve in this Assembly and he 
has done an excellent and admirable job of doing it. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I would look forward to working with that member in 
the future in whatever walks of life that he chooses to go down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I’d also like to congratulate the new 
member for Carrot River on taking his seat, Mr. Speaker, and 
for his 100 per cent attendance in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to wish all of the 
members of the Assembly and all of the staffs a good summer 
and a safe summer, Mr. Speaker. And to the members opposite 
I look forward to meeting them again, either on the doorsteps, if 
we have an election this fall, or back in the Assembly for a fall 
session. 
 
And if there is neither one of those, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking 
forward to this fall, as I’m sure the Sergeant-at-Arms is, and 
having some good hunting. 
 
Thank you, everyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased also to have this opportunity to rise and wish my 

colleagues and the staff of this Assembly a good summer. And I 
want to start by offering my welcome and personal 
congratulations to the member for Carrot River Valley. It does 
seem to me though that for the past year we’ve heard a lot from 
NDP ranks about the forest fringe being their salvation. I 
wonder if it might not be more accurate to say it was their 
Waterloo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today marks my final day as the lone Liberal in 
the Saskatchewan legislature. When I return I’ll have a large 
number of colleagues and my personal recommendation to all 
hon. members is, before you make your final decision on 
whether or not you want to run again, consider how you will 
feel sitting in a legislature where there are a large number of 
people who think exactly the same way as I do. So I ask you to 
ponder that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was preparing my remarks for adjournment 
today I thought I would feel like Eileen Brennan — she was the 
actress in the movie, Private Benjamin. She played the crusty 
drill sergeant who on graduation day said to Goldie Hawn, let’s 
not keep in touch. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, now as I look around at all the 
members who won’t be back, I think I’m actually going to miss 
some of you. And so it is with some nostalgia as I take my leave 
of this House today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the session that’s just ended, 
once the government had decided against a spring election we 
were left with a session bereft of anything very substantial and 
so we fretted about things as trivial as a female dress code. But 
as we worked our way through a menu of thin gruel, there were 
substantive issues facing our province. 
 
We all know that if we do not succeed in getting our borders 
opened to our beef, the restructuring of the beef industry will be 
catastrophic. But I was extremely pleased this morning to hear 
that a panel of international experts congratulated Canada on 
the way we dealt with the BSE outbreak. And that international 
committee of experts was very flattering about our regulatory 
and animal health reporting system. 
 
And I believe all members of this House should pause to thank 
the staff and workers of the Canadian Food Inspection Agency 
for their work. And I’d go so far as to say that I think this 
reminds us all that our public servants do valuable work. They 
are not just overpaid paper-pushers but dedicated men and 
women who do valuable work on our behalf. 
 
As this session closes, I want to thank yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
the staff of the Assembly and the library, and I even want to 
thank the media for being ready always to remind us that we are 
fallible human beings prone to error. 
 
I especially want to thank my staff, Joanne Jonsson and Jon 
Jonsson, both of whom have gotten me through this session. 
Members, I think, will be interested to know when they’re not 
trying to keep me in line that Joanne doubles as a 
commissionaire at RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
Depot and Jon doubles as consul for the Republic of Iceland, 
happily snacking on pickled herring and lefse. 
 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

To all who are watching this afternoon, I say, good summer. 
And to my fellow members, I’d like to leave you with a quote 
of Theodore Roosevelt I came across recently that I think gives 
meaning and honour to what we do as elected representatives. 
And it says as follows: 
 

The credit belongs to . . . (those people) who are actually in 
the arena . . . 
Who knows the great enthusiasms, 
the great devotions . . . (to) a worthy cause. 
Who at the best, knows . . . the triumph of high 
achievement; 
And who, at the worst . . . fails while daring greatly. 
So that . . . (their) place shall never be with those cold and 
timid souls who know neither victory nor defeat. 

 
Good luck to all of us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Government 
House Leader pointed out, I will be brief. I know that members 
in this Assembly are anxious to get home to their families. I’ve 
been here for about a total of 37 minutes now but I know many 
of you have been here much longer and you are anxious to get 
back to your families and your constituencies as well. 
 
A bit overwhelming coming into this Assembly today. 
Yesterday at this time we were still in the middle of a 
hard-fought by-election campaign where no one of course knew 
exactly what was going to happen. And some 24 hours later, I 
have been sworn in to this House by a special Bill passed by all 
members of this Assembly. And I do want to thank you all very 
much for that. It’s very much appreciated. 
 
As members will know, I have served in another House in 
Ottawa in prior years. It’s tremendous. It’s overwhelming. This 
one is very, very special because I believe that this province and 
the people that are in it are headed for nothing but greatness, 
and I’m very much looking forward to that. 
 
I was a bit confused however, Mr. Speaker, when I first took 
my seat over here. Many of my colleagues on this side of the 
House said to me, well don’t get too comfortable here because 
we’re going to be moving pretty quick. And I’m not sure where 
they meant we were going to be moving. I think to the other 
side — something like that — shortly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be partisan today in 
the words that I use although sometimes I must admit it’s a little 
tough not to be. Again, any of those of us who have run in an 
election campaign, which we all have, know that they are very 
partisan and ours was no different in Carrot River Valley. And I 
will try to keep my comments to a non-partisan nature. 
 
I’m a new resident of the Carrot River Valley and I love it. I 
believe it’s the heartland of Saskatchewan. I look at what I have 
seen there in the short few months that I have been there, and I 
see unlimited potential for that part of Saskatchewan. We’ve 
got an outfitting industry that’s booming, we’ve got a forestry 
industry that’s on the verge of some great things, and most of 
all we’ve got what I believe are some of the most progressive 
people who live in this province. And I’m so, so proud to be a 

part of that. 
 
Before I go any further, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say, I do 
need to say a few words about our former MLA, Mr. Carl 
Kwiatkowski. I know that tributes have been made in this 
House to that effect prior to this, but I’d like to add my words to 
that. And I realized and I learned that every day that I have 
travelled through Carrot River Valley, how well respected and 
how well-liked and appreciated Carl was. 
 
I know you folks knew that far better than I do, but I just 
wanted to say that that’s been echoed to me every day of my 
travels. I spoke with Leona last night as I was driving to 
Regina, and she wished me well and I appreciated that as well. 
And their family is doing well. I wanted to make sure I got that 
on the record today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Lots of people that I’d like to thank today but some of the most 
important people are the ones that were talked about here by the 
House leaders — our families that we often leave behind when 
we enter into this business of politics. And some of my greatest 
supporters are my family. My mom and dad have been behind 
me since I got involved in this politics in 1992, and my dad was 
in Carrot River, or in Nipawin, I should say, last night to hear 
the results. He’s going to be 84 this winter, but he still makes 
the trip and I give him a lot of credit for that. 
 
My wife, Melanie, who also was in Nipawin last night, and our 
four children — Josh, Tyrel, Stefanie, and Danille — they’ve 
been my greatest supporters. And as we all know, without 
families and our partners and our spouses, we could never do 
this business. 
 
(12:45) 
 
Today we are going to . . . our family, in fact, is going to be 
celebrating another event and I find it ironic and also gratifying 
that it’s the day that I get sworn in to this Assembly as an MLA, 
our son Tyrel will graduate from high school this afternoon. 
 
That’s nothing special in this province of Saskatchewan. All of 
us, I’m sure, or many of us in this Assembly have had and are 
having sons or daughters that are graduating from a 
Saskatchewan high school. But the point about it that I truly 
believe is so special is that that’s why I think we’re here to a 
large degree. All of us, as members of this Assembly, are here 
to promote and to make this a better province for our children 
and their children. 
 
And so I’m really, really pleased today that on the day that, as I 
said, that I’m sworn in, my son . . . or our son will graduate 
from high school. 
 
I listened to the words of the member from Cumberland as he 
spoke and I was . . . I guess I would like to say that I wish I had 
been here longer to hear more of his words, because I think I 
would have liked that. I want to say to him that I want to wish 
him well and congratulate him on his many years here. I’m on 
my way in as he’s on his way out and I know that he’ll have 
different thoughts than I do. But having said all that, I very 
much appreciated what he had to say and I wish him all the 
best. 
 



June 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

 

The people of Carrot River Valley yesterday placed their trust 
in me. They placed their trust in our party. And I guess what I 
hear more so than anything else as I travel right throughout this 
province or throughout this country is how people have lost 
their faith, have lost their trust in politicians. To a large degree, 
we have brought that upon ourselves. And I’m hopeful that in 
the days and weeks and months and years ahead, that we can 
start to change that. 
 
But they do . . . they still come to the ballot box to some degree 
and they still elect their members and they still send them to 
their provincial capitals or their national capital. And they did 
that with me last night. They placed their trust in a person they 
don’t know very well, because it is no secret that I am a new 
resident there. 
 
My goal, my goal over these next few weeks and months is to 
prove, to show the people of Carrot River Valley that I will live 
up to that commitment and up to that trust that they placed in 
me. I have tremendously big shoes to fill but I’m going to do 
my best to fill them. 
 
I’ve never made a lot of promises in my time in politics because 
I think to a large degree people are tired of politicians who 
make empty promises, but I do make a couple. And that 
promise to the people of Carrot River Valley today is that I will 
represent them to the very, very best of my ability. Their issues 
will always be heard in Regina here, and I will never let them 
down. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to finish by saying, and my House 
Leader mentioned, that I do want to go on record today as 
saying that as of today I have 100 per cent attendance in the 
House, and also 100 per cent voting attendance, and I fully 
expect that the government will run ads to that effect in every 
paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to finish by saying thank you to each 
and every one of you today for allowing me to take my seat in 
this House. I want to say to you, have a good summer. And I 
want to say to each and every one of you that I look forward to 
working with you in the future. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I too want to get 
away and think there are family members waiting. But I would 
beg your indulgence for a moment because I do want to extend 
a thank you for . . . to members of the Legislative Assembly 
Office staff and extend an appreciation for the professional 
service that they provide to us. 
 
And I want to start with mentioning Gary Ward and Ihor 
Sywanyk and Kerry Bond, and the sound system and our 
broadcast services who got us through a sound-out here and got 
us back on. And we really appreciate the work that they’re 
doing and the work that they’re also committed to, to going to 
work on a new committee room for the members in the House. 
 
A thank you has to go out to Linda Kaminski and her group of 
eight — who is director of human resource and administrative 
services — who helped us with all of our directives. 
 

People in the information systems that keep our computers 
going — that’s Guy Barnabe with his group. 
 
All of our things are recorded in Journals on a daily basis by 
Pam Scott and Rebecca Best, who is the . . . Pam is the assistant 
journals clerk. 
 
And of course everything, every word that is said here, is 
recorded on Hansard. And I want to thank Darlene Trenholm, 
working with Cheryl Behrns and all of the people that are in 
Hansard who do that work for us on a daily basis and often sit 
here into the night. 
 
Of course our constituency assistants and our members and our 
caucus officers all appreciate getting their cheques on time, and 
the credit there goes to Marilyn Borowski and Janis Patrick who 
work in financial services. 
 
Pat Shaw, we want to thank our Sergeant-at-Arms, along with 
all of those on sessional security and all of those 
commissionaires who have been serving us throughout the 
session. 
 
I want to make special mention of Lorraine deMontigny and her 
four people that are in the visitor services, in addition to the 
summer guides who are our ambassadors and our first point of 
contact in many cases and who are very, very proud of the 
building and the work that goes on. 
 
We have depended on our Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, 
Ken Ring, and his team, and we want to extend a thank you to 
him. 
 
And of course a lot of the research that is done by our caucuses 
and other people from the general public come to the 
Legislative Library, and I want to thank Marian Powell and Pat 
Kolesar for showing leadership in that aspect. 
 
We often go down to the Dome Cafeteria and we’ve had many 
occasions to actually have our guests here, and it’s particularly 
for special events. And we are very appreciative of Trent Brears 
and his team and the work they’ve done for us. 
 
I want to say thank you to our landlord, SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation), Steve Bata, and all the 
people in housekeeping, maintenance, and renovation that work 
here. And it’s kind of a weird situation to be in, I think, to be 
landlord for your bosses, but he manages that very, very well. 
 
From my own office I want to thank the chiefs of staff from 
both caucuses — Jim Fodey from the government caucus and 
his staff; Reg Downs in the opposition caucus and his staff — 
for the co-operation and the assistance we’ve received from 
them any time we’ve had calls or needed to get in touch. 
 
Thank you to the Pages who — that is, I’m speaking of Curtis 
Dow, Brock Egeto, Karly Edwards, Paula Trefiak, Luke 
McWilliams, and Cameron Wensel — who served us very, very 
well and we wish them the best into the future. 
 
I want to congratulate, along with the House leaders, the 
interns: Cam Baker, Corinne Barnett, Lee Weiss, and Bill 
Cooper who are providing a very valuable service I think to the 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2003 

 

Legislative Assembly, and they will to the whole concept of 
democracy, into the future. 
 
Now I want to get closer to the people who I work . . . or to the 
people I work most closely with and that is the Office of the 
Clerk. A special thank you goes out to Gwenn Ronyk and her 
Deputy Clerk, Greg Putz, Clerk Assistant Margaret Woods, 
Clerk Assistant of Committees Viktor Kaczkowski. And in their 
office, Monique Lovatt, who is the assistant to the Clerk, and 
Sandra Gardner, supervisor of Assembly services and office 
assistant, Zorka. 
 
In particular, though, I want to thank you for your counsel and I 
want to mention specifically, with respect to Viktor 
Kaczkowski who will be leaving us — good bye, Viktor, and 
best wishes to you as you move back east to your home 
province and thank you for the service that you have provided 
for us. 
 
And my last thank you has to go to the people who work with 
me on a daily basis, and have to put up with what I bring to that 
office, and for their guidance and attention and, really, and the 
care that they give to their work and to the office and the 
respect that they have for the office. 
 
And I’m talking about the assistant secretary, Rhonda 
Romanuk, the secretary to the Speaker, Linda Spence, and the 
assistant to the Speaker, Margaret Tulloch. And without them it 
would be impossible to run a Speaker’s office. 
 
So, members of the Assembly, with that I want to wish each 
and every one of you . . . each and every one of the members 
and everybody in the building a really, really good summer. 
And I hope everybody has an opportunity to have some time 
with their families and friends. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until notice from 
the Speaker. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:56. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................2005 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2006 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2006 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................2006 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2006 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2006 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2006 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................2007 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2007 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2007 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2007 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2007 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2007 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2007 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2008 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................2008 
  Crofford .........................................................................................................................................................................2019, 2020 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2019 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Band Settles Land Claim 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................2008 
 Condition of Highway No. 42 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2008 
 Saskatchewan Economy 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2009 
 Kipling Water Treatment Plant Opens 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2009 
 Health and Social Policy Developments 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2009 
 Recognition of Legislative Interns 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2010 
 Performance of Opposition 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................2010 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Performance of Government 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2010 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2010 
 Carrot River Valley By-election 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2012 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2012 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2013 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2013 
 Support for Beef Industry 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2013 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2013 
 Call for Election 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2015 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2015 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Changes to The Securities Regulations 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2015 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2015 



 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................2016 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2018 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2018 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 45 — The Carrot River Valley Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2018 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 45 — The Carrot River Valley Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2018 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 45 — The Carrot River Valley Constituency By-election Act...................................................................................2018 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 45 — The Carrot River Valley Constituency By-election Act 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2018 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................2019 
INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2019 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2019 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation —Vote 53 .................................................2020 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund —  
 Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — Vote 53 .............................................................................................2020 
 General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16...................................................................................2020 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Highways and Transportation — Vote 145....................2020 
 Supplementary Estimates — General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 .................................2020 
 Motions for Supply 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................2020 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................2020 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................2021 
RECORDED DIVISION ...............................................................................................................................................................2021 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................2021 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2021 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2022 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2023 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2024 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2024 
 


	Call for Election
	Call for Election

