















































Hansard: June 23, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1873 
 June 23, 2003 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Revitalization to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today, seated next to me, is Gordon Nystuen, who is the deputy 
minister. Directly behind me is Hal Cushon, who’s the assistant 
deputy minister. Next to him is Karen Aulie, who is the director 
of corporate services branch; and next to her is Ross Johnson, 
who is the manager of operations and services branch. 
 
And then deep in the back row there is Louise Greenberg, who 
is the assistant deputy minister; Maryellen Carlson, who is the 
assistant deputy minister; Greg Haase, who is the director of 
lands branch; and Dave Boehm who is the director of the 
financial services branch. 
 
Those are my officials, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to 
welcome the minister and his officials here tonight. 
 
When we finished on Friday I was asking questions of the APF 
(agricultural policy framework). I have three rather brief 
questions, I think, on the APF. 
 
When we concluded on Friday the minister had stated that 
Saskatchewan would not be administering their own super 
NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) program. It’s my 
understanding that the other provinces are interested in 
administering their own program, and including Manitoba is 
considering that a possibility this time which they did not do 
with CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program). 
 
Could the minister give us an explanation of why he wouldn’t 
want to administer his own program? It would create jobs here 
in Saskatchewan. It would mean that we would have the 
farmers . . . or the producers would have better access to the 
workers in the office. And is there a particular reason why he 
chooses not to administer his own? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the officials advise me that 
because it runs off the tax system, it would be really easier for 
the federal government to administer it. And if you had one 
administration arm that were to look after the entire Canadian 
program, we think it would be cheaper. And so our sense is that 
if we can encourage the national government to operate it, it 
would be much more effectively done from the perspective of 
cost and because it’s . . . the data will be collected off the tax 
system, that makes more sense that the federal government 
would in fact oversee it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’m not sure if I entirely agree with the 

minister, but will the forms for the new NISA be due the same 
time as the tax forms? Our old NISA, of course it wasn’t due at 
the same time. It was therefore easier for the accounting offices 
to deal with both. It meant that they could consistently have 
employment. And I have been told that they will both be due at 
the same time which will mean that it will be quite 
overwhelming for our accounting offices and our accountants. 
So does the minister know when the new program will be due, 
when the forms will have to be submitted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials advise me that we 
don’t have the exact time frame yet because those time frames 
are still being sorted out with the federal government in terms 
of when the information would be provided of which the data 
would be tied to. Those periods have not yet been confirmed 
and so we’re not able to provide you with that detail yet today. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer and I 
would encourage him then in further negotiations to bring that 
to the attention of the federal government because I can see the 
accountants’ concern. They have to hire seasonal help to handle 
income tax and they have to train them and therefore they will 
have to hire additional seasonal help. But it’s always better if 
we can have full-time positions in the accounting firm so . . . 
 
The last question I have on the APF has to do with the transition 
fund, the 600 million that last year was allocated through the 
producers’ NISA accounts. Has there been any word from the 
federal government when they’re going to allocate this year’s 
$600 million transition fund, and how? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, prior to the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) work that we’ve been working on, 
our sense is that it will be . . . The $183 million is the amount 
that it looks like Saskatchewan will be entitled to again and that 
it will be made payable directly to producers is the way in 
which we had the last conversation, as opposed to I think some 
sense was that it might go through the NISA accounts as they 
did this year. It’s our view that this will go . . . these payments 
will be made directly to the producers. 
 
This is the last conversation we had prior to the BSE, and we 
haven’t had any more detail on that since those discussions. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to refer now to subvote 
(AG09), which is the Agri-Food Equity Fund. Could we please 
get a list of all debt and equity investments held by the AFEF 
(Agri-Food Equity Fund) as of March 31, 2002; a list of all debt 
and equity investments held by the AFEF as of March 31, 2003; 
and in addition a list of all the debt and equity investments held 
by the AFEF as of today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, Mr. Chair, we can make those 
available to you in short order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I’ll be looking 
forward to his response. 
 
In the case where the AFEF held a debt or equity investment at 
the beginning of the 2002 fiscal year but either renegotiated, 
added to, or divested some or all of an existing investment, 
could he provide the details of each transaction, including the 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

value of any new investment and proceeds from any 
divestment? Could he also supply that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we can certainly do that. We 
would ask if the member would tell us what the start date would 
be that she would like the information from and that would be 
helpful for us in terms of collecting the information for her. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like if that would start at the 
beginning of 2002 fiscal year. And in addition, in the case 
where the value of an investment was written down or written 
off, could we get a list of the name of the investment and the 
nature and value of the transaction and the reason for the 
transaction that took place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, certainly we’ll have that to the 
member. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Chair, could the minister tell us what 
organization, government department, agency, or Crown 
corporation manages the AFEF portfolio? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, financial programs branch of 
department of Ag, Food and Rural Revitalization look after that 
fund. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — And the last question on this subvote is, is 
the AFEF in a position to make any new investments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, we can only in those 
investments that we already have investment in. So we can add 
to those, but we can’t take on new ones. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for those answers and 
I’ll be looking forward to the information that he could provide 
for me, and I’m going to turn the questions over for a minute to 
the member from Redberry Lake. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, my 
question’s concerning the game farming industry. And could 
you just give us an update on the status, the health status of the 
game farming industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We have about 40,000 head right now that 
are in the . . . that would be in the tent that we would consider 
as being within the game farming perspective. Of that, we have 
had about 229 animals that have tested positive, and of those 
numbers we have now put down just over 8,000 head over the 
period of the last couple of years. 
 
That would be sort of generically around the game farming 
industry. Now if the member is asking about the number of 
animals in each one of the species, we’d require a bit more 
work to provide that for you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, how 
many herds have been quarantined in that period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — About 30 herds have been quarantined. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — When was the last positive test for chronic 
wasting disease on a game farm in Saskatchewan? 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — About 14 months now. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. A question is concerning 
quarantined ranches. I understand there is four ranches that 
were quarantined for a considerable length of time, I believe 
three years or five years. You could correct me on that. What 
are the terms of that quarantine? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Of the four quarantined farms — and as 
the member would know, the decisions about lifting the 
quarantine is really with the federal agency — of those four that 
are quarantined, I’m told by Dr. Greenberg that three are now in 
the capacity to grow crops. Three of them can now grow crops, 
those that are quarantined. The other one is . . . The land is still 
idle, so it’s not in any use at this point in time. But all four of 
them are still under quarantine. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Could the minister explain how long before 
the quarantine would be lifted on those four ranches, and what 
are the terms and conditions that have to be met before it’s 
lifted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The decision would . . . It really does 
remain with the federal government, and I expect that the lifting 
of the quarantine would be an assurance that the food safety 
chain would not be affected by lifting the quarantine off the 
lands that are currently under quarantine. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, I know 
there’s compensation for the animals that have been killed, that 
have chronic wasting disease in their herds. But is there any 
compensation for the ranches that have been quarantined and 
that are not allowed to have any other livestock on there, 
whether they be cattle or game farm animals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the compensation has only been 
for the animals that have been put down, as the member has 
described. There has been no other compensation for any other 
purpose to the other farmers. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, that 
completes our questions for tonight. It’s unfortunate that we 
didn’t complete it on Friday since we only took 20 minutes, but 
the House Leader decided to adjourn even though he knew that 
we only had a few minutes left. 
 
So it was very tolerant for the officials to come in, and we 
appreciate that, that they came in in the evening to have only 20 
minutes of questions. So I thank the minister and I thank the 
officials and I have no further questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I too, before my officials leave, 
want to thank the member for their questions . . . the members 
for their questions in taking us through the department 
estimates. We all know how important the Department of 
Agriculture and Food is to the, not only the supply of safe food 
in our province, but the advice that we get on an ongoing basis 
about how we build the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
So before we leave the estimates, I want to also take this 
occasion to thank the officials from my department who do, in 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

 

my view, a tremendous amount of work not only in making sure 
that the minister is well informed but also the public, and as 
well as ensuring that we have in Saskatchewan, in my view, an 
agricultural department that is exceptional. A small team of 
men and women and the credit of providing good food safety is 
to a large degree in part to their leadership. 
 
So this evening I want to thank them, Mr. Chair, as well as the 
official opposition for the work that we’ve been able to 
accomplish in doing the estimates for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report significant progress on the Department of Agriculture, 
Food and Rural Revitalization and move to estimates, the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Community Resources and Employment 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (RE01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And thanks again there, Mr. Chair. The 
officials assisting with estimates today, to my immediate right, 
Bonnie Durnford, deputy minister; to my immediate left, 
assistant deputy minister, Darrell Jones. And then directly 
behind me is assistant deputy minister, Shelley Hoover; to her 
immediate right, Bob . . . No, we have Don Allen, executive 
director of finance and property management. And to his right 
is Bob Wihlidal, assistant deputy minister. 
 
Behind the bar, Mr. Chair, a number of officials including Larry 
Chaykowski, executive director of housing operations; Phil 
Walsh, executive director, employment and income assistance; 
Marilyn Hedlund, executive director of child and family 
services; Deborah Bryck, director of child care; Dorothea 
Warren, associate executive director, child and family services; 
Betty West, acting executive director of community living; and 
Jan Morgan, acting director of career and employment services, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Welcome 
this evening, Mr. Minister, and certainly welcome to your 
officials. It’s a pleasure to be able to have Community Services 
up here again for another go around. And as you know, Mr. 
Minister, you have a quite a large and important portfolio, and 
so it takes many sessions of work from this side of the House 
and from your side of the House to go through your estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could elucidate for me and 
for the opposition and for the House, Community Services’ 
position, and whether you have one, in regards to home 
schooling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the department would have no 
position in regard to home schooling. That would be a subject 
that would be a matter for the Department of Learning. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I guess we’re going 

to be somewhat confused here for awhile until we can get some 
light thrown on this subject because certainly I’m working on a 
situation right now where your department has taken a position 
on home schooling. And an unfortunate circumstance has arisen 
where one of your clients actually does home schooling and has 
been put in a position of awkwardness in regard to this matter. 
And your department has advised her that as long as she 
continues to home school, then she will no longer be able to 
receive assistance from Community Services. 
 
And so I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would be able to 
enlighten us as to why that kind of a scenario would have 
arisen. The person I’m referring to is a single mother, a widow, 
and I’m wondering has circumstances changed in your 
department where we have become, as a society, less caring. 
And I don’t think that that would be on the table at all, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But I’m wondering if you have . . . be able to enlighten us as to 
why your department would take a position as to why someone 
could be removed from the rolls of assistance because they 
home school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the hon. member I suspect is 
aware that it is not only improper but contrary to the law for 
both he and I to engage in discussion of the particulars of a 
case. And I also acknowledge that’s not what he’s suggesting is 
to get into identifying specifics. He has not done that at this 
point in time. 
 
Mr. Chair, having said that, I think it would be rather futile to 
get into an exchange which involves speculation. And I think 
probably the best course of action is if the hon. member would 
like to provide for me the specifics of the case that is of concern 
to him, that I would be happy to follow that up and attend to it 
in that way. I think that’s probably the most appropriate and 
also the most productive way to deal with it. Quite honestly, 
given the information they have, I don’t think it’s possible for 
us to productively deal with it in the course of estimates. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, over the past number of weeks we’ve discussed a 
number of issues regarding your department and some of the 
concerns that have been raised, and I have a few I’d like to talk 
about tonight. 
 
First of all, regarding housing. Sask Housing has now been 
moved under your ministry and your responsibility of your 
department in regards to housing for low- and middle-income 
families. 
 
Mr. Minister, maybe we could begin by basically just letting us 
know exactly how many housing units the province will be 
building . . . any or if you’re continuing to build or fund the 
construction of housing units. And what budget do you have for 
that program and where these housing units may be built? As 
you’re . . . I’m sure, Mr. Minister, you’re probably aware of the 
fact that there are communities across the province that find 
themselves in situations where they are lacking . . . They do 
have personnel living within or would come to the community 
— low-income jobs — and probably in many cases finding 
themselves in a situation where housing is fairly limited. 
 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

For example, the community village of Windthorst has written 
recently, and I believe they were applying under the centenary 
affordable housing program, wondering about some seniors’ 
housing for their community. And that would be one of, I’m 
sure, many letters that your office has received. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could just fill us in as to 
where you’re going this year in regards to housing, and the 
process, whether or not you’re into constructing new housing 
units for low- and middle-income families. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I think the program that the 
hon. member refers to, which is the only program that we have 
available to us at this point in time that is intended to address 
the capital expenditures for construction of affordable housing 
. . . And I just want to point out the hon. member in introducing 
the housing subject referred to housing for low and middle 
income. I think may have been just a mistake. It’s low and 
moderate income is the level that housing is targeted towards. 
 
We have some funds available for affordable housing. And 
again just for the record so as to avoid confusion, as 
distinguished from social housing, social housing being housing 
where the rent is a percentage of income. Affordable housing 
then will be medium, will be largely moderate, moderate 
income folks, and it will be also targeted towards ownership. 
 
We have the centenary affordable housing program. It comes 
about as a result of an agreement with the federal government 
that was signed a year ago, and in fact I’m very pleased, Mr. 
Chair, to say in the House today that this morning we had the 
first of the centenary affordable housing announcements in 
Saskatoon. And in the announcement this morning, it was 
announced that there will be some $8 million worth of 
affordable housing activity in Saskatoon in the first go-round 
approvals. And what was specifically announced is 36 units for 
the Central Urban Métis Federation Inc., CUMFI, and 10 units 
for the Abbeyfield housing in Saskatoon, with another couple 
announcements to come as soon as the details are worked out. 
 
This comes about as a result of the federal government — thank 
heaven — agreeing to come back into the world of support for 
affordable housing. And we have available to us, as was 
announced in this year’s budget, $46 million worth of federal, 
provincial, and municipal funding available over the next four 
years. 
 
The target is that we will produce in Saskatchewan some 1,400 
units over the province in that period of time. Of that $46 
million of public funds, it’s about $18.3 million of that is 
provincial funds. And those provincial funds all come from 
within our centenary funds of the province of Saskatchewan and 
therefore the name: the centenary affordable housing program. 
 
Generally targeted . . . And this was described in a call for 
proposals from across Saskatchewan that we received a goodly 
number of in February and some more in May . . . described 
that our target is to have these units at the end of the day be 
targeted proportionately to how we read the need being in 
Saskatchewan. And that’s roughly in this way, Mr. Chair, that 
we expect that 70 per cent of them will be targeted for family 

use. And why? Because province wide in our assessment of 
needs, 70 per cent of our needs are family province wide; 
approximately 13 per cent for use by seniors; six per cent for 
persons with physical disability; and then the remaining that 
gives us some amount of latitude. 
 
There will be $6 million of that public funds . . . is required to 
be targeted to building activities in the North, and the remainder 
will be south of that. And we anticipate, I would expect that 
after all of the building is done that the total capital investment 
will be in the range of about $135 million so that on balance 
each public dollar will generate two private dollars in building 
activity over the course of the program. 
 
And these are grants. This is very clear. This is not money 
intended for ongoing subsidies for shelter. We don’t have the 
funds to be able to do that. The federal government clearly does 
not allow their money to be used in that way. And so these are 
capital grants through the centenary affordable housing program 
that are being taken advantage of by co-ops, by private builders, 
by non-profits as well, Mr. Chair. And as I say in summary then 
that we expect over the course of the next years, 1,400 units, 
And over the course of this fiscal year, approximately 400 units 
we expect to be built. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, if I heard you 
correctly, I think you mentioned something about over the 
period of time 146 million. Did I get . . . 46 million? There was 
some actual expenditure. I think there was a number of . . . what 
was that number? I think you mentioned some private 
investments or whatever, and I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, 
where would that money . . . would that be individuals 
themselves investing in some of these properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Yes, what I was referring to was that the 
public money that’s available by way of grant is $46 million. 
We expect then in order to realize . . . That’s up-front money to 
bring down the cost of construction or renovation in the project 
that is being tackled. The remainder of the expenditure then 
must be borne by the proponent whether that’s a co-op or a 
non-profit or a private builder who through their own means, 
rental income, will be primarily . . . I would think in virtually all 
cases the means of income to support the remainder of the 
activity. 
 
So we would have . . . Just to summarize it, what we have is 
federal or, sorry, is public monies that is leveraging private 
expenditure to increase the housing stock within Saskatchewan. 
So about $18.3 million of Saskatchewan money will generate 
about $46 million worth of public money when we include 
federal as well as municipal. And those public monies then will 
generate another approximately $90 million of private 
expenditure. 
 
So when I look at it from a money management point of view, 
and I look at some $18.3 million from the Centenary Capital 
Fund for the province of Saskatchewan that we forecast will 
generate in the neighbourhood of $135 million worth of 
affordable housing activity, that says to me that this is money 
well spent on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and I guess that’s 
where . . . You mentioned a hundred and some million, and I 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

 

know in this letter from the village of Windthorst to the Sask 
Housing, they talked about the $135 million generated over the 
period of time. They referred to the centenary program, and in 
their request they mention about the need for some seniors . . . 
more seniors’ housing units in their community. 
 
Mr. Minister, outside of what you’ve already announced, are 
there any additional housing units that will be built? Would 
seniors’ housing be separate from social and — I wrote it down 
here — social and affordable . . . centenary affordable? Is that a 
separate component regarding housing and housing units in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — No, the senior units that will be 
constructed are within the confines of the centenary affordable 
housing program, and that is Saskatchewan’s . . . by far this is 
Saskatchewan’s main vehicle for generating building 
foreseeable over the next four years. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, how many units of this nature 
would be built, and will there be any built out of the large urban 
centres? I think you mentioned about . . . I think you’re saying 
about 1,400 over the next four years, 400 this year. Can you 
give me a rough idea where some of these will be built and 
whether a community like Windthorst would fit into a project of 
this nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, perhaps it’d be helpful just to 
describe the province-wide need. And in doing this, I have to 
admit what I’m providing is information that would have been 
available to any of the people who were interested in putting 
forth a proposal because it was provided to them. 
 
This is a province-wide program. And to put that into context in 
terms of Saskatchewan’s housing shortages, to put it that way, 
we would estimate that the number of households in 
Saskatchewan that would have an affordability challenge would 
be in the neighbourhood of about 56,000 households in 
Saskatchewan that have some kind of affordability difficulty in 
terms of access to adequate and affordable housing. 
 
Within that, Mr. Chair, if you were to ask the question: for how 
many households in Saskatchewan is the issue access to decent 
quality accommodation . . . And so that either it’s not available, 
or it’s a deteriorated condition, the kind of place that they’re 
living in. The answer would be about 17,000. So that if we were 
to say, how many units do we think it would actually need to 
come into the system in order to meet those needs for access to 
affordable quality housing, the answer to that in Saskatchewan 
would be about 17,000. 
 
This is a program that brings into play over the next four years, 
1,400. And so we can see that although it’s a significant 
number, it’s still less than 10 per cent of the actual provincial 
need. 
 
And what we’re intending to do is to respond to the proposals, 
then, basing our evaluations on their merits and both in terms of 
long-term . . . as they respond to long-term need and the 
viability. I’ve described to proponents a number of times, I’ve 
said to them this: the housing program, this is not a 
bricks-and-mortar program, this is a social program. The 
intention here is not just to construct some walls and windows 

and doors that people can live inside, but to ensure that the 
work that’s being done will result in living conditions — 
whether they’re rental or ownership; and Saskatchewan has 
placed more emphasis on potential ownership more than any 
other jurisdiction — that those are accommodations that people 
will still be sustainably living in 10 years down the road. 
 
Now as we’ve looked at that, then again we’ve set the general 
guidelines. And I don’t feel a lot of freedom to vary 
significantly from these because they’re fairly clear to us what 
the province-wide needs are of some 70 per cent targeted to 
families; 13 per cent targeted to the seniors; and 6 per cent 
targeted to persons with physical disabilities. 
 
And further in the information that’s been provided to 
proponents, it has been said as well that the priority will go 
where the need is the greatest. So that we’re taking this and 
responding in a proportional kind of way to the province-wide 
kind of needs. 
 
And so coming then from that point to the member’s question, 
so where would the need be the greatest? What would be your 
description of that? It would be when we look at the total needs 
here in Saskatchewan, the needs will be greatest in the inner 
cities. In inner- city neighbourhoods is where the housing 
demands are certainly being felt the most strongly. 
 
There have been two calls now — one in February, one in May 
— that have been responded to and then there will be other calls 
over the course of the term of the life of the program. The next I 
expect to be sometime in the late fall of this year will be another 
call for proposals. And as we go along, depending on the kinds 
of projects that are approved, then in order to meet our target of 
1,400 units we’ll get more and more specific about what kind of 
projects we’re going to be able to fund in order to meet our 
province-wide objectives, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I wonder 
if your officials or you yourself at some time could let me know 
exactly what the response was to the request to meet with the 
village of Windthorst. 
 
(19:45) 
 
I know in the past on numerous occasions you’ve kind of . . . if 
something’s in the constituency either due to a direct question 
on my part through a letter, you’ve sent a note back. Or 
sometimes even if a letter hasn’t arrived directly from me, 
we’ve had a conversation, you’ll just kind of give me a bit of an 
update as to a response to a specific request. 
 
So if you wouldn’t mind, this letter actually came back on April 
22 from the village of Windthorst for a meeting regarding 
seniors housing units. And so if your officials would just maybe 
make note of that and maybe get back to me, just let me know 
exactly what response has been sent back to the village 
regarding their request. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Minister, in regards to rental housing, you 
mentioned the fact that the dollars that are available today, 
while they sound like a substantial amount of money, in reality 
translate into very few units, housing units. 
 



1878 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

Probably about a month ago now I met with the Saskatchewan 
Rental Housing Industry Association. And I understand from 
the meeting with them, they had met with you personally just a 
short period of time prior to that. And the major concern that 
was raised with me, and no doubt would have been brought to 
your attention as well, is the ongoing problem in collecting rent, 
especially from people on assistance. 
 
And I understand, Mr. Minister, that while the cheques are 
made out both jointly, in many cases — and we had this debate 
last year too; we talked about it, about how the rent is being 
paid and it’s made out jointly — but the facts are the tenant 
needs to get that cheque off to the landlord. And it sounds to 
me, Mr. Minister, while we’re endeavouring to suggest that we 
need tenants and welfare recipients to start accepting more 
responsibility, that many of them are just failing to learn what it 
means to make sure that your rental bill or rental cheque is 
handed to the landlord in time, or even handed to the landlord at 
all. 
 
And one of the issues that was raised was the fact that more and 
more landlords are becoming more and more reluctant to even 
rent to welfare recipients because of the failure to have the rent 
passed on in an appropriate period of time, or even to receive 
the rent. And I think that might be part of the problem we’re 
having, Mr. Minister, in even private development in the 
province because of the number of social service recipients who 
have neglected to pass that cheque on. And as a result, landlords 
themselves are not prepared to invest in their properties because 
of the . . . or invest in their properties and rent to welfare 
recipients because of that. 
 
And one suggestion I would have, and it was brought to my 
attention as well, Mr. Minister, I would suspect or guess that 
even in this Legislative Assembly, on the floor of the Assembly 
this evening, many of the individuals here on the floor, myself 
included, on many occasions already now we have actually put 
in place a payment option which is an automatic transfer we’ve 
agreed to, we’ve signed on to. Whether it’s a payment on our 
housing or whether it’s a bill to SaskPower or SaskTel, you’ve 
got an auto debit on your account. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if this is something that 
couldn’t be done even with welfare recipients — if, rather than 
issuing the cheque, if the cheque went into their account or 
wherever it goes and then the welfare recipient would actually 
come to an agreement with the landlord that that rental 
agreement would be automatically deducted from their account, 
and thereby ensuring that the money flows to the landlord more 
efficiently and effectively and quickly versus just the cheque 
going to the recipient who may then just put it in the cupboard 
and say, well I’ll get it to the landlord by the end of the month, 
but ends up forgetting. And in many cases the landlord still has 
to move and, as the association was saying, on numerous 
occasions where it’s two or three months down the road when 
they start threatening eviction that they finally get their funds. 
 
And I don’t know if your department or your office has given 
any consideration to that means of making sure the . . . that 
method of payment to ensure that rental commitments are met. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Okay, thanks, Mr. Chair. The trouble with 
having a series of questions in your questions is that it takes a 

while to get them and you get a series of answers in your 
answers. 
 
But just going back to the first part of the hon. member’s 
question, Mr. Chair, about the proposal from Windthorst, or the 
interest from Windthorst I think is more accurate, to the best of 
my knowledge there has not been an actual proposal that has 
been submitted from Windthorst. I don’t have knowledge of 
that, but so . . . but they certainly would be most eligible to 
submit one under the centenary affordable housing program 
when we do our next call. 
 
However, having said that, the hon. member asks whether there 
would be willingness for officials to meet with him, and the 
answer’s a clear yes. Without hesitation we would be happy to 
have the appropriate person or personnel meet with him to 
discuss their needs and the means by which objectives related to 
affordable housing can be achieved. So that’s . . . There’s no 
doubt about that. 
 
On the matter of joint payment. As the hon. member says, this 
is something that he and I have discussed before and we have to 
put it into the context of the Building Independence objectives. 
And I know that the hon. member understands that as well, and 
that our key objective is for the province of Saskatchewan in the 
social assistance program to support as much as possible the 
independent, self-sufficient function of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan in maintaining their own needs. And part of that 
then comes to the responsibilities of money management, and 
included in that then, responsibilities to make payments for the 
place you live. 
 
I do want to remind the hon. member as well . . . I know that he 
will be aware that there has been legislation passed in 
Saskatchewan that specifically prohibits under human rights 
that a landlord would deny a potential tenant the opportunity to 
rent the facility purely and simply on the basis of being a social 
assistance recipient. And so it’s important that when we have 
our discussions it is in the context of the law. Having said that, 
of course landlords are always welcome to be asking for 
references and that sort of thing, and it happens all the time. But 
I do want to make that point. 
 
On the matter of joint payment then, I freely admit that it has 
been my direction to the department to as much as possible, as I 
said, to support people responsibly managing their own affairs 
— not building a dependency on the province managing their 
finances for them, but managing their own affairs. And this has 
led then to workers on a case-by-case basis to assess whether 
individuals have that capacity of successfully managing their 
own finances. 
 
For the information of the member, the most recent statistic I 
have is June 2002 — so that would be an 11-month-old statistic, 
but it is the most recent I have — is that in June 2002, 55.1 per 
cent of social assistance recipients are involved in joint 
payment. So in fact it is still the case that in Saskatchewan the 
majority of households receiving assistance are involved in 
joint payment kinds of arrangements. The number has been 
coming down. 
 
And certainly if a landlord is aware of an individual who is not 
involved in joint payment, brings that to the attention of the 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1879 

 

Department of Community Resources and Employment, then 
we would address that in the context of supporting what is 
necessary to aid a person into getting their bills paid, their 
obligations met, but at the same time reinforcing the 
expectation that people will be managers of their own money. 
That’s what we want at the end of the day. 
 
And part of that, again I go back to a discussion we’ve had a 
number of times. When we’ve looked at the reorganization of 
the Department of Community Resources and Employment and 
bringing . . . Why do you bring under the same policy umbrella 
income assistance, as we have, and the employment supports, 
for example, which is now a branch of the department? Income 
and employment together — why do you do those kinds of 
things? It’s because we intend, as much as possible, to use the 
resources of the taxpayers to provide the supports that people 
need; but secondly, in a way that supports people being 
independent and self-sufficient. 
 
And that clearly has to be, I think, the public obligation to the 
individual citizen as well as to the taxpayer, who would surely 
want our policies to promote people reducing and ultimately 
eliminating — if that’s possible for them to do — their 
requirement for support, for public support, and on the other 
hand acquiring the ability to be self-sufficient. So it’s in that 
context that the policies are there. And as I say, it can be dealt 
with on an individual basis. The majority of recipients at this 
point in time then are involved in joint payment kinds of 
arrangements. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, in the situations where 
joint cheques are issued and the joint cheques aren’t arriving in 
the landlord’s hands . . .and I think, Mr. Minister, as I indicated 
earlier, and I apologize for the fact that yes, I probably got into 
four or five or six questions, but we have . . . And no doubt you, 
sir, are like many other residents in the province of 
Saskatchewan, now have come to agreements with lenders or 
whatever where you’ve got auto debit payments on different 
accounts. 
 
And if I would . . . It would seem to me that if a customer . . . 
Pardon me, if a client is — and you’ve got joint cheque being 
issued — but if the client is having difficulty, for some reason 
or other just doesn’t get at it and get the cheque delivered, 
would it be conceivable to have the client come to you and 
suggest, you know, why don’t I just enter an agreement 
whereby the cheque is issued directly to the landlord? It’s in 
joint owner . . . It’s in joint names but I will . . . As if I were to 
make, ask a business to direct debit, I would sign an agreement 
whereby that debit would automatically come out of my 
account to cover that bill. 
 
Would that be something the department could look at and 
thereby allow those funds that may get misplaced and not 
issued on time, if the client so desired, allow that to move 
directly to the landlord? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the question by the 
hon. member. He may be interested to know that in fact 
Saskatchewan is one of the few provinces that does issue the 
joint payment. Most provinces in Canada in fact just have a 
straight policy of issuing the funds directly to the client. 
 

So in the Canadian context we’re — as the pendulum swings — 
we’re closer to the end of the swing of the pendulum that 
involves joint payment. 
 
Again I want to respond to this in many ways. What we’re 
talking about here is not so much a technical question as it is a 
question of strategy, of support for individuals. And it is the 
bias of the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment that the best approach that we can take is to not 
remove the client from the responsibility loop — that 
ultimately, at the end of the day, it would be my hope that the 
individual citizen who is requiring social assistance today will 
ultimately, if possible, be able to find a way to no longer require 
that. 
 
And therefore it is the policy of the department that the 
payments will either be made directly to the client or jointly to 
the client and the landlord. 
 
(20:00) 
 
One exception to that, and I know the hon. member is aware of 
this because he’s raised this in the matter of discussion with me 
personally as well as in the House in previous estimates, would 
be then where there is a case of trusteeship, where it is judged 
that the individual is purely and simply at this point in time —
and maybe for a long period of time, maybe not — but at this 
point in time is incapable of managing his or her financial 
affairs and therefore a trustee is put in place who will then be 
working together with the client to ensure that financial 
obligations are met. 
 
But that is recognized, I think, that it’s by far the exception, and 
it would be a circumstance that would be put in place when it is 
judged that the individual is incapable, simply incapable of 
managing their own financial affairs. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I move on because 
time is slipping away on us. Mr. Minister, maybe you could just 
update me as to what the current levels for housing rates are. I 
think there’s probably two — if I’m not mistaken — two fees, 
urban and . . . like an urban and a rural where it’s a little higher 
for rental fees. What I’m looking for is what would be allowed 
for housing. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, the question that arises is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re talking about in the shelter 
allowance? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Yes, sorry about that. Yes, and the second 
question that arises from that, has the department given any 
consideration to increasing that shelter allowance, as that was 
another issue that was raised. The fact that in many cases . . . 
And I know it really varies in Regina. But it would seem to me 
very difficult to find a shelter that would fall within the 
allowance that’s offered by the department. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what response has been 
taken in regards to the shelter allowance and whether or not it’s 
meeting the needs of the available spaces that are out there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’m well aware of the 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

discussion the hon. member had with the Saskatchewan 
landlords’ group who, as he knows, I met with as well earlier 
this year. And I do understand their concerns for the shelter 
rates reflecting the market realities. 
 
There are three different categories in Saskatchewan that will in 
some cases, not in all cases but in some cases, bring a different 
maximum in certain household circumstances. There’s tier 1, 
tier 2, and tier 3. And in tier 1 then are Regina, Saskatoon — 
Saskatoon includes Martensville and Warman — Prince Albert, 
Lloydminster, La Ronge, Yorkton, Melville, Weyburn, and 
Estevan. Those are all tier 1. Tier 2 are Moose Jaw, Swift 
Current, North Battleford, Battleford, Melfort, Nipawin, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Kindersley, Rosetown, Humboldt, and Dalmeny. 
And then in tier 3 are towns and rural areas. 
 
And those will be differentiated by the market norms. That’s 
generally what will guide whether, for example, Prince Albert’s 
is in tier 1 and Moose Jaw, which is a city of similar size, is in 
tier 2 . . . is guided by that. 
 
On the matter of shelter allowance, the hon. member will be 
aware that this is a category that hasn’t had an increase for some 
time and it is of concern to a good number of people and it 
certainly is to me as well. What is important to me, and this is 
why in part I am so determined that we are going to make 
maximum use of the centenary affordable housing dollars that 
we’ve got in order to support access to affordable, decent places 
for low- and moderate-income — not just families — 
households in order to live and why it’s important to increase 
the stock that we’ve got available. 
 
It is important to me that if we are to increase the public 
expenditure that goes into public housing . . . into support for 
low-income families through social assistance, that it’s . . . 
there’s got to be, from my point of view, something more 
involved than just raising the rates. 
 
And this is part of the discussion I had with the landlords’ 
group on more than one occasion and will continue to have as 
we consult. It is important to me that if we’re spending public 
dollars to support Saskatchewan citizens to live, to meet their 
accommodation needs, that if we’re going to increase that, I 
want to see some way of bringing an increased assurance of 
quality of accommodation into the picture. 
 
And from my point of view, in order to seriously consider 
moving the shelter rates, paid for by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan to support Saskatchewan citizens, that I want to 
see that there will be some improved ability to assure that those 
public dollars are being spent on adequate kind of living 
accommodations for Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
And to me at the end of the day that’s an important policy 
question. I invite input in addressing that specifically from 
proponents. I’ll welcome any discussion from any part of the 
province to deal with that question. 
 
But it is, to me there is a matter of ethic that’s involved in this 
question as well. If we’re looking at making change in rates, 
then I want to, I want to be assured that we can count on that 
providing access to some decent places to be living. 
 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I wonder if . . . you 
mentioned tier 1, 2 and 3. Are there specific rate maximums for 
each tier? And I wonder if you could just respond and let me 
know what those rates are. 
 
And secondly, the other concern . . . issue that was raised, the 
quality issue was an area of discussion that certainly we had 
with the association as well. And one of the matters that they 
raised is the upkeep on their properties, and at current rates it 
makes it difficult. And they recognize the fact that if they’re 
going to upgrade to provide that quality they need a certain 
level to maintain . . . for them to be able to maintain that 
upgrade and providing a quality of living space. So I think the 
association’s quite well aware of that at all. It’s not a matter of 
just asking for it, to have more and then not look after the 
property. 
 
It’s everything . . . I think you’ll agree, Mr. Minister, we’ve 
seen increases in almost every commodity. Certainly a lot of the 
areas and services that are provided, whether it’s the cost of 
housing and construction or what have you, there has been . . . 
In the lumber sector, there has been somewhat of a decrease, 
but in general principles we’ve seen increases in the costs of a 
lot of services. 
 
So that having said that, I think that reflects some of the effect 
that is being held by landlords as they try to upgrade their rental 
properties in view of even what the marketplace is prepared to 
offer for a rental property. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I can either read into the record 
the maximums for the tiers, or if the hon. member wants, I can 
just send it to him. Do you have a preference? Just send it to 
you? Yes, I’ll do that in the various categories and get that to 
you. No problem at all. 
 
Going back to the point the hon. member makes about 
affordability and adequacy, which is really the issue that we’re 
faced with here, and he’ll recognize from earlier on in our 
discussion that we identify some 17,000 households in 
Saskatchewan that have — for whom this is a real issue — 
affordability and adequacy both. 
 
And it is clearly my concern that as we . . . are we willing to 
look at increased public expenditure in support of shelter? The 
answer is yes. But I’m not prepared to look at it being purely 
and simply an increase in right. 
 
From my point of view, it is the ethic that the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment accepts, when we’re 
using public dollars, is that those dollars must be spent to 
address both the issue of affordability and adequacy. If we’re 
going to do good public policy and spend tax dollars wisely for 
people who need those kinds of support, I’m not prepared to be 
just only single-minded in the way that we look at that. 
 
And so as I said earlier, I am more than prepared to meet — and 
officials are more than prepared to meet — with private sector 
proponents, public sector commentators who are willing to 
recommend how we can address these issues. 
 
Centenary affordable housing program is a program that helps 
us to address that issue by bringing grant payments and to 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

 

provide the potential for affordable, adequate rental, as well as 
affordable, adequate home ownership. And however as I said 
earlier, that’s 1,400 units when you need 17,000. 
 
And I’m just, I’m just not prepared to look at only one side of 
this coin. If we’re going to increase our public expenditure, then 
from my point of view, it has to include an increase in 
assurance that the accommodations that our Saskatchewan 
citizens living in . . . are living in meets some basic standards. 
And so my mind is very open to any, any proponents who are 
interested in making suggestions as to how we can move in that 
direction by way of public policy. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, regarding that concern 
from the village of Windthorst, I did send over a letter. And 
maybe just not necessarily needing a response right now, but if 
you could just let me know what the department response to the 
minister was, even by letter, that’ll be fine. It won’t . . . It’s not 
necessary tonight, unless you do have a response in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I do point out to the hon. 
member the final sentence in the letter that the administrator 
writes, that they look forward to meeting with Sask Housing 
Corporation to pursue opportunities to meet the housing needs. 
 
And we will . . . You’ve got it on the record, and if you want 
more than that, we can do that but I think this probably meets 
the need. And I’m not sure if . . . We may have already been in 
contact with them, but if we haven’t, we will be as a matter of 
course. This is the kind of conversation that we welcome and 
we’ll follow up with on a regular basis. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and that’s basically what 
I was asking, if they, even down the road, not necessarily 
having to have the answer tonight but just kind of let me know 
what the response was. 
 
Mr. Minister, is the department involved at all in any funding 
for on-reserve housing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — All on-reserve housing is handled by the 
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation, CMHC, and the 
province of Saskatchewan is not involved in on-reserve 
housing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, another issue that’s come up on 
many occasions is the response or your response to the 
disability action plan that was released in 2001. In fact just 
recently, and you and I both attended the 35th anniversary for 
the SARC (Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres) association and that was an issue that was brought to 
our attention again. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can let us know 
exactly what your response is to that disability action plan and 
where indeed your department is heading with that, in regards 
to the plan. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the response of the province of 
Saskatchewan in this year’s budget has been, in total, about $6 
million in total in increased expenditure to support the principle 

of citizenship and participation which are core principles of the 
disability action plan and have been well received. Within that 
. . . have been well received by the disabilities committee. 
 
Within that $6 million, $4 million of that is expenditures 
through the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment and perhaps I can just list those for the hon. 
member. The single largest and the largest increase that has 
gotten the most attention, I think it’s fair to say, has been an 
additional, in this budget, $1.85 million in new funding to 
address individualized barriers that people with disabilities 
have. 
 
We anticipate that this will support the additional attachment to 
mainstream employment for people with disabilities in the 
neighbourhood of about 900 individuals over the course of the 
fiscal year. And that’s monies then that is used to address the 
specific barriers related to a disability that a specific employee 
has with a specific employer. 
 
In addition to that there’s $300,000 which is targeted to 
employers and to work with the employers to increase the 
ability to make mainstream employment available to individuals 
with disabilities. In addition to that there is $150,000 — which 
is not in my department, which is in Department of Health — 
that is extremely important to a good number of people with 
disabilities who are currently receiving social assistance. So 
social assistance recipients are Department of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
The hon. member will recognize that one of the principles that 
has been so important in the Building Independence program to 
support low-income parents’ attachment to work to take 
children out of that poverty cycle, has been the family health 
benefits — recognizing the value of that that many low-income 
families have at least above average sickness with their children 
and the importance of the family health benefits. 
 
And there is a parallel for many people with disabilities who, as 
part of their condition, have significant medical needs and for 
whom the health benefit on the social assistance program is 
extremely important to their own security. And so therefore it 
can be said in some ways, Mr. Chair, that that support policy 
becomes a barrier to leaving assistance to go to employment. 
Because there’s the risk that when you go to employment, you 
lose the family health benefit and it’s quite possible that you 
could literally be worse off working than not working because 
the important . . . the protection you have, that health benefit, 
has been lost. 
 
And so what’s in this budget effective this June 1 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . effective June 1 — so it’s in effect now — 
effective June 1 a person with a disability who’s a social 
assistance recipient who leaves assistance to go to work, for the 
first year will take that health benefit with them. You don’t lose 
the benefit, the health benefit, because you went to work. And I 
know, as I have talked to a good number of people in 
disabilities communities, that’s an extremely important factor in 
terms of supporting the ability to attach to mainstream 
employment — mainstream employment which is employment 
where you’re using knowledge and skills and getting 
mainstream pay and mainstream benefits. 
 



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Chair, there was a decision in this 
budget to increase the disability allowance for those who are 
receiving assistance but . . . and receive the disability 
allowance, that are eligible for that. It’s increased by $10 a 
month and the cost of that to the public purse is an additional $1 
million. 
 
There is also $1 million in my department’s budget this year to 
increase, within the community living division, 
accommodations as they require for residential 
accommodations of people with disabilities. 
 
There is also in the budget some $715,000 from the Centenary 
Fund to replace another 13 paratransit vehicles. And we’ll all 
recognize for people with disabilities, if you’re going to be 
participating in our society, enjoying full citizenship, part of . . . 
What that means is you have to have a way to get to work, get 
to social activity, and so on. And so therefore the paratransit 
vehicles that our communities use are an important part of that 
and there is support in that as well. 
 
There is, outside of my department, an additional $1 million 
that’s targeted in this budget to support, through SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), the access 
to public buildings for people with disabilities. 
 
So that’s been the budgetary response. There will be more if 
you want that we can talk about, but we’re in estimates and 
that’s the budgetary response to the disability action plan in this 
year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to do a little more follow up 
on that specific question. But there’s a couple other areas I’d 
like to get into as well, and I’m not exactly sure what timetable 
we’ve agreed to tonight. But an issue . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 8:30. 
 
Mr. Toth: — That’s what I was concerned about. But, Mr. 
Minister, an issue that comes up on an ongoing basis is . . . And 
of course any time we talk to officials from SARC and 
SARCAN and some of these organizations that are providing 
support to people with disabilities throughout the province, 
either through group homes or sheltered workshop situations, a 
major problem that arises in many, many communities — and I 
would suspect the large urbans are no different than the small 
rurals — is the issue of wages and salary, and the fact that the 
wage levels in comparison to heavy care or care homes or even 
in hospitals and support staff in hospitals, is that it’s 
substantially less. 
 
And I know in a number of communities locally where they just 
nicely trained an individual, and basically with a little 
additional training that person has then been able to move into 
working in a care home or a health care centre of some type for 
substantially more money. And many of these organizations 
have been finding it difficult to hold employees as a result of 
the wages. And I know that was a major issue last year. 
 
I’m wondering exactly where we are in addressing that concern, 
Mr. Minister, and whether or not any steps have been taken to 
try to address that concern, that issue. That makes it difficult for 
some of these groups to find qualified, or to hold on to and 

maintain qualified help rather than continually training new 
personnel because the personnel, they basically move them 
through and they find other employment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the hon. member in his remarks 
refers to Saskatchewan Association of Rehab Centres, SARC. It 
is, as a matter of fact, one of SARC’s tasks that they’re working 
on a human resource plan, have been for some time, and we’ll 
be working on it through this fall. I have made it very clear to 
SARC that I am very, very interested in their advice and that 
we’ll be looking at that very seriously. 
 
I’m extremely aware of the significance of the recruitment and 
retention challenges that exist in our CBO (community-based 
organization) world. Community-based organizations are very 
important for the delivery of services provided through the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment. And in 
fact, it’s the recognition of the community significance of the 
delivery system that has led in many ways to the new name of 
the department, Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Over the last seven years, funding directed to wage 
enhancement has been in the range of $25 million. In this 
budget that’s before us, there is a 3 per cent increase that is 
targeted to wage enhancements, to wage expenditures of the 
community-based organizations. There have been discussions 
that have begun in workshops, that have begun on 
outcomes-based planning, and that that’s generated a fair 
amount of interest in community-based organizations. 
 
I had a discussion just this afternoon with a Saskatchewan 
community-based organization that has participated in the 
outcomes-based workshop and has a lot of enthusiasm about 
looking at the way that we measure the delivery of services to 
the people of Saskatchewan to ensure that we’re doing a good 
job and making the best use of the resources that we’ve got 
available. 
 
So I can assure the hon. member and the community-based 
organizations in Saskatchewan that I am well aware of the 
recruitment and retention challenges that they have, and that we 
are committed to working together with community-based 
organizations and to bring the resources, the best resources that 
are available to us, to address those ongoing recruitment and 
retention challenges that they have. 
 
We’ve made some progress, I would argue, over the past 
number of years. We’ve still got a fair ways to go, I quite 
acknowledge that; and we’ll continue to do this in a very 
collaborative kind of way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you. And I think, 
Mr. Minister, we will both agree with the fact that many of 
these organizations do a tremendous job and . . . in providing 
assistance and care for people with disabilities. And in many 
cases a number of these people would have been more in an 
institutionalized format, which I don’t think we really want to 
see. 
 
I think it’s been good for a lot of individuals to be . . . You 
talked about independence. And while they may not be totally 
independent, we’re creating for many individuals — and I know 
I’m talking of my communities because that’s what I see around 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

 

me a lot of times there — that sense of at least independence. 
But it comes with a bit of a cost because you do need caregivers 
or people to provide some support mechanisms, and having 
adequate funding so that you have people . . . We come back to 
that question of quality. 
 
And also I think the other thing that really comes out in many 
cases for people working in group homes and sheltered 
workshops is the level of care. To many people the fortunate 
part, it’s not just a job; it’s something they enjoy doing working 
with people and assisting people with disabilities. It’s like 
they’re giving of themselves to help somebody else and that just 
shows the positive side of our human nature, the willing to do 
unto others as we’d like them to do unto ourselves. 
 
Mr. Minister, one area — I know we’re not going to get into a 
lot of depth on it — but I think we’ll have 10 questions and one 
comment here. 
 
It’s regarding the welfare rolls in this province, and a couple of 
quick questions here and I guess we’ll let you go where you 
want to go, Mr. Minister. The time will be dictated by how long 
you want to take to respond. No doubt you’re . . . probably 
would like to do a major dialogue on how well your 
government’s been doing. 
 
But this one headline reads, “Sask. welfare numbers see steady 
decline since ’94: Decrease (however) doesn’t mean fortunes of 
poor people improving . . .” And we see . . . And I know just 
chatting with people down at providing some of . . . Souls 
Harbour for example and the food banks, we have some major 
concerns coming out of those two organizations for example. 
And in this article it talks about the fact that, I think, you talked 
about the decrease to some 29,000 caseloads at this time over 
. . . a 10 per cent drop over the year of March 31. And I forget 
the date on here; I don’t have a date right on this article. 
 
(20:30) 
 
But there was a single woman in this article talks about having 
taken some training, gone back . . . or trying to get to work. 
Unfortunately by the time she paid her babysitter, she really had 
very little left and so she ended up just going back on welfare 
for a while, something that she really didn’t want to do. 
 
Another young lady mentions, I didn’t want to raise my kids on 
assistance so I figured that . . . She used, I think, some help 
from social assistance to get off work but she basically said, 
Social Services just didn’t do enough for someone wanting to 
get off assistance. There’s so much red tape. It was her own 
persistence that actually got her off of assistance. 
 
But I think what was coming through loud and clear from both 
of the individuals is that, as they’re attempting to get off of 
assistance and trying to find employment, one of the stumbling 
blocks they had — they’re both single parents with children. 
And of course we know child care is an issue that a lot of young 
people, young women face. 
 
And recently you did mention some funding for child care 
programs in the province of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Minister, 
I’ve kind of . . . we’ve got a lot in a little bit. I haven’t got to the 
10 questions yet but I think you have the gist of where I’m 

going in regards to that. 
 
And I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, in regards to your child 
care programs, the funding for these child care programs, 
exactly how is that administered? Is that publicly funded 
daycare programs or would some of that funding, would people 
apply for it individually? 
 
Let’s say a single parent has hired someone they know, a 
neighbour but isn’t a recognized daycare program of that nature. 
Would some of those funds go to assist single parents in that 
manner to provide some of the child care they need so that they 
can actually find some gainful and meaningful employment and 
provide for themselves and stay off of assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, probably the only person 
who would be more enthusiastic about extending our discussion 
than the critic for the opposition, Mr. Chair, would be the 
minister. And so it won’t be because of either his preference or 
mine that we must wrap up here now as agreed and move to 
other estimates. 
 
But heaven forbid that I should pass by the opportunity to 
respond to the important issues that the hon. member raises as 
he addresses issues of support for people moving out of poverty 
to independence, and also the way that we support that through 
our child care supports as well. 
 
Let me be as brief as I can to acknowledge that Saskatchewan 
has done some good work. I appreciate the hon. member’s 
recognition that Saskatchewan has gone now more than nine 
consecutive years — year after year after year without fail — 
with a reduction in the social assistance caseloads within the 
province. 
 
And I think it would be generally acknowledged that 
Saskatchewan’s ability to reduce the requirement for social 
assistance has been greatest since the Building Independence 
program was introduced in 1998, and since which time the 
number of families requiring social assistance has come down 
by 6,000. 
 
But what I said many times I consider to be the, simply the 
most significant number is the fact that today there are more 
than 13,000 fewer kids growing up on welfare than just five 
years ago. And you don’t have to be a rocket scientist to look at 
how that’s good for the families, it’s good for the children, it’s 
good for the taxpayer. 
 
But just on the numbers alone, Mr. Chair, but I would say as 
well that I think the real payoff for Saskatchewan will come a 
generation from now when children grow up outside of poverty, 
they grow up in homes in which a parent or parents are 
working; and the different kind of atmosphere that exists and 
that leads to them becoming eventually adults who bring their 
own attitudes and their own expectations of . . . that they have 
of themselves and their society to the parenthood task of the 
next generation. 
 
On the matter of child care supports, the hon. member quite 
accurately acknowledges, Mr. Chair, that there has been a 
significant increase in this budget again in support for child care 
access in two ways. One, with the commitment that we will 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

increase the number of child care spaces in the province by 
1,200 over the next four years, including 500 this year alone, in 
the fiscal year in which we are now. 
 
In addition to that, we also brought funding to 250 currently 
existing but unfunded spaces. That’s not counted in the 500; 
that’s above and beyond the 500. And there are, I think it’s 81, I 
think is the exact number of Kids First child care spaces that are 
above and beyond that as well. So that’s a significant growth in 
the system. 
 
Now in addition to that, there was announced — and it came 
into play in June 1 — the increase in the child care subsidy by 
an average of $20 per child per month. And along with that, as 
the subsidy increased, then so did the income level at which the 
subsidy is available. 
 
But in response to the hon. member’s question, Mr. Chair, that 
subsidy relates to licensed spaces. That is, the subsidy is 
required to be assigned to licensed spaces. 
 
However having said that, I do want to remind the hon. member 
as well that part of the Building Independence program that I’ve 
not referred to is the employment supplement. And the 
employment supplement then takes the earned income that a 
lower-income working family has and adds to that supplement 
to address the working . . . the work expenses, and recognizing 
that working expenses can include of course child care. 
 
And in the employment supplement that we have there is 
absolutely no restriction as to how a family would use . . . 
would apply that money to meet their own expenses. And so 
clearly in the case where a family would choose to respond, 
have their child care needs responded to through personal 
arrangements and not licensed arrangements, very clearly the 
supplement that’s there to support low-income family 
attachment to the workforce can enable them to use that. 
 
The employment supplement is . . . Okay, I just have pointed 
out to me here, to put into context, the number of families that 
are receiving some form of assistance under the Building 
Independence program — the family health benefit, the 
employment supplement, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit — is 
in the range of 26,000 families across the province. So that’s no 
small measure of assistance that we have been able to bring to 
support lower-income families here in our province, to assist 
them to be able to have the support available outside of the 
welfare system. 
 
And thinking of ourselves, I think as I look down the road, Mr. 
Chair, where are we going? Where clearly I want to see us head 
is that we will relate to the social assistance program or the 
welfare program in the way that it was originally intended, as a 
short-term, stop-gap program. And the problem that so many 
people have these days has to do with the fact that the rules that 
govern the social assistance program are intended to deal with a 
program that’s short-term, stop-gap, in short-term times of 
need. 
 
And what we’re recognizing that when the needs are longer 
term than that, the program we’ve got — that we call welfare 
informally — doesn’t do a very good job of meeting the social 
need. And clearly what’s in the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan is support systems that are outside of the welfare 
system, support systems that support people being able to attach 
to mainstream employment, that support people becoming 
increasingly a part of our economy that . . . who want to be and 
taking advantage of the dynamics that are going on in the world 
around us. 
 
With a tightening of the labour market, what, for employers, 
including CBOs, is . . . you know, they see over and over again 
the challenges related to recruitment and retention. On the other 
hand, for those of us who support people who have tended to 
live outside of the mainstream, being able to get in and be a part 
of the mainstream of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know I’ve thought many ways, Mr. Chair, as I look down 
the road and I say, what’s your dream? You know, it is in many 
ways I define what is my dream. How do we know if we 
succeed? It’s based on the kind of complaints that we hear from 
the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I will know that we’ve achieved our objective, Mr. Chair, 
when instead of people describing the difficulty they have of 
making ends meet with the public supports that we provide 
through the welfare system, instead of . . . those same people 
are engaging in that great Canadian experience called 
complaining about your income tax, that I will know. If those 
same people are changing the complaints to their . . . then I will 
know we’ve made progress. 
 
Because we’ve done the right thing policy-wise to support 
people getting to where they want to go, to have attachment to 
the best form of income security possible — and that’s 
employment. 
 
So it’s a long answer, I know. I tried to be comprehensive, as I 
know the hon. member has in his question, and we’re both well 
aware that we’ve passed the time that has been agreed for 
estimates in the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment. And I don’t know, did the hon. member want to 
make a final comment? If so, Mr. Chair, I’ll take my place and 
let him do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I thank you. And 
unfortunately yes, you’re right, we . . . there are a number of 
questions here in regards to that that would have been nice to 
get into, but time constraints sometimes come . . . stand in the 
way. I appreciate the work your officials have done and the 
responses we’ve had. Look forward to addressing a few more 
issues as time allows, and thank you for your time. 
 
And I think over the past number of weeks, Mr. Minister, we’ve 
also shown that we can probably accommodate a lot without 
really getting into a very heated argument. Or is that just yours 
and my personality? I’m not exactly sure. We haven’t got into 
that heated rhetorical debate in regards to your department, at 
least to date, but I appreciate the time and the work of your 
officials at this time. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well I thank you, Mr. Chair, and I . . . we 
won’t get into personality analysis except to note, Mr. Chair, 
that perhaps it is a couple of mellow fellows who are engaged 
in this discussion, this important discussion, about how our 
province supports people who are most vulnerable as our 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

 

citizens of our province. 
 
I, Mr. Chair, before making the motion, do again want to thank 
the officials of the department for their assistance this evening 
and their ongoing assistance as they provide leadership in 
moving forward in a creative way to use the resources provided 
to us by the people of Saskatchewan most effectively and most 
synergistically in support of people who are most vulnerable in 
our province. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Chair, I move that the committee report 
progress on Community Resources and Employment estimates 
and move to estimates on Highways and Transportation. 
 
(20:45) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce our deputy minister for the Department of Highways 
and Transportation, Harvey Brooks, who is to my immediate 
left. To my right is Barry Martin, who is the associate deputy 
minister of policy and programs. Stu Armstrong is immediately 
behind Harvey; he is the assistant deputy minister of operations. 
 
Next to Stu is Don Wincherauk, who is assistant deputy 
minister of corporate services. Fred Antunes is to the right of 
Don and he is director of operations, planning and business 
support. Les Bell is sitting to my left in the second row and is 
manager of sustainable infrastructure. And Terry Blomme is 
executive director of the southern region and sitting in the third 
row behind me. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here tonight. We have a 
number of issues that we would like to discuss with the minister 
and we’re certain that his officials will be most helpful to our 
discussions. 
 
Minister, there’s a . . . part of the budget is . . . there’s $5.5 
million that is allocated to a strategic rural roads partnership 
program. I wonder if you could just in very briefly explain the 
parameters of that particular program and its purpose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well a number of times, to the 
member opposite, a number of times there have been questions 
asked about our rural roads, particularly the thin membrane 
surface highways and the impacts that heavy haul has had on 
those. 
 
And so as we’ve looked at ways of trying to manage our 
resource most effectively, we’ve met with communities, with 
rural municipalities. And in working with those municipal 
bodies we have managed to come up with this strategic rural 
roads partnership program which allows us to, in many cases, 
find alternate routes for heavy haul, and then when we rebuild 

or maintain a TMS (thin membrane surface), it doesn’t get the 
heavy haul and it stays up to a better standard for a longer 
period of time. 
 
So our investments in repair, maintenance, rebuilding are better 
used that way. It’s completely volunteer. It’s done in 
co-operation with the municipalities. So that would be the one 
type. 
 
Another type of strategic rural road partnership that we have 
managed quite successfully, and again in co-operation with the 
municipalities, has been shared responsibilities in building 
where they may have materials or labour or heavy-duty 
equipment that they will use in helping with the road 
construction. 
 
So those are the basic parameters for the strategic rural roads 
program and we found some very good success with those. We 
might have a particular road that would be good for industry, 
whether it be a grain company or a manufacturing operation, 
and working with the company and the municipality we’ve been 
able to work out a partnership that enables us to more . . . to 
manage the resource in a better, more effective way and provide 
the kind of transportation needs that people are looking for. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, how many agreements 
have you got in place at present with municipalities for alternate 
truck or heavy-haul routes? And also while I’m on my feet, I’d 
like to ask how many partnership agreements have you got with 
municipalities to build and reconstruct highways? I understand 
it’s thin membrane highways that you have partnership . . . If 
you could tell me how many of each that you have at present? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Okay, I’ll answer this in two parts. In 
’03-04, the department is committed to investing about $4.5 
million on 26 initiatives. And this is 48 partners and will 
manage about 535 kilometres of highway. This includes four 
municipal road projects under the Prairie Grain Roads Program 
valued at $340,000. 
 
The department is committed to five construction partnership 
projects valued at 1.86 million: Annaheim road, Highway 31 
West, Highway 51 west of Kerrobert, Highway 342; and not 
added into the dollar amount is one which has just recently been 
negotiated in the member’s own constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood on Highway 15. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, the minister mentioned 
that there is an agreement with an RM (rural municipality). I 
believe that’s RM 279 with regards to Highway 15, the RM of 
Mount Hope. Just for the public record, that isn’t in my 
constituency; it’s just outside my constituency. But that’s okay 
because I was going to raise that issue, and I’m glad the 
minister did. 
 
Now the way I understand these . . . my understanding of this 
partnership arrangement to construct highways is that the RM 
acts as a general contractor. And the RM may or may not 
actually do the work but they act as the general contractor. And 
I understand that when funds are made available from the 
Department of Highways, then the RM goes ahead and issues 
tenders, or calls for tenders and so on to have the work done. 
 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

To me, I just wonder what is the advantage, if in fact that is the 
scenario where the RM is the general contractor but as I have 
said may or may not actually do the work themselves but 
oversee the work? What advantages does the department see 
they are gaining by involving the RM in this process? 
 
You are building a highway; you’re not building a municipal 
road. Quite often RMs don’t have equipment, I understand. I 
believe the RM of Mount Hope does have some equipment and 
so on. But regardless they’re not a highways contractor and that 
sort of thing. So where are the efficiencies, Mr. Minister, in this 
type of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Where the RM has its own equipment, 
basically they’ll do the direct . . . just bill the direct cost to the 
department. But there’s a very strong local buy in. They’re 
doing the construction themselves. Very often they’ll do the 
design work as well. You know, we have standard parameters 
that are set, but they’ll do the design work as well. 
 
(21:00) 
 
And generally what is . . . where the savings are both to us and 
to the RM . . . I mean the benefit to the RM is the roads are 
done in a timely manner and there are savings in terms of the 
overall administrative costs. And for us the benefit is in the, 
again being able to move the projects ahead, and again savings 
for us also in administrative costs. And we just do . . . we just 
pay the direct billing costs that the RM puts forward to us. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I’m looking at an article in the Last 
Mountain Times dated April 6 that reported on a spring 
ratepayers supper in the RM of Mount Hope, and the agreement 
that you’ve mentioned was certainly a topic of discussion 
between the council and the ratepayers in attendance. 
 
And it appears from this report that quite a number of 
ratepayers in that municipality certainly were not happy that the 
council had entered into an agreement with the department. 
They were . . . They felt that the building of highways is a 
provincial responsibility. They felt that if the council, if the RM 
was using their own equipment to build highways, that they felt 
the remuneration or the payment for that type of work wasn’t 
enough to offset the long . . . the wear and tear and so on. They 
just weren’t happy with it. 
 
And I think the underlying feeling was that this was just the 
first step in having the RM accept total responsibility for the 
highway. 
 
And I guess my question to you, Minister, is in fact that the 
purpose behind this program is to turn over some of these thin 
membrane surfaces to the RMs for total responsibility? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Leave to welcome guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. I just see we have some 

visitors up in your gallery. I think it would be appropriate for us 
at this time to welcome our visitors here in the House tonight. 
So I’d ask all members to join in with me to welcome our 
visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member opposite, we know 
that there were department officials at the meeting of Mount 
Hope and I think it’s important to note that the discussions 
around this are generally broad-ranging and sometimes the RMs 
decide not to join in. 
 
But very clearly, very simply and straightforward, the answer is 
no. It is not our design or long-term plan to turn the roads over 
to the RMs to try and off-load. But what in fact it is, is a way I 
think, and very common to us as a province, that where we can 
pull together to accomplish a result that is beneficial to 
everyone, then we do that. And I think the experience that we 
have had . . . And there a number of situations where one RM 
neighbour to another one will have a road that they would like 
to have done through a partnership agreement, have at some 
previous point decided to go ahead with the partnership. The 
road has been progressing, and the other RM that might have 
engaged in the discussions looks at this one and goes, oh why 
didn’t we go forward with it, we should have, at the time — and 
then later on join in in co-operative discussions and the road’s 
moved forward. 
 
So basically what it’s about is that we are able to get more done 
when we operate co-operatively. People in those areas are 
asking for the roads to be completed, and with the limited pie 
that we have to divide up we can get more done when we work 
co-operatively. And I think the RM, the feedback that has come 
through my office, the feedback that comes through the 
department discussions, is that the RMs that have joined in on 
these programs are generally very pleased with the results. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, Minister, I’m certainly 
happy to hear that it is not your intention to off-load these 
highways on to the rural municipalities. I know there are a 
number of people out in rural Saskatchewan that are very 
concerned about that issue and they will be watching very 
carefully and closely that that doesn’t happen. 
 
Minister, I’d like to just take an opportunity to discuss a number 
or a couple of highways in my constituency and a couple that 
are not in my constituency. It seems that a number of my 
colleagues have had an opportunity to discuss with you 
highway issues that are of concern that are within their 
constituency and I feel I should be doing the same. 
 
We have discussed I think in the past this issue of Highway No. 
22 from Junction No. 6 to Junction 20, and particularly the 4 or 
5 kilometres from Junction 6 west to the grain terminal, and just 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

 

to make you and your officials aware that Highway 22 between 
those two junctions, particularly the west part of it, really 
underwent severe damage this spring. 
 
And my question is what are the department’s plans and is there 
any short-, medium- or long-term plans to address that section 
of highway, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — For the time being, our plan is just to 
do regular maintenance, try and . . . We know there was a 
number of breakouts in that section of road, and so crews will 
be out doing maintenance, rebuilding those particular sections 
— patching and repairing, I mean. 
 
And the other thing is that for a longer term plan, in mid-August 
the department officials will be meeting with the RM, will be 
looking at what the possibilities are for alternate roads — I 
think it’s 731 — looking at the possibility for doing some kind 
of a partnership there that might help us move ahead and 
preserve that piece of road. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, the 4 or 5 kilometres 
from Junction 6 to the Pioneer cement elevator, is there no 
plans to upgrade that portion of highway? I have received 
numerous calls from farm people in the area who are very 
concerned about that. They are asking that at least they have 
one access of . . . reasonable access, I guess. And they’re asking 
that that section of highway be brought up to standard so that it 
would not need to have weight restrictions placed on it in the 
spring. 
 
It’s, as I said, it’s 5 or 6 kilometres, I just forget now. I have 
been down that stretch of highway a number of times and the 
people of the area along with the business feel that that should 
be fairly high priority. 
 
So I would put that thought forward, Minister. And also I just 
raise at this time Highway No. 20, particularly from Govan to 
Nokomis, has suffered severe damage this year. And again, 
have you any plans to address that situation in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With regard to the section between 
Semans and the grain terminal — Pioneer Grain terminal — or 
pardon me, Southey and the terminal, it’s about somewhere 
between 2 and 3 kilometres actually into the terminal there. I’ve 
been out and driven on the road, looked at it. 
 
And we have engaged in some discussions with the RM and 
also, I think I’d indicated last year, with Pioneer. It’s a typical 
kind of case where a partnership agreement with industry would 
certainly help in moving this ahead. I mean the direct 
beneficiaries are the producers and the grain terminal 
themselves to having this put forward. Very often when a grain 
terminal is building in an area like that they might look at, in 
their capital costs, including an amount to make sure that they 
have good, strong access. 
 
So that would be the typical kind of a spot for a partnership 
program that might include all three partners in making this 
happen. And the department is very open to those kind of 
discussions and would be happy to meet and work on that if the 
players were interested. 
 

With regard to Highway 20, Highway 20 is a granular pavement 
and has pretty much reached the end of its 20-year life cycle. 
It’ll go into the mix with our provincial highways in terms of 
priority. 
 
And, I mean, we don’t want to lose these . . . the investments 
that we’ve got there, so in the meantime our crews will be out 
patching, maintaining, and then we know that it needs to be 
rebuilt so it will go into the works in terms of the priorities for a 
rebuild. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, I’ve been 
asked the question, and I think it’s probably a legitimate 
question that I should ask you, is when Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool built a high-throughput elevator at Booth Siding on 
Highway 15, the department undertook to upgrade that highway 
from Junction 6 all the way to Semans, some 10 kilometres or 
15 kilometres — something like that, I believe, is the distance. 
 
Now we have Pioneer who has built a high-throughput elevator 
on Highway 22 some 5 kilometres off of Junction 6. They’re 
asking for that section of the highway to be improved and 
upgraded. And you mentioned that you’ve been in discussions 
with them under a trucking partnership program. 
 
Did the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool enter into a trucking 
partnership agreement out of their Booth Siding’s plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The section from Booth Siding to 
Semans was built under the old CAIP (Canada/Saskatchewan 
Agri-Infrastructure Program) program. And there were a 
number of projects that were applied for under CAIP. And the 
structure of administration there and management was very 
similar to what we have under the Prairie Grain Roads Program 
where you have SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipality 
Association) representatives and it was just one of the ones that 
was picked out of a whole number of grain-dependent roads 
that might receive a rebuild; and it was rebuilt under the CAIP 
program. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I would suggest that your department 
would have a fair bit of influence on this committee that decides 
what roads will be built under the Prairie Grain Roads, and I 
would suggest that if it was the wish of the department to have a 
short section of highway considered under the program, that, I 
would think, would carry a fair bit of weight in the final 
decision making. And I would ask that that section of highway 
be given the same consideration as that section of highway on 
Highway 15 from Junction 6 to Semans. 
 
Also I have a question and I’ve been . . . had citizens speak to 
me about Highway 310 between Ituna and Balcarres. I believe 
last year there was a short section south of Ituna was done with 
the technology and the method that Pavement Scientific 
International used, I believe. If memory serves me, I believe it 
was one of the contractors that worked in the Cupar area or 
Dysart area that did the same work, I believe. 
 
The question is . . . and I’ve been asked by RM councils, 
amongst other people, is there . . . is 310 slated for an upgrade, 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2003 

 

the rest of it, similar to what has been done, that short section 
south of Ituna? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I’ll start with the question about 
310 and then I want to go back to the piece between Booth 
Siding and Semans. 
 
So with regard to 310, the current plan doesn’t have any work 
done on that. It’s not a corridor so it doesn’t really qualify under 
PGRP (Prairie Grain Roads Program) as well but . . . And the 
other thing is that we might have been able to do small sections 
this year, and in a year where so much demand isn’t there for 
fixing and maintenance on a TMS. And this, as the member will 
know, in a wet year like this it really takes a high toll on 
maintenance for the TMS. And so we don’t have the extra funds 
that we might use to do spot upgrading that we would . . . we’ve 
been able to do in some of the drier years. So 310 is not listed in 
the . . . hasn’t qualified for PGRP. 
 
So that leads into the second piece, and that was the question 
around the section between Booth Siding and Semans. And 
CAIP actually had some different guidelines than what PGRP 
does. CAIP is . . . or pardon me, PGRP is more looking at 
corridors that are grain dependent, but CAIP allowed for short 
sections that were directly to terminals. So the parameters with 
which we’re allowed to deal are quite different between CAIP 
and Prairie Grain Roads Program. And that basically would 
explain why that section does qualify there. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I believe your office has been contacted 
by the village of Paradise Hill. That village has some concerns 
with Highway 3 that passes through the village. I understand 
that they have requested that the speed limit be reduced to 80 
kilometres through their corporate . . . through their village 
limits. And also they are requesting a turning lane on the south 
side of Highway 3. Are you aware of these requests and, if so, 
have you . . . what would your response be to the village? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Since the request from Paradise Hill, 
the department has been meeting with them and undertaken to 
do traffic volume counts, do turning patterns, and to do the 
studies that are necessary to see if it warrants the actions that 
are desired. Once that work has been done, recommendations 
would be made to council, and discussions would take place 
about what would be the appropriate actions. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials tonight. My line of questioning, Mr. 
Minister, is regarding railways. And I received a letter from a 
councillor in the RM of Duck Lake, Raymond Blanchard. And 
his concerns are regarding the maintenance of fence along 
provincial regulated railways. Back on April 28, SARM 
director, Mr. Neal Hardy, wrote a letter to your department 
regarding the concerns that Mr. Blanchard had raised in 
regarding railways. And it should be noted that both the 
Canadian National and the Canadian Pacific railways submitted 
written commitments that they would continue to maintain 
fences under the Railway Act. Now Mr. Hardy goes on to say: 
 

We have concerns that the provincial government is taking 
a position that shifts the responsibility from the railways to 
the landowners for fencing and to municipalities for 
additional crossing responsibility. 

It makes it difficult for us to convince the federal 
government to continue to hold federal railways 
responsible for fencing and crossing if the provincial 
government is reducing railway responsibilities on railways 
under its jurisdiction. 

 
Can you make comment to that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There are a number of factors 
involved in terms of the fencing along railway lines. And first 
of all with regard to building and maintenance of the fence, the 
railways are not obliged to build — the federally controlled 
railways — are not obliged to build or maintain fence. They 
may voluntarily do that but they are not obliged by their Act to 
do that. 
 
Within our Act we could demand that the railways look after 
fencing but there are other Acts that allow for fencing to be 
looked after, The Stray Animals Act or The Line Fence Act 
which allows for arbitration. If you needed a fence or felt you 
needed a fence put in place or that the railway should put it in, 
you might work under that Act and then an arbitrator would 
determine who would pay the costs of or how those costs would 
be shared in putting the fence in. 
 
But I think even more important as we’re looking at the 
development of short lines in the province, it might be okay for 
a very strong, well-grounded, financially grounded short-line 
rail to cover some of these extra costs. But to expect that for 
example maybe a Red Coat or one of the other short lines that is 
just beginning or is really facing some financial challenges, to 
expect that they would then pick up these additional costs 
voluntarily or that the department would demand that they do 
that, I think would be onerous and could be destructive of the 
program to encourage development of short lines. 
 
And remembering also that the users are the farmers in the area 
generally, of these short lines, and co-operation between the 
producers and short lines is essential to their survival. 
 
And so I think what we would prefer is that things are worked 
out on a co-operative basis. If it came down to the need, the 
other two Acts that are there. The Stray Animals Act or The 
Line Fence Act, could be used to help provide this fencing. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. In regarding 
your comments, according to this letter that Mr. Hardy wrote to 
you regarding the commitments of the Canadian National and 
Canadian Pacific, which are federal railways, they have 
submitted written commitments that they would continue to 
maintain fences under the Railway Act. 
 
Does the province have a different perspective in regarding the 
Railway Act and are you governed by the Railway Act 
provincially? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The short-line railways are not bound 
in any way by the federal legislation. The Railway Act applies 
to the federally regulated railways, CN (Canadian National) and 
CP (Canadian Pacific). 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That means that 
the jurisdiction of looking after the fences as a commitment, 



June 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

 

what the federal government did is somewhat changed now that 
the short-line railways have taken over? Does that mean that 
there’s change now that the short-line railways have taken over, 
because under the Railway Act it is commitments that they do 
maintain the fences? So I’m wondering where the jurisdiction 
changes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The Railway Act of Saskatchewan 
does not require a short-line railway — and short-line railways 
are all within the Saskatchewan borders — it does not require 
them to do any of the fencing. In fact the Railway Safety Act of 
Canada, which replaced the Railway Act of Canada, does not 
demand that the federal railways, federally regulated railways, 
build or maintain livestock fencing either. But they have, CN 
and CP have voluntarily agreed to do that at this point. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there has been 
very much progress this evening and I would now move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:32. 
 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1873 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1873 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1874 
 General Revenue Fund — Community Resources and Employment — Vote 36 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1875 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1875 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1875 
 General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1885 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1885 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1888 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1886 
 
 
 


