















































Hansard: May 29, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1293 
 May 29, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today on behalf of 
people from my constituency who are really concerned about 
the state of Highway No. 49. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in the area. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district 
concerned about the lack of dialysis services in their 
community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition this afternoon are 
from the city of Moose Jaw and from the community of 
Tompkins as well, and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my duty today to 
stand to present a petition once again on behalf of constituents 
from the constituency of Cypress Hills. It concerns the issue of 
Crown land lease renewals. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of the 
communities of Cabri and Abbey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have a petition with citizens that are very concerned with the 
deterioration of Highway No. 20. It’s becoming extremely 
dangerous. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 

in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Strasbourg, Earl 
Grey, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency very concerned about the condition of Highway 
47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, 
Creelman, Saskatoon, and Prince Edward Island. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents from the Moose Jaw 
area that are very concerned about the lack of a dialysis unit. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Lafleche and 
Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
today to rise with a petition signed by individuals who are very 
concerned about the proposed changes to the lease policy for 
Crown land. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Lacadena, Val 
Marie, and Kyle. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people from the west central area 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

of Saskatchewan concerned with their state of health care. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure that current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley and Loverna. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here with citizens who want improved dialysis in Moose Jaw. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the fairness of Crown 
leaseholders. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown lessees maintain their first option to renew those 
leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens on the concern of 
Highway 14. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable conditions of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take necessary steps to reconstruct 
and repair this highway in order to address safety concerns 
and facilitate economic development in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitions are signed by residents of Wilkie and Scott. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are concerned with the government’s 
handling of the Crown land leases. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from Leoville 
and Medstead. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the repair of Highway 20 from 
Nokomis to Strasbourg; 
 
A petition concerning the repair of Highway 43; and 

 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 12, 27, 36, 41, and 100. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 52 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: how much money was 
Dominion Construction awarded in the year 2000 for the 
sound stage and what specific work did this group do? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar question to the same 
minister regarding the year 2002 and the firm Suer & Pollen. 
 
I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for various years 
surrounding the sound stage construction, as well as questions 
for the minister of the Pubic Service Commission. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day 52 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization: what are the names of the people currently 
employed in the office of the Minister of Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Revitalization; and for each person, what is their 
title and what is their annual salary? 

 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a number of questions for all the different 
departments, whether it’s Culture, Youth, Recreation; Finance; 
Justice; and so on. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 52 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what was the number of 
personal income tax returns filed in Saskatchewan for the 
tax year 2000 with total taxable incomes in excess of 
$500,000; and a second question, what was the combined 
total taxable income assessed for this group? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 52 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: what is the government 
policy concerning the . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — 
 

To the Environment minister: what is the government 
policy concerning the recycling industry purchasing burnt 
copper wire; also can the minister please provide the 
directive that has been given to the industry relating to this 
issue? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and all members of the Assembly a group of 
Saskatchewan public servants who are touring the legislature 
and are now seated in your gallery. The participants are 
employees from the departments of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization; Justice; and Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
This is the last public servant tour for this session, and I’ve 
certainly enjoyed being able to visit with all the various public 
servants that have toured and to discuss the future of a modern 
civil service. And I’d like to take this opportunity to thank 
visitor services for the hard work they’ve done in making these 
tours a huge success. 
 
And I do look forward to meeting with them later this day, and 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming them and 
thanking them for the good work they do on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I’d like to join with the minister on inviting 
the members of the public service that are touring. I hope they 
enjoy today’s proceedings and I know that members of the 

opposition will look forward to meeting with them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I want to introduce three special friends 
of mine from Beauval. They travelled a long ways to be here. 
One is Robert Laliberte, and Robert is a process operator at 
McArthur River. And of course with him is Roger McCallum, 
who is also from Beauval and works at the Key Lake mine. And 
with them of course is Larry Roy. And Larry Roy has been 
doing an extensive housing analysis and study for me, and 
we’re planning on meeting with the Sask Housing officials 
today or folks in the minister’s office on some of his findings. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
these three gentlemen. They come a long ways and I would ask 
all members to join me in making sure they get a warm 
welcome to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, Mr. Speaker, to all members of this Assembly, I am very 
pleased today to introduce not one, but two school groups from 
my constituency. 
 
From the Weekes School I have 12 students in grades 3, 4, and 
5, along with their teacher, Debby Tessmer, and four 
chaperones. 
 
And from Porcupine Plain we have 26 students and their 
teachers, Annette Legare, Deb Zeleny, and Doug King. These 
are grade 8 students. 
 
I’m looking forward to meeting with them later on and I hope 
you enjoy your proceedings here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

World Junior Curling Champions 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 10 I had the 
opportunity to take part in honouring the World Junior 
Women’s Curling champions along with the World Junior 
Men’s Curling champions at a social in Biggar. 
 
A large crowd turned out at the Biggar community hall to thank 
and congratulate hometown girl, Teejay Surik, along with the 
rest of the team — Marliese Miller, Janelle Lemon, and Chelsey 
Bell; and the Steven Laycock rink of Chris Haichert, Michael 
Jantzen, and Kyler Broad for their achievements by giving us 
some exciting curling to watch, and for giving Saskatchewan 
and Biggar bragging rights to the best curlers in the world. 
 
The women’s team won the right to represent Saskatchewan in 
Ottawa after winning provincials in Meadow Lake. There they 
captured the national title of Canadian Women’s Junior 
Champions and went on to the world championship in Flims, 
Switzerland. The rest is history. 
 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

I would like once again to congratulate Marliese, Teejay, 
Janelle, and Chelsey, as well as Steven, Chris, Michael, and 
Kyler on their accomplishments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Catholic Education Day 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 29 is World 
Catholic Education Day, the day on which Roman Catholic 
schools around the world engage in some activity that 
acknowledges their special presence in our educational systems 
— perhaps a special prayer in the classroom, perhaps a unique 
form of communication with Catholic schools in other 
countries. Obviously in this high-tech age, many schools will 
use an Internet hookup to say hello halfway around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of the role our 12 urban and 6 rural 
Catholic school divisions play in our communities and in the 
lives of our students. I think it is very significant and very wise 
that these schools take this one day to let their students know 
that they are, indeed, citizens of the world as well as residents 
of, say Saskatoon — something that we all should remind 
ourselves of from time to time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members will join me in recognizing on 
this day the special role our separate schools play in the 
educational, social, and spiritual life of our province. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Convocation at Saskatchewan Universities 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have the 
privilege to recognize two significant events taking place in 
Saskatchewan this week. I’m referring specifically to the 
convocations happening at both the University of Saskatchewan 
and the University of Regina. 
 
Now wherever you travel across this country and around the 
world, you will find graduates from our universities working in 
top positions in all sectors of private and public endeavour. 
Saskatchewan graduates leave our universities equipped with 
inquiring minds, sound judgment, and reasoning skills, and 
ready to embark on careers or to further their studies to even 
greater degrees of specialization. 
 
We are extremely fortunate to have two exceptionally 
high-quality universities in the province of Saskatchewan, both 
of which continue to demonstrate the importance of advanced 
education in the realization of our potential as individuals and 
as a province. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Now while placing significant emphasis on unique research, 
they also understand the importance of providing the citizens of 
this province with a well-rounded educational opportunity. The 
love of learning is alive and well in Saskatchewan, and we are 
proud of the opportunities provided to our students through the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan. 

Congratulations to those students who are graduating this 
spring, as well as to the universities of this province that furnish 
them with well-rounded, world-class educations. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Palliser Regional Library Wins LibraryNet Award 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to report that the Palliser Regional Library, along 
with its partners, recently won the LibraryNet 2002 Best 
Practices Award for the digital divide project. 
 
The LibraryNet Best Practices Award recognizes the important 
role Canada’s libraries play in encouraging innovative use of 
information and communications technology. The digital divide 
project, also known as the Internet Pilot’s License, provided 
free, hands-on experience so users could develop basic Internet 
and computer skills. The project ran for five months and 340 
people received their Internet Pilot’s License. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the Palliser Regional Library and its partners on 
receiving this prestigious award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on May 15, 
Ms. Patti Sebestyen of Saskatoon was awarded the Prime 
Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence at the national 
awards ceremony in Ottawa. 
 
Representing the Prime Minister at the national awards 
ceremony, the Hon. Alan Rock, Minister of Industry, presented 
certificates to national level recipients saying through their 
dedication and hard work and innovative teaching practices, 
these outstanding teachers have received exceptional results 
with students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Sebestyen currently runs a program in 
Saskatoon called Opening Doors. This program was started 
three years ago to meet the community need for children not in 
school. This is the third alternative program that Ms. Sebestyen 
has operated during her 26-year teaching career with the 
Saskatoon Catholic School Division. 
 
Congratulations, Patti Sebestyen. We are very proud and 
grateful for the work that you do with our young people. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Métis Role Model Awards 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, this statement is a positive story 
of a Métis youth. A few years ago the Métis National Council 
instituted the Métis youth role model project as a way to 
recognize and celebrate the achievements of Métis youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2003 Role Model Awards were presented 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

 

recently, and I’m proud to say that four of this year’s seven 
recipients are from Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jennifer Brown from Prince Albert received the 
award in the volunteer services category. Ms. Brown is active in 
all levels of Métis politics and holds the Aboriginal seat on the 
Youth Environment Network, an organization she helped 
created. 
 
Christian Anderson received the award in the academic 
achievement category. He’s also from Prince Albert. Mr. 
Anderson has a B.A. (Bachelor of Arts) and a M.A.(Master of 
Arts) from Queen’s University and is working currently on his 
Ph.D.(Doctor of Philosophy) at the University of Alberta. 
 
Real Carriere of Cumberland House is this year’s recipient in 
the culture and heritage category. Mr. Carriere is 
home-schooled on traplines and hunting and fishing in the 
Cumberland area. In 2000, he was chosen to attend Lester B. 
Pearson United World College of the Pacific. He has since 
graduated and is now studying at Simon Fraser. 
 
This award . . . The athletic achievement went to Jacqueline 
Lavallee of Saskatoon. Ms. Lavallee excelled in both soccer and 
basketball while studying at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) and played on the Canadian national basketball 
team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all my colleagues to congratulate these 
outstanding young people and I would say to them in Cree: 
Keechiguskeetawuk. They have represented us with excellence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

50th Anniversary of First Summit of Mount Everest 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Thursday, 
May 29 marks the 50th anniversary of the first summit of 
Mount Everest. As we all recognize the achievements of Sir 
Edmund Hillary and his guide five decades ago, we also 
recognize that this New Zealand native laid the groundwork for 
those that followed behind. 
 
Since that day in 1953, more than 1,200 men and women have 
made the 27,000-foot climb to the top of the world’s tallest 
mountain; nearly 200 people have died trying. Among those 
climbers who have claimed victory, Mr. Speaker, is 
Saskatchewan’s own Dave Rodney. This Yorkton native who 
now calls Calgary home was the first Canadian to climb Mount 
Everest not once, but twice — first in 1999 and then again in 
2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dave’s second climb in 2001 also included a 
video camera, and this past week at the Yorkton Short Film and 
Video Festival, the world premiere of Back to Everest: The 
Dave Rodney Story was released. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dave Rodney’s journey from east central 
Saskatchewan to the summit of the world’s tallest mountain 
wouldn’t have been possible without a substantial amount of 
courage and determination mixed with an equal amount of drive 
and ambition. 
 

It’s no wonder that Dave Rodney is a highly sought-after 
motivational speaker. The man who climbed Mount Everest has 
spoken to thousands about overcoming their everyday Everests. 
 
Mr. Rodney’s father lives in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, and is 
justifiably proud of his son’s many achievements. I ask all 
members to recognize the 50th anniversary of the first Mount 
Everest climb and all those who have subsequently shared in 
that victory. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Research Funding 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, as part of the Action Plan 
for Saskatchewan Health Care, the provincial government is 
increasing funding for health research. Much of this research is 
carried out through the Saskatchewan Population Health and 
Evaluation Research Unit, whose many partners include the 
universities in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
I am pleased to say the research unit recently announced a 
number of scholarships to students from both universities 
through the new community and population health research 
training program. 
 
Among the projects approved were Gloria DeSantis, who will 
study how non-profit voluntary organizations help to empower 
people. Allison Quine will look at the factors that influence 
health care services provided to Aboriginal persons with 
diabetes. Brandace Winquist will study the impact of stress in 
early life on the development of adolescents. Flavia Bianchi 
will research the health needs and challenges of First Nations 
children from birth to age five. And Dr. Lewis Williams will 
study various health-related issues in minority communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating these and the other scholarship recipients. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Response to Distress in Beef Industry 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
has anyone in the government contacted the Prime Minister to 
tell him to keep his mouth shut? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province and other provinces, political parties 
and political leaders have set aside their differences to protect 
our beef industry. Meanwhile at this critical moment the Prime 
Minister of Canada seems to be going out of his way to insult 
the President of the United States and his administration, the 
very administration we need to reopen the border for the 
Canadian cattle industry and our beef. 
 
Has he . . . Does he understand what is at stake here? The entire 
industry is at risk and the Prime Minister, Jean Chrétien, is 
more interested in shooting his mouth off than solving the 
problem. 
 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Premier be telling the Prime Minister to 
keep his mouth shut and stop insulting the US (United States) 
administration? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well as always, Mr. Speaker, I will treat 
the office of the Prime Minister with respect. 
 
I have today on public radio in this province, I have moments 
ago on national television, pointed out my view and the view of 
this government of the inappropriateness in the timing of the 
Prime Minister’s comments around US deficit measures. This is 
not a time for the national leader of Canada, in my view, to be 
engaging in debate with the President of the United States about 
their record or his record. It is a time for the Prime Minister of 
Canada, for the national Government of Canada, as it is time for 
all of us, to stand together, working hard, as hard as we can, to 
eliminate this border closing of the United States. 
 
Let us work with the Canadian federation of food assessment 
here; let us work with the specialists; let us ensure our 
American neighbours that the Canadian food supply is safe, that 
our herds are safe. And let us work with our American political 
counterparts to get the border open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, we all want the border 
open and we all need to work together. But it’s going to take a 
couple of things for the US to reopen that border to Canadian 
beef. It’s going to take a thorough investigation by the CFIA 
(Canadian Food Inspection Agency) — and we have every 
confidence that that is and will be done — but it’s also going to 
be a test of our relationship with the US. And right now our 
Prime Minister is failing that test. Instead of building bridges, 
he’s burning them, Mr. Speaker, and the entire Canadian beef 
industry could wind up paying that price. 
 
Right now in Saskatchewan there are real people with real 
farms, real jobs in the packing plants, in the feedlots, in the 
trucking industry, and real families, Mr. Speaker, all of which 
are having their livelihoods threatened by BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy). And the Prime Minister is making 
things worse. 
 
Will the Premier be contacting the Prime Minister to tell him to 
stop damaging our relationships with the US? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the record 
here today the appreciation that we’ve had of the work of 
Minister Vanclief and the federal agricultural officials. I want to 
put on the record here the support and appreciation we’ve had 
for the CFIA and the work that they’ve done. I want to identify 
that we’ve had a very, very good relationship with the 
Americans who have been in province and in Western Canada 
participating in the whole very difficult exercise. 
 
I wish, Mr. Speaker, that, I wish I could say the same of 
Minister Jane Stewart in her response to our request that the 
two-week waive of unemployment be put in place. We’ve seen 

that turned down. 
 
And I am disappointed that the Prime Minister has chosen this 
time to engage in a verbal debate with the White House. I have 
expressed that very, very publicly today. I have written today to 
the Prime Minister to follow up on the letter written by the 
Minister of Labour on May 23 of this month, calling on the 
national government to waive the two-week provision for EI 
(Employment Insurance). I am extremely disappointed in the 
reaction thus far. 
 
I am reminded that our Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, 
Minister Lautermilch, this day has spoken to . . . The Minister 
of Intergovernmental Affairs has spoken to Mr. Goodale and 
Mr. Dion in Ottawa about these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I was shocked to hear this 
morning that the Government of Ontario is considering a ban on 
imported beef from Alberta because of the discovery of BSE in 
that province. However, because of the ties of the cow to our 
own province, one would assume that Ontario would be 
considering this action for Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ontario minister’s comments echoed similar 
suggestions mentioned earlier this week by premiers of Quebec 
and one Manitoba . . . Maritime — sorry, Mr. Speaker — 
province. These sentiments and, in fact, possible actions of 
provincial bans on beef movement within our own country is a 
concern. 
 
On another front, how will it possibly help us to remove 
international trading bans on Canadian beef when some of our 
own neighbouring provinces believe that there may be some 
threat to their own beef industry? This is a startling 
development, Mr. Speaker, and of huge concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister aware of the Ontario minister’s 
comments and, if he hasn’t already done so, will the minister 
immediately contact the Ontario minister — and in fact, all of 
his provincial counterparts — to stress the importance of 
supporting, maintaining, and strengthening the beef industry in 
our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the ministers of Agriculture, 
along with the federal Minister of Agriculture, have been in 
communication with each other every other day since Monday 
of last week. So we have lots of communication with each 
other. 
 
The member opposite asks that I communicate a message to 
Ontario. I can report to this House, as I did to the media 
yesterday in our scrum, that all ministers across Canada believe 
that this issue is not a regional issue — that this is a national 
issue, that this issue needs to be dealt with and maintained at a 
national level, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

 

And this . . . The minister from Ontario, Helen Johns, was on 
the conference call yesterday when we had this very 
conversation. So, Mr. Speaker, there is no need in my view for 
me to communicate anything more with the minister from 
Ontario because on Monday, on Monday, Mr. Speaker, we are 
again on the conference call. We’ll also be having that 
conversation again on Monday. 
 
All of the provinces are on board that we’re going to deal with 
this issue from a national perspective, Mr. Speaker, and it is not 
going to be dealt with on a regional level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, could 
the minister please then explain a press release entitled, 
“Ontario considering banning beef cattle from Alberta over mad 
cow.” And it reads: 
 

Ontario might join other provinces in pushing for a ban on 
imported beef cattle and beef from Alberta in light of mad 
cow disease. 

 
And it goes on to quite some extent quoting the minister from 
Ontario saying that this is indeed a consideration of her 
province. 
 
Can the minister, who is in constant contact with the Ontario 
Agriculture minister, explain why he did not know that she’s 
been saying this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what I said to the House is 
that we had a conference call yesterday morning. We’re having 
a conference call on Monday morning again. We’ve been 
communicating with each other on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker, 
and we have a national resolution, Mr. Speaker. The national 
resolution is — from Ag ministers across Canada along with the 
federal minister, Mr. Speaker — that this in fact is a national 
issue and we’re going to be working on it as a national issue. 
 
We are not adopting, Mr. Speaker, we’re not adopting the 
position that Mr. Charest took a couple of days ago. We’re not 
taking the position, Mr. Speaker, of the minister from Ontario 
where she says that this is regional, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve 
all concurred, Mr. Speaker, that this will be an issue that will be 
dealt with at the national level. 
 
And I ask the members of the opposition to not abandon this 
position at this point, Mr. Speaker, to remain with us. This is a 
national issue; we’re going to deal with it as a national issue, 
and they should not waver on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
CFIA did not sit around over the weekend and wait for someone 
else to look after things. They did their job over the entire 
weekend to address this issue. It’s a serious issue. It’s very 
serious for our province and for the country as a whole. They 
worked on it immediately. 
 

Will the minister commit to phoning, picking up the phone and 
phoning the Ontario minister before Monday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, my officials, my officials 
from across . . . in Saskatchewan are working very closely with 
the national officials. The position of Ontario, Mr. Speaker, is 
one that the national government or this province doesn’t 
accept, Mr. Speaker. The minister from Alberta and I are in 
constant contact, as is the minister from Alberta, Mr. Speaker, 
or from British Columbia. 
 
No one in Canada, Mr. Speaker, holds the position that this 
would be a regional issue at all, Mr. Speaker. And so as we 
work through this piece, we have the industry working together, 
Mr. Speaker, at the national table. I have the industry in 
Saskatchewan working together . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we have a press release 
coming from the national meeting that’s going on of livestock 
producers across Canada, of which our representatives are 
going to be . . . are at today, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be briefed from 
them over the weekend and have an opportunity to hear the 
position that they’re all taking. 
 
And so we remain united in Canada, Mr. Speaker, where this 
issue will continue to be dealt with at the national table with all 
of the provinces and with the federal minister, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m confident at the end of the day we’ll get the borders 
open, because that’s what it will take. It will take the 
co-operation of all of the ministers across Canada in order to 
reach that conclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. The discovery of a cow 
infected with BSE has had a serious impact on Saskatchewan’s 
economy, not only to beef producers but also the spinoff 
industries of livestock such as sales, processing, transportation, 
and many, many others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week XL Foods, a slaughter facility in Moose 
Jaw, announced a temporary layoff of employees as a result of 
the slowdown in the beef industry. But given that the temporary 
ban on Canadian beef imports by several countries, including 
the United States, may not be lifted for weeks, maybe even a 
month, Mr. Speaker, is it a concern that there may be so many 
people . . . it is a huge concern that there will be so many people 
out of work because of BSE. 
 
My question to the minister: can she estimate how many people 
will be out of a job due to this disaster in our cattle industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have said to the media and 
I’ve said publicly to people across this province and across the 
country that today we’re examining, and have been now for 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

several days, what in fact the impact is, not only for a regional 
part of the country but nationally. 
 
What is the impact of this particular disaster, Mr. Speaker? And 
what will it cost the industry in the area of primary production? 
What will it cost the industry in the feeding business? What will 
it cost the industry for those who provide feed to the industry, 
Mr. Speaker? What will it cost the industry, Mr. Speaker, for 
those who are in the trucking business, and in the plants, and in 
the processors, and in the employees who are not working 
today? 
 
All of those assessments are currently being undertaken at the 
national level by all of governments across Canada, including 
Ontario, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we are able to make a 
representation for all of Canada in the days and the weeks ahead 
when we come to look at the issue of compensation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have recently heard that 
the federal resource minister, Jane Stewart, has said that she 
won’t waive the two-week waiting period to apply for 
Unemployment Insurance for people impacted through the BSE 
findings. This is unbelievable given that the federal government 
has done exactly that for people in Ontario through the SARS 
(severe acute respiratory syndrome) epidemic. 
 
It is appalling that the minister would allow a double standard 
to take place in this country, allowing it in Ontario but not 
recognizing it here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, workers in 
Saskatchewan are just as impacted through work slowdowns 
related to this beef industry situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier and the Prime . . . Mr. Speaker, 
will the Premier and the minister immediately take steps to raise 
serious concerns — not just write a letter, but raise serious 
concerns — with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Human 
Resources in Ottawa, to eliminate this double standard that 
seems to be forming in our country? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
be able to stand on this issue and address the Labour critic’s 
comments from the Saskatchewan Party. I’m pleased to do it, 
but a little surprised when these questions are coming from a 
party that has advocated for workers working for less than 
minimum wage — has worked for, has advocated for less than 
minimum wages . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite. 
The Moose Jaw plant, the XL beef plant, is on forced vacation. 
They are not laid off or were not given termination. They are 
currently gearing up again to have some of the herds from 
Alberta and BC (British Columbia) brought in there to be 
slaughtered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week, on May 23, I sent a letter and made 
some calls to my federal counterpart requesting that the 
two-week waiting period for EI be done away with in this 
situation if it continued to escalate. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue to address this situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
minister’s arrogance and condescending attitude is exactly why 
people all over this province are calling for an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The arrogance of playing politics with this 
very issue is exactly why that minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is the exact reason why 
we hear all over this province that this government is soon 
going to be out of government and sitting on this side with only 
a few members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, immediately following question period the 
Saskatchewan Party intends to move an emergency motion 
calling on the federal government to waive the two-week 
waiting period for applicants to Employment Insurance. Will 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) be supporting this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — We have shown our support already by 
our early intervention on this topic by contacting our federal 
minister, sending the letters. Mr. Speaker, this party has 
supported working people across this province. It’s one of the 
things that we stand for and we will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was driving in from Moose Jaw this 
morning, coming in for the sitting of the legislature, the more I 
thought about this, the angrier I became. Mr. Speaker, here is a 
fund, Unemployment Insurance — Employment Insurance it’s 
called now — that workers and employers contribute to. The 
federal government does not put any money into Employment 
Insurance. 
 
So when workers in this province need that insurance fund and 
that support when this industry is going through some very 
difficult times, of course, Mr. Speaker, this party and this 
government will support that motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 
during the Crown Corporations Committee hearings, we heard 
from the president of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), of the Crown Investments Corporation, Frank 
Hart, on the fact that the NDP hired Scotia Capital last July to 
review the ethanol deal between the NDP government and the 
Broe group of companies. Then the . . . By the way, the Scotia 
Capital apparently was reviewing a deal that doesn’t exist. 
 
Then the NDP held a revival style news conference in Belle 
Plaine to announce the deal that doesn’t exist. And then the 
minister announced last December that the ethanol deal that 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

 

doesn’t exist and that the construction project that still hasn’t 
started is running on time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the NDP pay $25,000 to any firm to 
review a deal that doesn’t exist? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of the Crown 
Investments Corporation has spoken to this matter a number of 
times and has explained both to the opposition and to the public 
that the arrangements around the Broe, CIC proposal for Belle 
Plaine are a matter of arranging the financing. The terms of this 
deal, the conditions of this deal, are widely known publicly. 
 
And of course it was the engagement of the third party to look 
at this proposal, to look at this option. And what have they 
concluded? That ethanol has great potential for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now why is it, Mr. Speaker, everything that has great potential 
for the province of Saskatchewan is criticized by the 
opposition? Yesterday — can you believe this, Mr. Speaker — 
the member of Lloydminster said publicly about 
Saskatchewan’s future and Saskatchewan’s opportunities, the 
member of Lloydminster said, quote: 
 

What is there here to fundamentally interest the investor? 
 
Well I’ll tell you what’s here, Mr. Speaker. Some of the hardest 
working, most creative people in the nation; some of the best 
resources; some of the best potential you’ll find anywhere in 
Canada. That’s what’s here and we’re working with partners to 
deliver that opportunity and potential. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to see the Premier stand up and attempt to answer the 
question because his contention that the details, the terms of this 
deal, have been made public is simply not the case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, now that the Premier’s involved in the 
debate, we would remind him of his words when he was in 
opposition in 1989, when he said the following. And I quote: 
 

“It’s very strange the deal would be announced without the 
details in place,” . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that appeared in an article under the headline, 
“New Democrat wants all facts on Belle Plaine.” 
 
The article went on to say: 
 

The opposition New Democrats say the government should 
have released the complete funding details of the project 
when it was originally announced. 
 

That’s also the standard he has set for he and his government 
through the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) scandal. The truth of it is they haven’t 
tabled the deal. 

So the question to the Premier is this: will he live up to his own 
commitment? Will he live up to his own word and table the 
Scotia review of the deal and the terms of the deal itself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, at the time I was asking 
those questions the member from Swift Current was right over 
here working for the Devine government cooking up some of 
those deals, cooking up some of those deals that got this 
province $15 billion in debt. That’s where he was, Mr. Speaker, 
and he will well know since he was right here in the Devine 
government — right here working for them — he will well 
know they would not, they would not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order, please. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have, we 
have talked about the details of the arrangement with the Broe 
group of companies and CIC; we are working on the financing 
package. 
 
I want today, Mr. Speaker, to contrast the negativity that comes 
daily from the Saskatchewan Party with what we’re seeing in 
today’s press. Now these are some words from Nancy Southern, 
who is recognized as one of the prominent members of the 
Alberta business community. She, working with SaskPower, 
working with the Crown corporations, says of these people and 
our ability to work together, she says: 
 

We’ve encountered open, hardworking, straightforward, 
visionary people with the highest integrity, dedicated to 
excellence for whom we have the highest regard. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ambulance Charges in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. The government claims to 
be against two-tier medicine and yet they continue, contrary to 
the recommendations of the Fyke report, to penalize those 
people who live in communities where the government closed 
their hospital. 
 
The Fyke report recommended, and the government accepted, 
that they would cease charging different rates for ambulance 
charges and the mileage rate for ambulance charges as Fyke 
recommended, so that all Saskatchewan citizens would have 
equal access to ambulance charges. 
 
Now last year I asked the Minister of Health when he was going 
to follow through on his promises to accept the Fyke report, and 
he said that as . . . I should contact my federal cousins and ask 
them to give more money, and if they did, he’d keep his 
promise. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I did, they did. What’s he doing? 
 
So I ask the Minister of Health. It’s now a year and a half since 
Fyke. The government says they adopt Fyke. Fyke says we 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

should not discriminate against rural residents; there should be 
one charge for ambulance service standard across the province. 
When is he going to institute that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting. 
Today in the press, in the Liberal Party battles that are 
happening at the federal government, there’s a discussion about 
Mr. Paul Martin’s budget of 1995 which effectively gutted the 
health system in Canada and created many, many problems. 
 
That member . . . That’s the same point I made with that 
member last year about how we’re dealing with this. We have 
had received some money and we are working carefully to deal 
with that, use that money in the broad way that is necessary in 
our province. 
 
We have in our province for seniors been able to set a standard 
for transfer by ambulance services. We have not been able to do 
it for the total population because we have many demands on 
the things that we’re doing. But it is our goal to continue to 
work towards that accessibility right across the province. We 
will continue to do that; we’ll work with our Saskatchewan 
people to make sure that we have the best health care system in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

National Health Council 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when the Prime Minister 
and Canada’s premiers came together in February to discuss the 
future of our health care system, there were two important 
outcomes for the people of our province. The federal 
government agreed to increase health transfers to provinces 
over the next three years and we are using those dollars to 
implement our Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care, 
invest in new medical and diagnostic equipment, and make 
targeted improvements in drug coverage, home care, and 
primary care. 
 
The federal ministers’ health accord also contained measures 
that are aimed at improving the accountability of our system in 
putting a new national health council. Our government has 
supported the formation of the council from the very outset and 
we are working to make the council as effective, inclusive, and 
accountable as possible. 
 
We see the health council as an important opportunity to 
demonstrate that our governments are accountable for the way 
in which we spend health dollars and for the results that we 
achieve. We also believe the council could provide a permanent 
vehicle for patients, providers, and governments to work 
together to improve health care for all Canadians. 
 
Establishing the health council has taken longer than expected, 
partly as a result of the different views on what it will do and 
how it should be structured. 
 
I want to share with the members of the Legislative Assembly 

and with the public the position our government has taken in 
these discussions. 
 
The mandate for the council is outlined in the First Ministers’ 
health accord. It states the council will monitor and report on 
the implementation of the accord, particularly its accountability 
and transparency provisions. While our government could 
support a broader role for the council, we are prepared to work 
with this mandate and do not support any further limitations in 
its role. 
 
To ensure the council is credible with the public and with the 
health sector, it must be objective in its work and have a 
majority of non-government representatives. There are many 
knowledgeable, credible people in the health care field who can 
bring a broad base of expertise and experience to the council. It 
is also important to have a strong health sector representation 
for the council to build support and confidence in its work. 
 
Our government fully supports a review of the scope, mandate, 
role, and objectives of the council. However, we do not support 
a sunset clause that assumes the council will outlive its 
usefulness in five years. We take the view that the council has a 
valuable long-term role in building confidence in our health 
system. We believe the council could provide a permanent 
vehicle for patients, providers, and the provincial and federal 
governments to work together in the interests of all Canadians. 
That is what the public is asking us to do. 
 
We welcome the improved accountability and we believe the 
National Health Council is worth doing and it is worth doing 
right. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to respond to the minister’s statement in regard to 
the National Health Council and the accord that resulted from 
the First Ministers’ discussions about the future of health care 
in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in this country, and certainly in 
Saskatchewan, understand that there has to be improvements to 
the Canadian health care system. Everyday we hear accounts 
from people who — in Saskatchewan and in other jurisdictions 
but particularly here — are forced to wait on longer waiting 
lists, are forced to leave the province in order to get essential 
imaging diagnostics and MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging ) 
in Alberta. 
 
And we are very concerned about the fact that our health care 
system really needs some major improvements, not only in 
Saskatchewan, but across this country. So we are certainly very 
pleased that there was an accord reached between the First 
Ministers of the country with the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this health care accord provided for the potential 
establishment of a health care council, and we think that there is 
merit in this structure. However, Mr. Speaker, as many people 
across this country have said, what the health care system 
doesn’t need is a bigger bureaucracy of administrators and 
people operating in a think-tank environment. 
 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

 

They need to have practical guidance and direction so that these 
waiting lists can actually be shortened right across this country, 
and in particular in this province, that pragmatic, concrete 
solutions are arrived at in order to improve the health care 
services of all of our citizens. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we think it is very important that this council 
does exist in a very accountable and transparent way. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, what we don’t need is another sort of think-tank 
environment where a great deal of hypothetical ideas are 
discussed and debated and nothing pragmatic is going to come 
out of it. 
 
We understand that the government has said that there should 
be a review of this council on an ongoing basis and I think 
that’s important. And it’s important to make sure that the 
council stays on track, that it stays focused on providing very 
concrete and specific direction for the health care system in 
Canada. We agree that there shouldn’t be an automatic sunset 
clause. But the review has to be strident, it has to be very 
meticulous, and it has to be able to give clear direction to this 
council of the needs and aspirations of Canadian citizens, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member is requesting leave to 
respond to the ministerial statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleagues. In the wake of the Romanow report and the 
increased federal funding, it is desperately important and vital 
to the future of medicare that the increased funding flow 
through to actually lead to a difference that patients notice as 
opposed to health care professionals. 
 
And I think we already hear some very, very disturbing 
rumblings that lead us all to worry that the increased federal 
funding could disappear into a bureaucratic black hole that still 
leaves us with eight-month waits for MRIs, three-year waits for 
hip and knee replacements, and two-year waits for eye surgery. 
If that does not change, then public confidence in a one-tier, 
publicly funded health care system will inevitably be eroded, if 
not destroyed. 
 
And I mentioned just moments ago that the government 
committed itself to one-tier ambulance service, and yet in the 
wake of the new federal funding, that has not happened. So that 
we see in the city that some ambulance trips are free, the most 
they could ever pay is $250. And in the rural areas they can get 
charged sometimes in the thousands of dollars for an ambulance 
trip. 
 
The provincial government has promised to address this. They 
have not. We have to see, we have to see some changes that 
actually are noticed by patients. And this council hopefully will 
mean that there is a flow through of the funds and that the 
reforms flowing through from the new funding and from the 
Romanow Commission actually bring about changes that 
patients and people notice as opposed to the bureaucracy. 
 

As the member for Melfort said, we don’t need more health 
bureaucracy. But if the health council can make sure that these 
funds are actually used to bring changes on the ground, then 
obviously we have to be strongly in favour of them. 
 
And that is what we are looking for. That there needs to be 
some control and some management to make sure that — as 
was said at the time of the Romanow Commission — that 
dollars buy change. But I think that this has to be where we put 
the initiative. And I think the government now with the 
increased funding they have, instead of talking about a budget 
10 years ago, they have to start talking about the budget today 
and how they are going to use that money to make sure that 
residents of this province actually see some improvements in 
the treatments they’re receiving. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Regina Auto Theft Strategy 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise today to advise the House of an 
announcement I was pleased to participate in this morning 
concerning the Regina auto theft strategy. I was particularly 
pleased to be at the Regina alternative measures program centre 
in north central Regina, to be joined by my colleague from 
Regina Elphinstone, the Minister of Justice, as well as the 
president of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and 
the deputy police chief. 
 
The announcement this morning was to announce that we will 
be undertaking implementation of phase 2 of the Regina auto 
theft strategy. I was pleased to report to the House some time 
ago that in the first year of operation of the initial Regina auto 
theft strategy that we have seen a 37 per cent reduction in the 
number of car thefts in Regina. This brings the total number of 
car thefts to its lowest point in this city since 1995. 
 
It was interesting this morning to listen to the deputy police 
chief also note that as a result of this strategy he believed there 
was an associated reduction of crime in this city, particularly as 
it related to breaks and enters and thefts under $5,000. 
 
This strategy, the Regina auto theft strategy, was built on a 
community-based partnership that takes a serious targeted 
approach dealing with those who commit auto theft offences. 
Today the announcement will build on that successful 
partnership. The Regina experience has led to us looking at 
other targeted approaches in other communities, Mr. Speaker, 
most notably among these is the recent announcement by the 
Attorney General, the Minister of Justice, that we would be 
undertaking in North Battleford — a crime reduction strategy. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Phase 2 of the Regina auto theft strategy takes a targeted 
approach aimed at adult offenders between the ages of 18 and 
22. This strategy will involve cracking down on chronic, repeat, 
younger offenders through the piloted use of electronic 
monitoring devices, increase in the use of alternative measures 
for low-risk, first-time offenders, and providing education and 
prevention for at youth risk . . . youth at risk. 
 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

This older group of offenders in the age 18 to 22 are recently 
one of the leading causes of theft that we’re seeing in the city 
today, rather than the younger . . . The traditional young 
offenders is, in fact, a slightly older group in the 18- to 
22-year-olds that we are now looking at targeting. We believe 
that by targeting in this group and continuing with our existing 
successful interventions with young offenders, that we’ll be 
able to see a successful expansion of this program and an 
improvement on our overall numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a critical element of phase 2 will be the evaluation 
process. Long-term evaluation of the whole strategy and a 
specific analysis of the electronic monitoring program are being 
planned. I am pleased to report to the Assembly today that these 
evaluations will be completed by Dr. Jeffrey Pfeifer from the 
Canadian Institute for Peace, Justice and Security at the 
University of Regina. Dr. Pfeifer had completed the process 
evaluation last October on our initial strategy, and his findings 
underlined the effectiveness of the initial strategy’s innovative 
approaches and techniques. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce to the House today that 
Corrections and Public Safety is committing to this initiative an 
additional $50,000 to expand the alternative measures program 
and to add a currently filled position for an adult probation 
officer to the team. The Department of Justice is providing 
funding to support the allocation of two police officers and one 
prosecutor to support phase 2. And SGI is providing funding to 
expand alternative measures and pilot an electronic monitoring 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are confident that the number of auto thefts in 
Regina will continue to decline with the implementation of 
phase 2 of the Regina auto theft strategy. This year, in fact, we 
are targeting to see an additional 10 per cent reduction. 
 
This is, Mr. Speaker, a successful program. It is a success story 
that we all should celebrate. Indeed it is a success because of 
the fact it is rooted deeply in the community. It involves a 
partnership with government, with local providers, and is very 
much the approach that this government favours in terms of 
developing a strategy to keep Saskatchewan communities safe. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to respond to the minister’s statement. I can say we’re 
extremely pleased to see that the auto theft is down 37 per cent 
in the city. It’s unfortunate though, because my understanding 
that B and Es (breaking and entering) are up in the city at the 
same time which is something that maybe we have to look at. 
 
It really is kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, that we had to 
become the number one car-theft capital of the world — or 
Canada at least — before this government would intervene at 
all and try and do something. If they would be so active in other 
areas like our huge loss of the people from the province, if they 
would take the same initiatives becoming number one at that, if 
they would deal with those issues in the same manner, it would 
probably be very, very enlightening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of items in here . . . The 

alternative measures, I’m really looking forward to 
understanding and finding out what the alternative measures 
are. I know it’s mentioned a couple of times in the minister’s 
speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another issue to deal with here also. The 
NDP government in 1999 promised 200 new police officers and 
that promise has never been fulfilled. And I think if they would 
spend a little bit more effort on the policing, that the crime — 
not only the auto theft but the other crimes — would also, also 
go down. 
 
One other issue that I looked at in the minister’s statement that I 
found kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, is in the statement it 
says that we’re targeting — targeting, if you can imagine — a 
10 per cent reduction. Well I think it would be my 
understanding that we should be targeting 100 per cent 
reduction. I mean the target, I mean it’s realistic that we maybe 
only achieve 10 per cent, but the target should be 100 per cent 
reduction. And I find that quite odd, but I think it’s very typical 
of this government setting a very, very low standard for itself 
and still being not able to meet it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I applaud the initiatives of the strategy for 
reducing car theft in this city and also in the province. And it’s 
nice to see the numbers going down, but I think that there’s 
more that we could probably be doing. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to move a motion 
of urgent and pressing necessity under rule no. 46. 
 
The Speaker: — Under rule 46, could the member take a 
moment and just explain the nature of the motion. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In light of the 
recent comments made by our Prime Minister towards the 
United States, as well as comments made by the minister, Jane 
Stewart, the federal Minister of Human Resources, regarding 
the unemployment . . . waiving of the two-week waiting period 
for Unemployment Insurance, Mr. Speaker, I think I would like 
to move a motion that addresses those concerns. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Waiting Period for Employment Insurance 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s I 
guess really unfortunate that we even have to get to this point 
and discuss such issues, such as comments made by the Prime 
Minister towards the United States, comments made by the 
minister, Jane Stewart, of Human Resources regarding 
Saskatchewan and how we would not apply for the two-week 
. . . qualify for the waiving of the two-week waiting period for 
Unemployment Insurance. 
 
In light of all the issues and situations that are happening in our 
world and that directly impact us here in Saskatchewan — and 
so many of them are completely out of our control and we have 
people that are going to be suffering because of the 
consequences — and we have such a, really what I would 
describe as a cold-heartedness, a complete disrespect for what 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

 

we need here in Saskatchewan. 
 
A lack of sensitivity comes to mind. There are a number of 
words that come to mind that would describe the reactions of 
the federal government with respect to both the comments made 
by the Prime Minister and also the comments made by Minister 
Jane Stewart of the federal government. 
 
The first issue that I’d like to talk about is the unemployment 
issue and how in Ontario they are suffering the SARS epidemic 
which is devastating. It has been devastating to the Ontario 
economy. We’ve heard over and over again some of the 
situations that have happened in Toronto with people not 
travelling to Toronto; World Health advisory suggesting earlier 
in this year that Toronto was perhaps unsafe to fly in to. And 
the devastating affect that would have on a city and a province 
on its economy, Mr. Speaker, is unbelievable. 
 
But fortunately enough for Ontario, the minister, the federal 
minister, realizes that there are people that are going to be 
affected by this, such as people that are quarantined and can’t 
get out to work, and the federal minister has addressed that very 
situation by waiving the two-week waiting period for 
Employment Insurance and allowing these people to collect 
Employment Insurance much quicker, waiving the two-week 
waiting period. And really, I mean, being quarantined is of no 
fault of their own. Why should they be punished even though 
they are unable to get out to the job, and that’s what the federal 
minister has recognized. 
 
But if you travel about a couple of thousand miles west, it 
seems to be totally different. The issue and the sensitivity 
towards this issue seems to have vanished in those 2,000 miles. 
 
We have people, through no fault of their own, that as we hear 
today are on forced vacation from different beef . . . from XL in 
Moose Jaw, a meat processing facility, and they’re in forced 
vacation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if there was a light at the end of the tunnel, if we could say 
by the end of this week, tomorrow, that the borders will be open 
for beef shipments into the United States and across the world, 
it would be a different issue. But right now there is a real 
concern that that block of beef shipment is going to remain for 
possibly days, weeks, and months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the effect on the industry is just hard to believe, the effect 
that this province will be seeing in the next couple weeks, in the 
next month or two, especially when you look at some of the 
statistics of the cattle that we slaughter here in Saskatchewan 
each day — 6,800 head of cattle are slaughtered each day in 
Saskatchewan; 15,000 in Alberta. 
 
The impact of not having this industry operating, not having 
this industry exporting into the United States and around the 
world will be devastating. And there is no way that forced 
vacation time is going to in any way make up the difference of 
two months, three months into the future when these people are 
still unemployed, laid off or whatever. 
 
Now I cannot see how a federal minister could look at Ontario 
and waive a two-week waiting period and then come to 
Saskatchewan and say, you’re on your own; the two-week 

waiting period is still in effect. That she would ignore that very 
plea, especially as was mentioned by the minister that the 
premiums, the whole issue is of no cost to the federal minister. 
It is of no cost to the federal minister whatsoever. The double 
standard that applies, in my eyes, between Ontario and 
Saskatchewan is absolutely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m glad that the members of the government would agree 
unanimously with us to let this motion go forward to show our 
united concern and disgust with the federal minister and how 
the lack of sensitivity towards workers in our province and the 
need to be treated as equals in this country, as equals with 
people in Ontario, and it just doesn’t seem to be there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue that is of great concern and when 
you look at the national papers across Canada, and you hear . . . 
see some of the remarks that our Prime Minister has been 
making in a time where, as was said during question period, 
bridges need to be built and maintained — not burned — and 
statements that go against our hugest trading partner, that insult 
our hugest trading partner, who are at this time, quite frankly, 
are holding our cattle industry at ransom. They are quite frankly 
holding the economy of our province, the economy of Alberta, 
if this keeps going on, in the palm of their hand — we refuse to 
open up our borders to any shipments from Canada for however 
long. 
 
Now personally I would think that if you want to deal with 
someone like United States and work with them towards 
opening up the borders so our cattle industry is moving again, 
so that our economy isn’t as severely affected as what we’re 
going to have, I would hope that the leader of our country 
would deal with the leaders of United States and other 
international countries that we have to trade with — but in 
particularly United States — I would hope that they would deal 
with some respect towards that leader, Mr. Speaker. And what 
we are seeing is the exact opposite. 
 
It is by far our biggest trading partner. And when you look at 
some of the disputes that we are going through right now — 
whether it’s softwood lumber, and the Canadian Wheat Board, 
some grain exports — all these issues of trade that are so vitally 
important to Western Canada, yes, they may be important to 
Ontario, the trading relations, but not to the same level as to 
what they are here in Saskatchewan. 
 
When you look at our economies of Western Canada especially 
— and you look at the beef industry here in Saskatchewan and 
the grain industry and when you go into Alberta you look at the 
beef industry, the grain industry, and oil and gas, Mr. Speaker; 
when you look at BC, you’re dealing with the softwood lumber 
issue as we do here in Saskatchewan — we are so reliant on 
United States and maintaining a good trading relationship. 
 
And anything that jeopardizes that, even though it may be done 
by the Prime Minister of Canada, it directly impacts on us here 
in Saskatchewan and on our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And I guess a little bit in a way like the poor workers in the beef 
industry right now that are on forced vacation and are facing 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

perhaps layoffs into the future, it seems to be out of their 
control. But when the Prime Minister goes around the world 
and makes comments like he’s made towards the President of 
the United States and we sit here and have to take the 
consequences, it almost seems out of our control. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think there are some things that we can do. 
And I think we need to stand up for our rights and make sure 
that comments made by the united . . by the president . . . by the 
Prime Minister of Canada, comments made by the Minister of 
Human Resources, federal Human Resources, Jane Stewart, are 
unacceptable. They are absolutely unacceptable because the 
people that pay the consequences are our producers here in 
Saskatchewan and our workers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So it is extremely important that the federal government, both 
the Prime Minister and the Minister of Human Resources, 
realizes that their statements that they are making — whether 
they’ve thought them out in prior or not — have a huge impact 
as to the way our economy is going to function into the future, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I think it is of utmost importance that we as a 
legislature, as a unanimous voice, voice our concern not just 
through letters but through phone calls, through pressure, 
through . . . Whether it’s the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan had 
better stand up and show its concern with some of the 
statements that have been made because it has a huge impact on 
how our economy continues to work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m pleased to move the motion, seconded by the member 
from Battleford-Cut Knife that we certainly express our deep 
concern with statements that are being made by the federal 
Liberal government of the day. And I would hope that all of us 
in this legislature — the government, the official opposition, 
and the lone Liberal member shows his concern as well, that 
these statements are unacceptable and cannot be tolerated 
because of the impact it has on our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would move, seconded by the member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife: 
 

That this Assembly demand that the federal government 
immediately waive the two-week waiting period for 
Employment Insurance applications for persons whose 
employment has been affected by the impact of BSE on the 
Canadian beef industry; and that this Assembly further 
demand that the Prime Minister of Canada show greater 
sensitivity to our international trading partners, particularly 
the United States. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
tremendously important that we support this motion, and we 
look forward that the members opposite support this motion as 
well. 
 
We’re talking about Saskatchewan real people. We’re talking 
about people that are in the livestock industry. We’re talking 
about some real jobs in the packing industry, in the feedlots, in 
the trucking industry — real families that are going to be 
affected in the sense of this crisis in that respect as well. 

Are we having a double standard when we see that the Minister 
Stewart, the EI (Employment Insurance) minister, talks about I 
guess the lost opportunity that is happening in Ontario with the 
SARS situation and then we take a look at the lost opportunity 
for employment for people in Western Canada as well, and we 
can’t appreciate the value of that situation, that we say that we 
can’t recognize the waiving of that two-week period as well. Is 
it a double standard? We start to wonder and we start to 
question if the recognition of having that value there isn’t being 
appreciated. 
 
We also are starting to hear about some border closures as well, 
or proposal of border closures as well in Eastern Canada; the 
promotion of what Ontario is coming forward with and also 
encouraging some of the other provinces in Eastern Canada be 
recognizing the closing of the borders, of moving beef from 
particularly Alberta, and also we’ll be probably hearing what’s 
going to be happening with the movement of beef from 
Saskatchewan as well. There again it’s going to be affecting 
employment. It’s going to be affecting the whole industry as 
well in that respect. Is that again another double standard? 
 
If we’re in a country that we’re working together to try and 
work with our entire industry of agriculture, and in particular 
the cattle industry, we need to work together as a country and 
not segregate ourselves from West to East in that respect as 
well. So we need to stand in unison and working through these 
situations and these problems that we have as well. 
 
It is somewhat ironic I guess when you hear some people that 
have experienced the type of crisis that we’re going through 
right now with the BSE situation. We have the European Union 
that’s made some statements as the last two weeks have 
unfolded, that they recognize there is a way of dealing with this 
situation. And they recognize that we have some high standards 
of delivering our meat products. 
 
And they’re one of the areas, I guess, of the world that’s 
identified the fact that the due diligence is being done in this 
country and they haven’t closed their borders. They are still 
receiving the product, the meat products as such as well, as well 
in that respect. 
 
So the world standard of providing that product is well been 
attained through the checks and monitoring systems that we 
have in this country as such. So we start wondering within 
ourselves, how can we start separating ourselves from West to 
East again and saying that we can’t accept the fact of moving 
beef from the West to the East. 
 
There also was some discussion through the noon hour. There 
was some news broadcast that came through, starting talking 
about allowing the borders to be opened in Eastern Canada, to 
be moving beef product into the United States, and still keeping 
the borders closed in Western Canada as well. 
 
And again, why are we starting to talk and think in that type of 
relevance, in the sense of not working as a country any longer? 
So where is the standard, where is the double standard that’s 
coming in here in that respect as well? 
 
It’s a huge impact that we have in the Western provinces. 
Saskatchewan definitely is going to be impacted in this respect. 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

 

It’s impacted directly with the industry. 
 
But as this goes on, we’re going to be impacted through the 
spinoff industries that are related to the direct beef industry as 
well. We’re not only going to see the feedlots and the packing 
houses and the trucking industry impacted, we’re going to see 
our grocery stores, we’re going to see our shopping malls, 
we’re going to see other sectors of our economy impacted as 
well in that same respect. 
 
So getting the borders open quicker and moving our product is 
going to be critical and essential. 
 
But how do we deal with that situation with the people that are 
being affected? And again I think we need to go back and 
recognize that that’s why Employment Insurance is there. It’s to 
pick up these situations where you can identify the need and 
you can recognize the need and you’re going to allow that need 
to be addressed and looked after as well. 
 
And I guess when you hear a comment that comes forth that 
says the people that were in the SARS situation, they were 
quarantined and they weren’t able to get out and find some 
other employment, how can you expect the people in this 
industry, in the beef industry, to start looking for other 
employment through the time that we’ve got the borders 
closed? 
 
These people aren’t just going to leave their livelihoods behind 
and leave their businesses behind and start looking for different 
types of employment and moving into a whole new industry 
and a whole new direction of their livelihood. It’s almost 
ludicrous to think that people are going to start thinking and 
moving in that direction as well. 
 
So you really start wondering, when a comment like that comes 
forth, what kind of value that has to Western Canada and 
particular Saskatchewan as well in that respect. 
 
So again I think we need to appreciate that we need to put the 
pressure on, we need to put the feet to the fire, we need the 
ministers and the Premier here to be talking to Ottawa and 
saying, look we’ve got to work together, we’ve got to get this 
thing resolved as a team, as a country, but not as individualists. 
We’re in this situation as a whole. So let’s not segregate 
ourselves. Let’s not go out and look after our own particular 
agendas. We need to appreciate this is good value for the entire 
country, not just for Ontario or not just for Alberta or 
Saskatchewan. We’re into this situation for the betterment of all 
in that respect as well. 
 
So on the basis of realizing that we have a real crisis here — we 
have a crisis of industry; we have a crisis of livelihood; we have 
a crisis of individual people in the sense of how they are going 
to maintain their ongoing family structure, as well as how 
they’re putting the food onto the table and getting I guess the 
bills paid for at the end of the day — we need to recognize that 
EI is there for the purpose of providing them that ability that 
they can come through this bit of a hurdle that we’ve got to 
resolve. 
 
And hopefully it will be resolved much quicker. And if we can 
work together as an entire country to resolve this problem, 

we’re always going to be better off at the end of the day. 
 
So I support the motion and second it at this point. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to, I want to indicate that members of the government side 
of the House will be supporting the member, the opposition’s 
motion that’s been brought to the House this afternoon. In fact, 
we’re very pleased to be a part of supporting it. And we 
anticipate that the Liberal caucus will stand in the House and 
speak in the House and support this motion as well. 
 
I just, while I’m on the subject, I would anticipate that at some 
point today we may hear also from the Liberal leader, Mr. 
Karwacki, on this subject. I would hope so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not to dwell at length, on May 23, the day after 
government became well apprised of the issue that was to befall 
us here, recognizing that this may in fact have consequence for 
people who are working in the beef industry — particularly in 
the processing industry, the slaughter industry, and so on — 
that this may indeed have consequence to their work, the 
Minister of Labour communicated with her colleague in 
Ottawa, Ms. Stewart, requesting the waive of the two-week 
period. 
 
We did that the day after we learned of the circumstance that 
was laying in front of us. We were pleased that the Government 
of Alberta some days later joined with us in making that same 
call. 
 
When we made that call, it was our expectation — clearly it 
was my expectation — that this would be met with a very 
positive and early response. 
 
It in fact, Mr. Speaker, hardly crossed my mind that the 
Minister of Human Resources Canada would not make that 
change because, as others have pointed out, the change was 
made to accommodate the very, very difficult situation in 
Toronto in SARS and the people who have been affected in that 
regard. And it simply did not cross my mind that this matter 
would not meet with the same favourable response. 
 
As the Minister of Labour has pointed out today, in fact we are 
not here dealing with federal Liberal government funds, 
finances, or money. We are here dealing with monies that have 
been provided for Employment Insurance by workers and by 
employers for just this kind of circumstance. 
 
No one here is asking for more money or greater financial 
support — simply a waiving of the two-week requirement. 
Why? Because we anticipate yet that we will see resolution to 
the border issue, that this will be hopefully a max of two-week 
kind of problem. 
 
I was therefore more than disappointed this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, when I learned through the media that the Hon. Jane 
Stewart has in fact rejected this request to waive the two-week 
period. 
 
I understand the argument being put forward by the federal 
minister is that the workers in Toronto or Ontario have been 
placed under quarantine and therefore cannot seek other 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

employment. Well I want to remind the federal minister that in 
fact what is happening in Western Canada is that herds are 
being quarantined and it is in that quarantine, it is in this 
circumstance that people are faced with losing their daily 
employment. 
 
It’s just as the member from Battleford-Cut Knife has just 
pointed out. Is it to be suggested that these workers who may 
find their employment disrupted should now go out and seek 
new employment for a two-week period? I mean, that is a silly 
argument. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And the argument is being made in Ottawa, I am told, that what 
this would do is set a precedent, set a precedent, and they don’t 
want to set such a precedent. Well I say this is exactly the right 
precedent to set. Exactly the right precedent. 
 
When you have a crisis, when you have people being displaced 
by issues certainly not of their own control, this is just the time 
that we need a national government that is sensitive, that is 
ready to act, and willing to act. Unfortunately we have seen 
neither in our request. 
 
Therefore today we have very, very publicly — in 
communication with the national government and very, very 
publicly — have called upon the federal government and Ms. 
Stewart to immediately reverse this wrong-headed decision that 
they have made and provide the waiver. That is why, Mr. 
Speaker, given the first part of this motion, I and this 
government will be very supportive of it. 
 
Secondly, on the second portion of the motion regarding the 
Prime Minister’s unfortunate timing in his comments, there are 
occasions, Mr. Speaker — and I have supported the Prime 
Minister on occasion — when a Prime Minister of Canada is 
called to speak to international issues. There are the appropriate 
occasions. 
 
There may be occasions when the Prime Minister of Canada 
may appropriately pass comment on other policy matters of a 
neighbouring nation. There may be opportunity for the Prime 
Minister to pass comment on decisions being made in 
Washington around budgets and so on. That’s a debatable point, 
but there may be. 
 
But I’ll tell you what’s not debatable. This is not the hour for 
the Prime Minister of Canada to be making inappropriate or 
harsh comment to the White House about their budget deficits 
or about his performance versus the President of the United 
States’ performance. This is not the hour. 
 
This is the hour that calls on the national leadership from the 
Prime Minister, the national government, from provincial 
governments, from industry, from all Canadians to work as hard 
as we can to find a solution to remove that trade barrier that is 
now tonight, today, at the American border. This is not the time 
for inappropriate comment. 
 
This is the time for us to work together because we are all 
reminded I think in the Saskatchewan legislature today how 
significant an issue this is for the people and province of 

Saskatchewan, how significant an issue this is for the people of 
Western Canada, and, Mr. Speaker, because this is a Canadian 
issue, this is a significant issue for all of Canada and now is the 
time for us to be doing what we should be doing. 
 
I believe in Saskatchewan today we are doing what we should 
be doing. We’re standing together. We’re standing together in 
support of our producers. We’re standing together in support of 
the industry. And particularly as we address this EI issue, we 
are standing together in support of the workers in the livestock 
and beef industry in our province. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will be very pleased to support 
the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I’m pleased to rise to indicate my support for 
the motion before this House and to say that if we are a nation, 
then we are based on the belief that problems affect all of us 
and we are in this together. And I think we have adopted that 
view in this province when crises have hit other provinces. 
 
As far as the Minister of HRDC (Human Resources 
Development Canada) being reluctant to create a precedent, 
well the fact is precedents have already been created when 
special rules around the Employment Insurance scheme have 
been adopted to deal with the collapse of the fishing industry of 
Atlantic Canada or the appearance of SARS in Toronto. In both 
cases, the rules of EI were set aside to meet the crisis of the 
time. 
 
So it is frankly false and disgraceful for the minister to say she 
doesn’t want to create a precedent because in fact the 
precedents have already been created; that where there are 
crises affecting a part of this country, the normal rules are set 
aside to deal with innocent victims. 
 
So why would people in the auction marts, the meat-packing 
industry, the trucking industry, who are now displaced because 
of borders being closed to our beef, why would they not be able 
to access special provisions under EI? 
 
And if we believe we’re in this together this is not a time for 
one region of the country to separate itself off from others. This 
is a time for all Canadians to stand together to ensure, first of 
all, that the source of the outbreak is tracked down. Second, that 
it is eradicated. Third, that we satisfy our own consumers and 
our trading partners that Canadian beef is safe and high quality, 
and the borders are again reopened. 
 
Now of course I hope I’m wrong, but I fear that it might be 
some time before some of the trading bans are lifted. And 
during that period of time the innocent victims of the present 
embargo of our beef industry deserve the help and support of 
their fellow Canadians. And the Government of Canada should 
be proud to back them up and support them. 
 
This is not a time for the Government of Canada to cut these 
men and women loose, and I’m appalled that this would be 
considered. And I trust that on further reflection the minister 
will understand that what she has done is insensitive and 
unwarranted and a poor reflection not only on her but on the 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

 

Government of Canada. 
 
I also want to say in regards the statements concerning the 
White House and the present administration in Washington, that 
I also share the mover’s views that this is ill-timed and 
unfortunate. And I am not one who, like the Canadian Alliance, 
is of the view that the Canadian government must always be in 
agreement with whatever comes out of the White House. And I 
realize the people who moved this motion are of that view. I am 
not. However, however this is not the time. 
 
When national interests are at stake, when national interests are 
at stake, there may be times when the Prime Minister of Canada 
is called upon to defend Canadian interests and to say, we are 
not in agreement with what our American friends and trading 
partners are doing. We find that what they have done regarding 
softwood lumber, regarding the Canadian Wheat Board, is 
fundamentally wrong. And the Prime Minister not only has the 
right, he has the responsibility to set himself apart from the 
American administration. 
 
What concerns me though in these statements is that they 
appear to be, frankly, pointless and ill-timed. They do not 
appear to be a defence of national Canadian interests. They 
appear to be a purely gratuitous attempt to pick a fight with our 
largest trading partner. What possible good can come of that? 
And I do not see that we are benefiting our country to 
pointlessly and gratuitously pick a fight with our most 
important trading partner. So while . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I wonder if the members 
would mind taking their consultation to behind the bar. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — So I think it is important that while our Prime 
Minister and the national government defend Canadian interests 
and articulate those times when our policies are divergent from 
those of our American friends, that the comments that were 
made this week were, in my view, as pointless as they were 
unfortunate and certainly ill-timed. 
 
This is a time for all members of this House, of all political 
persuasions, to come together to stand shoulder to shoulder with 
the front-line workers who are being penalized and thrown out 
of work through no fault of their own. This is a time, I suggest, 
for Canadians in other parts of the country too to say that we 
stand together in this present crisis. This is not a time to 
separate ourselves off according to region or of party. And I 
stand four-square opposed to anyone in the federal government 
who might be seen to do that. 
 
So I am proud to support the motion before this House. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to support the motion 
that has been put forward. It has been a very stressful, yes, and 
long week and a half. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the one case of BSE that was confirmed last 
week in Alberta, a series of events have really kicked into 
motion over this last week. And, Mr. Speaker, I remember the 
feeling that was in this Assembly when the comments were first 
made and when the Minister of Agriculture relayed the 

information to the agricultural critic from the Saskatchewan 
Party. We all knew the seriousness of what had been told to us 
and that it could have devastating effects. 
 
Over this past week and a half we’ve seen the depopulation of 
herds. And in many cases producers have put their livelihoods 
into building a herd that really is their pride and joy, Mr. 
Speaker. There is a real attachment and pride in a lifetime of 
work. And it’s heartbreaking to see the depopulation that’s 
occurred and it has been a devastating week for the industry. 
 
This week has also brought in questions about our food safety 
programs, the tracking systems that we have. And I know as the 
Minister of Agriculture has said over a number of times, the 
food system and safety system in Canada is one of the best 
anywhere in the world. And we know by the CFIA, the work 
that has gone on over this past work in tracking . . . or this past 
week in tracking what may be potentially affected animals, the 
work has gone well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as we watch the events kind of unfold over 
this past few days, you start to wonder, well what else could be 
affected? And when you look at the industry within 
Saskatchewan, it’s huge. Saskatchewan and Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, not only producers directly but you start looking at the 
auction marts and the feedlots, meat processing plants — as 
we’ve discussed, the beef plant that is in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, of Moose Jaw Wakamow — meat wholesaling, meat 
brokering, both domestic and exports. It starts getting into feed 
companies, cattle and feed trucking operations, Mr. Speaker, 
rendering, other non-agricultural areas. And it has the potential 
to be devastating. 
 
So while we hope for a quick resolve in the work that’s 
currently going on and the testing that’s currently going on, Mr. 
Speaker, no one can argue the fact that there is a cycle that takes 
place in the production of . . . from a young animal into a 
finished animal that is ready for market. There is a cycle and a 
system that is in place. 
 
And there has been a disruption to that cycle. Now hopefully it 
will be short with the work that’s going on now. And we’re all 
hopeful of that outcome but, Mr. Speaker, there’s no way of 
knowing. 
 
So after discussions last week, I sent a letter on May 23 to the 
Minister of HRDC and made a request to her that the two-week 
wait period be waived for Employment Insurance benefits in 
case this does carry on for a longer period of time and cause 
disruptions and the ripple effect through the economy of 
Saskatchewan. And what we asked for in that letter was that the 
two-week waiting period be waived with respect to 
Employment Insurance benefits for any class of workers whose 
livelihoods are unduly impacted by BSE due to circumstances 
beyond their control. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that was a difficult request. 
And I feel, and our government felt, and obviously the 
opposition agrees with us, is that that was a reasonable request, 
that in consideration of workers that were being . . . were losing 
their livelihood due to circumstances beyond their control — 
which is a situation that is urgent within our province and 
outside and in fact right across Canada — that there be some 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

consideration given to these workers so that they wouldn’t have 
the added stress of wondering about where their income would 
be coming from. Not a complex request. But, Mr. Speaker, I, 
along with the Premier and others, were surprised when the 
request was denied in the media last evening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So as I was thinking about this a little more last night and this 
morning as I was driving in for work, I started to think about 
Unemployment Insurance — Employment Insurance — and 
here we have an insurance system that is paid totally by 
employers and employees. They pay the premiums on this 
insurance; that’s how it’s paid, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 
contributions made by the federal government. They administer 
the program but they do not contribute directly to it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I got a little more angry the longer I thought 
about this. Here was something, a situation where there was a 
need for some reassurance to be given to these workers in what 
is turning out to be uncertain times within the livestock industry 
and the beef industry. Here was an opportunity to give some 
assurance and a bit of stability to workers and take away a bit of 
the uncertainty that is surrounding everyone at this time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you look at the EI fund — it’s not short of 
money. There is a substantial surplus within the fund. And 
when you look at the statistics that go with Employment 
Insurance, we are a net exporter of EI premiums. And when . . . 
All that is very simple, Mr. Speaker, is that more Employment 
Insurance premiums are paid from Saskatchewan than are paid 
back into this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a low unemployment rate and I 
mean it’s a statistic, Mr. Speaker. There is no way they should 
have the opportunity to even dispute the fact that these benefits 
aren’t deserved to the workers here in Saskatchewan that may 
lose their jobs because of circumstances beyond their control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Employment Insurance a few years ago went 
through some pretty major changes. Less benefits have been 
paid back into Saskatchewan. The federal government made the 
time shorter that you could collect unemployment for. They 
made the qualifying periods longer and in doing so, Mr. 
Speaker, they have taken millions of dollars that would and 
should have been paid into this province to unemployed 
workers, they have taken that money away from this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fund has a huge surplus. What we are asking 
for is some consideration to workers that deserve the support 
during this difficult time when the circumstances are beyond 
their control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another point of this that was . . . When we were 
denied, when Jane Stewart denied the request last night in the 
media, here we have employees and employers that are going 
through, like I say, very uncertain times but we are asking them 
to pick up their own costs for that two weeks. 
 
Now compassionate employers that may want to help 
employees get through some difficult two-week wait period, 
Jane Stewart is expecting them to pay again. Employees who 
have already paid their EI premiums, Jane Stewart is expecting 

them to pay again and to survive over that two weeks, due to 
circumstances beyond their control, with no help from the 
federal government. Mr. Speaker, it’s appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you need Unemployment Insurance, it 
should be there. And, Mr. Speaker, when I think of what kind of 
numbers are we talking about . . . Well the Minister of 
Agriculture has said we don’t know for sure what kind of 
numbers, we don’t know for sure how long this situation will be 
here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what this would be . . . It may just be a 
support and a token of support from the federal government of a 
sign that they are there, they understand the situation, and that 
they are willing to support the industry and the workers within 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is uncertain times but I would again call upon 
the federal minister to review her decision. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
will gladly support the motion put forward by the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I feel 
this is an extremely important debate. I think there’s a lot of 
things that need to be said and I think the motion is an 
extremely important one. 
 
It’s unfathomable to me that we have a leader of our country 
that can be so appallingly insensitive and seemingly uninformed 
of the magnitude of what the closure of the US borders is 
creating every single day that it continues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The comments that have been made by Jean Chrétien, and the 
decisions made by Jane Stewart are both totally unacceptable. 
And they are in . . . It flies in the face of the seriousness of the 
problem. 
 
Beyond the impact that this is having on the producers — the 
producers that have to put their livestock down and see a 
lifetime, in some cases, of work destroyed in a very short period 
of time; producers who are still quarantined; producers who are 
concerned about prices falling — beyond that, beyond the 
feedlots who are losing an average of about $50,000 per day 
every single day that they can’t ship, there are a lot of families 
that are directly affected each and every single day that the 
border closures continue. 
 
And it goes so far beyond the producers that it will take a very 
long time to estimate the total impact this is having. There are 
the ranch hands, the feedlot workers, the workers in the 
abattoirs, the meat-processing plants, the rendering plants, the 
auction marts, the trucking companies, and the list just goes on 
and on and on. And all of these people, all of these families, all 
of these individuals are being affected. 
 
The public seems to have an understanding. Most people that I 
talk to have somewhat of an understanding of how serious and 
how far-reaching the effect of this trade action will be and is 
going to be the longer it continues. 
 
And the provincial governments across our country seem to 
have an understanding and they have worked together and in a 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

 

sensitive and united, responsible manner in all of their actions 
and in everything they have said to date. 
 
And yet we have a leader who has shot off his mouth in a 
totally unacceptable manner, quite frankly. And we have a 
federal Minister of HRDC who has no sensitivity to the western 
families and how much they’re going to be hurt by her 
decisions. It’s sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s appalling, and it’s 
unacceptable. 
 
And so therefore I shall be supporting the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand and also support the motion before the House 
this afternoon, and also to support the decision to transmit the 
findings and the comments of this afternoon’s debate on to both 
the minister, Ms. Stewart, and I expect to the Prime Minister of 
Canada. 
 
I want to address my comment to the two remarks that have 
been made, or the two issues within the motion. First, when we 
take a look at the issue around how we’re going to provide 
compensation to people who are injured by this issue, we look 
at this from two tracks, Mr. Chair . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
First we have established in Canada today a team of men and 
women who are looking at — at the end of the day, depending 
on how long this issue is before us — who in fact will be 
injured by the length of time that this issue sustains itself, and 
from where can you provide assistance to people while they’re 
in the process of working this issue out. 
 
And from the second perspective, looking at the human health 
side where you’ve had CFIA in Canada, all of the provincial 
governments participating today through their departments, 
people from the USDA (United States Department of 
Agriculture) here looking at how in fact we can get this issue 
off the table in a timely way and then move on to doing 
business as usual in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
On the issue of compensation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’ve 
been looking at is that the industry itself has been examining 
who has been injured. And they’ve identified a whole host of 
people who have been injured — from the people who are the 
primary producers, to people who are the feedlot operators, to 
people who are the truck drivers, to people who work in the 
processing plants and in the rendering plants, to people who are 
in fact working as labourers in the packing plants, to individuals 
who are involved in the meat industry overall. 
 
That discussion is ongoing on a daily basis today to try and sort 
out what that piece should look like, on what timely fashion 
would you provide that kind of resources to people given the 
length of time that this matter might be before us, and at the 
same time examining what you can do immediately for workers 
and for those that are affected in the industry. 
 
Well last week, in a timely way, the minister responsible for 
Labour in the province recognized that we could do something 
immediately for workers who are displaced because of the 
issue. And the Minister of Labour wrote a letter, our Minister of 
Labour wrote a letter to the federal minister outlining the kinds 
of changes that could be made quickly in order to ensure that 

workers could be adequately benefited through the changes. 
 
And after the Minister of Labour from Saskatchewan wrote her 
letter, two days later, the Premier of Alberta, on Newsworld, 
along with the Minister of Agriculture are talking about the 
importance here of changing the labour legislation in order to 
provide the waiver of the two weeks so that workers can in fact 
be compensated in a way in which would be satisfactory. It was 
never a doubt on the minds of the Minister of Labour from 
Saskatchewan as she advised the cabinet and nor was it ever on 
the mind of any of us here that this recommendation or this 
change would not be made. 
 
And it is surprising to hear today that the federal government 
was not prepared to move on this particular recommendation. 
This would be a recommendation that would be held, I expect, 
by all Canadian Labour ministers across the country, a position 
that would be held by all of the governments across the country. 
And so from that perspective, this debate is extremely timely in 
terms of sending to Ottawa our displeasure in the decision that 
was made here. 
 
And as the member from North Battleford indicated earlier, that 
if there’s concern here about the federal government 
establishing precedent, it is one, as the Premier indicated, that 
we were certainly proud to support, given the size and the value 
and the magnitude of this industry in our province and the 
importance of the people who work within it. And the fact that 
we can do some timely, make some timely decisions, we’re 
going to be supporting this motion as it relates to the changes 
that should be made. 
 
On the issue of the words of the Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker, I 
clearly adopt the words that were stated by the member from 
North Battleford. This is clearly an inappropriate time for the 
minister . . . for the Prime Minister of Canada to be taking the 
position that he has, given that we in Canada today are working 
collectively as ministers, led by Minister Vanclief, to try and 
find the solution to this very difficult issue. 
 
And we’re proud of the fact that as a nation we’re working 
together on every front. The provinces are standing united and 
making decisions from a united perspective and are joined by 
our friends from the United States in helping us to find the 
solution to this very difficult issue. And this would be not the 
time that we would want to be entering into a debate or getting 
into a fight with our US counterparts, this would be a time for 
compromise and a time for searching for a solution in order to 
bring this particular issue to a resolve. 
 
And so in the transmittal of our information to the Prime 
Minister, it would be certainly tempered in my view by the 
notion that this is a very, very untimely and unfortunate 
statement that the Prime Minister would be making to the 
United States. 
 
We should keep in mind that we . . . that at least on this side of 
the House, I can understand what would bring people to the 
kind of frustration and the comment that the Prime Minister 
would make. We just need to recall what’s happened in Canada 
over the last several months, in the last 18 for that matter, Mr. 
Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we’ve had placed on 
Canada some very severe restrictions. 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

The restrictions as they relate to the potato industry, of which 
PEI’s (Prince Edward Island) potato industry almost was lost 
completely because of 72 tubers of which the United States 
wouldn’t accept into their food chain, even though the scientific 
evidence showed very quickly that that industry should in fact 
be supported and that the PEI potatoes should make their way 
back into the US. 
 
And so it took some months before that was resolved with the 
national government of Ottawa and PEI working together to get 
those borders opened into PEI. And so there was a great deal of 
frustration around that piece. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you only need to look at what happened in 
the tomato industry, where in fact Ontario and British Columbia 
. . . where bans were placed into the US by both of those two 
commodities for long periods of time, of where their 
horticultural industry was significantly affected by it, and the 
national government needed to stand by as they tried to 
negotiate some of the lifting of the ban and certainly created 
significant, significant frustrations during that period of time. 
 
We only need to think for a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
about the kinds of dilemma that we’ve had on softwood lumber 
and the fact that our American friends, over a long period of 
time, placed a ban on our American lumber, and the kinds of 
tariffs and duties that we today are paying because of the 
situation that we find ourselves in. 
 
And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue around the Canadian 
Wheat Board, where we’re in now our ninth challenge on the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And then today to have the ban on our beef placed on our 
province and our country, one might . . . one should not assume 
here that there isn’t a great deal of frustration that’s on this side 
of the border because of the kinds of things that have happened 
over the past two years or 18 months in this country as we’ve 
struggled to keep our trade partnerships and our friendships and 
our relationships kind and open and working. 
 
But to make a statement in the magnitude of which it was made 
in the last couple of days, or yesterday, by the Prime Minister. I 
can understand the rationale for making the statement in terms 
of the work that’s been done over the last couple of years, but 
what I cannot understand is the timing of this particular issue. 
And to sort out the working relationship with the Americans . . . 
As we sort out our working relationship with the Americans 
today on this issue, the timing is hugely, hugely unfortunate. 
 
And I join with particularly my colleague from North Battleford 
who expressed probably the words best, saying that this is a 
very inappropriate statement that’s made by the Prime Minister 
today at a time when we’re looking at not pointing the fingers at 
each other but should be looking for compromise and solution 
as opposed to getting into a confrontation which is certainly 
unwarranted and will . . . and could have a dramatic impact on 
our Canadian industry — our beef industry — at a time when 
Canadians are searching for solutions as opposed to looking for 
ways in which we might get into confrontations with one 
another. 

So I too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, want to join with my colleagues 
who have spoken in the House today on the decisions that were 
made by Minister Stewart and the unfortunate comments that 
were made by the Prime Minister in yesterday’s comment, and 
respect the fact that we’ll be transmitting this information that 
. . . this debate today to the legislature . . . or to the Prime 
Minister and also to Ms. Stewart, and we’ll be supporting the 
motion, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, as it’s been put 
forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we have here a very serious situation involving all of 
Western Canada, all of Canada indeed, when it comes to BSE 
and the closing of the US border . . . and not just the US border 
but other nations around the world which have also banned 
imports of Canadian beef. 
 
This is having a dramatic impact — particularly with those 
people and those businesses involved directly in the cattle 
industry, the families that raise the beef on the farm, Mr. 
Speaker, and those service industries that provide service and 
transportation to the cattle industry — when we have to keep in 
mind, Mr. Speaker, that we’re talking about a crisis brought on 
by one single case of BSE. 
 
And I think that is being somehow forgotten across Canada — 
that we’re not talking about an epidemic. We’re not talking 
about a wide scale eruption. We’re talking about one single case 
of BSE that the Canadian Food Inspection Agency and the 
inspection agencies of Alberta picked up so that it did not go 
into the food chain, Mr. Speaker, so that there was no danger to 
Canadian meat supplies and food supplies that are being 
consumed both by Canadians and by people around the world, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The agencies involved have done their job. They have . . . They 
apprehended that one animal before it became a danger to 
people, Mr. Speaker, and we somehow seem to have forgotten 
that in all of the media hype that has gone on around this 
particular issue. 
 
But because that media hype has gone on, Mr. Speaker, because 
the concern that has been raised in the minds of consumers in 
Canada and outside of our borders, particularly in the US, Mr. 
Speaker, it has had a major impact on many parts of our society, 
many parts of our workforce, our industry — particularly in 
Saskatchewan as well as across the rest of Canada. And I think 
it would be interesting to take note on just what kind of an 
industry we’re talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re talking about an industry that provides over 13,000 
animals for consumption in Canada on an annual . . . excuse 
me, 13 million animals across Canada each year. Of that 
number, 2.4 million or 6,800 animals a day are slaughtered in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Chair — 6,800 animals. And that 
has a total value of, a conservative estimate of about 6 to $7 
million dollars a day of product that is produced in 
Saskatchewan — some of it for domestic consumption. But 60 
per cent of all the animals in Canada that are slaughtered on an 
annual basis are exported. So it’s a major export industry 
bringing revenues into Canada. 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that entire trade route is 
disrupted as it is being done so because of one single incidence 
of BSE, because the American border is closed, where the 
majority of our exports go to, it’s having a huge impact. It’s 
affecting people on the farms that raised this beef, Mr. Speaker. 
They cannot take their animals now and transport them to 
market. Those farms — there’s only 17 of them, Mr. Speaker, 
that are under quarantine — are being very seriously impacted 
and a number of those animals have been put down so that tests 
can be made. 
 
So it’s had a huge impact on those families like the McCrea 
family up in the Cut Knife area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whose 
entire herd has been eliminated, and now they have to start back 
in a process that has taken them 40, 50 years to develop to this 
point. It’s a huge financial concern to them. But it’s even 
greater. It’s a huge emotional loss for them because they knew 
those animals as individuals not simply as a herd, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But you are also looking at the impact that it has beyond the 
farm gate . You take a look at what’s happening in the auction 
industry, you take a look at what’s happening in the feedlot 
industry, you take a look at what’s happening in the Minister of 
Labour’s own riding at the packing plants — employees are 
being laid off. They’re being sent home. In some cases they’re 
being forced to take vacation time at this time. Not all 
employees have that, Mr. Speaker. They may not have the time 
built up yet to take a week — already it’s been a week to ten 
days of holiday time. If this goes on for another week, Mr. 
Speaker, they may not have that time. 
 
And yet everyone is being impacted. The trucking industry is 
one of those segments of this entire process, Mr. Speaker, that 
is being greatly affected. We have a trucking company out near 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, that has 100, over 120 trucks sitting 
idle today because they can’t be moving cattle. The BSE, BSE, 
Mr. Speaker, is having a huge impact just on that one business 
alone — it’s the drivers, it’s the mechanics, it’s the people who 
help out, the staff involved. 
 
So you’re looking at a large number of people across Western 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, that are being hugely impacted by this. 
 
Now we take the example of what’s happening in Ontario, in 
Toronto, with SARS, a very serious concern, Mr. Speaker. 
Employees are being quarantined if they’re suspected to have 
come into contact with somebody who may have the potential 
to have SARS. They’re being restricted to home. They’re not 
being allowed to go to their place of employment. In 
compassion, the Minister of Human Resources, Jane Stewart, 
has said, we will waive the two-week waiting period 
requirement for them to access Employment Insurance. 
 
Employment Insurance is in place to provide this kind of 
protection. Through no fault of their own, people who are 
quarantined at home, who cannot go to their place of 
employment, cannot earn their livelihood will be supported by 
Employment Insurance. 
 
And yet people in Western Canada who, through no fault of 
their own, Mr. Speaker, again because of a health/safety issue 
— SARS is a health/safety issue; BSE is a health/safety issue 

— because these people, Mr. Speaker, are not quarantined at 
home, according to the minister . . . But they have lost their 
employment. They may not go to work because there is no 
work there. Their employer has laid them off either temporarily, 
permanently if that should happen, or being sent home on 
holiday pay. When that runs out, Mr. Speaker, in those 
particular cases, what is to be done? 
 
The minister is saying there will be no waiving of the two-week 
requirement for Employment Insurance. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s wrong. That smacks of a double standard. It smacks of a 
fact that in Toronto the minister is . . . there’s a large number of 
votes for the Liberal Party and in Saskatchewan that’s not the 
case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the way to run a country. When there is 
a crisis, all of the country should receive the same 
considerations, not simply based on their voting patterns, Mr. 
Speaker. And yet that seems to be what’s happening in the case 
of the federal Liberal government, and it’s simply, did you vote 
for me last time or not; if you didn’t, then we don’t care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the federal Liberal government needs to 
show more sensitivity to the people across Canada that are 
affected by the impact of BSE, and in particular it needs to 
show more respect for those areas outside of the golden triangle 
of Ontario, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to dealing with issues 
that are having a very serious negative impact to the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this entire issue shows how this current 
government, this current cabinet, and in particular this current 
Prime Minister is no longer in touch with the issues dealing 
with Canada and in particular no longer in touch with the issues 
as they relate particularly to Western Canada . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister has come out and made some 
very disturbing comments about our trading partners, our 
largest trading partner, and one that at a time when we are 
having trade difficulties with them that you would think that 
you would want to deal with as an equal, that with respect, and 
that you would want to enter into negotiations with them in a 
positive manner. 
 
You don’t start those negotiations by throwing a rock through 
their window, Mr. Speaker, just because you want to talk to 
them. And that’s certainly what this Prime Minister has done. 
 
You know, we take a look at the necessity to quarantine people 
in Ontario, in Toronto, because of the threat that they are . . . If 
they have come in contact with a potential SARS case, they 
become a threat to society, Mr. Speaker, so they’re quarantined. 
Well I think in this particular case maybe we need to quarantine 
the Prime Minister’s mouth because it’s becoming a threat to 
the economy of Canada, and in particular the economy of 
Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we don’t always agree with the President of the 
United States as one of the members opposite seemed to 
indicate. In fact is we are in very much a disagreement with 
them on some of the very issues that he mentioned. 
 
We disagree with them on the softwood lumber issue. The 
Americans are wrong on that issue and we have stated so. 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

We’ve moved motions in this House on that very issue, Mr. 
Speaker, that they are wrong. We have moved motions in . . . 
Not moved motions. We disagree with them, Mr. Speaker, on 
their wheat . . . they’re putting duties on wheat that goes across 
the Canadian border to the US, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And the Minister of Agriculture asks about the Wheat Board. 
We happen to believe that the Wheat Board should be a 
voluntary sale, not forced monopoly as is the case today, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re prepared to say so, not only on the floor of 
this Assembly, but on the campaign train as well, Mr. Deputy 
Premier. 
 
We also disagree with them very much about the embargo on 
cattle. We understand completely why they would put this in 
place because of the health concerns. The question comes into 
play though, how does it come off? It will come off, Mr. 
Speaker, because science says it’s safe. 
 
But the question will be from the determination of the point in 
time that the decision is made scientifically it’s safe, to the time 
the announcement is made opening that border up, will be a 
political decision as well. It simply won’t be a statement by a 
Canadian representative of CFIA or an American representative 
of the USDA saying yes, we know all the answers now dealing 
with BSE in this single Canadian circumstance and the border is 
wide open. No. 
 
The scientists will make their statement that they know and 
understand what has happened and that the food system is now 
safe. But a politician in Washington will make the decision as 
to when that border is open. And very much so, very much so, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that determination will be made based on 
our relationship — Canada and the US. 
 
And when and how quickly that happens, it’ll be based on trust, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’ll be based on the trust that we have 
built up over years and decades. But as we all know it only 
takes one incident for trust to be lost between two partners. And 
our Prime Minister, Jean Chrétien today, is not building that 
trust, he is diminishing it because of his comments and his lack 
of respect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also need to take a look at where the rest of the Liberals are 
at on this particular issue. The man who would be prime 
minister, Paul Martin, to my knowledge, has not yet made a 
statement dealing with this particular issue. He has not yet made 
a statement, to my knowledge, dealing with the comments made 
by the Prime Minister. So what is his stand on this particular 
issue? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about those other people that are seeking the 
Liberal leadership? What about John Manley ? What about 
Sheila Copps ? Where do they stand on this particular issue? 
Are they supporting their leader, their Prime Minister, on this 
particular issue? Do they support his comments about the 
American President and the American administration? 
 
What about our own Liberal representative in cabinet, federal 
cabinet, Ralph Goodale? What statements is he making to 
defend the industry of Saskatchewan, the workers of 

Saskatchewan, the farmers of Saskatchewan? Where is Ralph 
Goodale’s statement? Does he agree with the Prime Minister? 
Those are the kind of things that I think the people of 
Saskatchewan need to know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the Leader of the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan, David Karwacki? And in fact is, where is the 
Minister of Finance and where is the member from Melville? 
They still hold, to the best of my knowledge, Liberal 
memberships, although they may not be running as Liberals in 
the near future. But, Mr. Speaker, what is their stand on the 
Prime Minister’s statement? What is their stand on the 
statements made by Jane Stewart that in Ontario we will have 
one standard for workers, that they don’t have to comply with 
the two-week waiting period, whereas the workers in the cattle 
industry and associated services do have to, Mr. Speaker? What 
is their stand on a double standard? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have other disturbing news as well related 
to the BSE circumstances with the Minister of Agriculture, I 
believe it was in Ontario, coming forward and stating that 
perhaps it is time to look at a ban on Western Canadian beef 
going into Ontario. Mr. Speaker, I believe that is a totally 
irresponsible statement — totally irresponsible statement. 
 
As well, there was an NDP member from the one of Maritimes 
provinces stating that beef going into the Maritimes should only 
be regionally grown, that beef from outside of the Maritimes 
should not be allowed. That’s wrong, that’s wrong, that’s wrong 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We’ll get you the name; I don’t 
recall it right offhand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for us not to be pulling apart. It is time 
for us to be working together on this particular issue. And I’m 
very, very pleased to see that the government and opposition in 
Saskatchewan have generally agreed and worked together on 
this particular issue. There was unanimity the other day on the 
debate on this particular issue. And I believe, listening to the 
comments from both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, that 
again we will be in agreement on this particular motion. We all 
understand how important the cattle industry is to 
Saskatchewan, how important it is to Western Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, and we need to work together to ensure the strength of 
that industry for the prosperity of all of us in Western Canada. 
And it doesn’t help any of us when the federal government is 
not sensitive to those needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I will be voting in favour of this particular motion, 
and encourage the Prime Minister and the Liberal government 
to recognize the sensitivity that is needed in dealing with this 
issue. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave to move a 
motion of transmittal. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move that 
the speaker . . . I move, seconded by the Opposition House 
Leader: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of the 
rule 46 motion to the Prime Minister of Canada, the federal 
Minister of Agriculture, the federal Minister of Human 
Resource Development, and the leaders of the federal 
opposition parties. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
this afternoon to stand on behalf of the government and convert 
for debates returnable questions 527 through 565 inclusive. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m extremely pleased to 
stand on behalf of the government and table responses to 
written questions no. 566 and 567. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 8 —The Youth 
Justice Administration Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m extremely 
pleased to stand today to speak on Bill No. 8, the changes to the 
Youth Criminal Justice Act as they’re really consistent with 
some of the other work that government departments are doing 
when it comes to thinking outside the box with what’s 
happening in many areas of government today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill recognizes after 17 long years of 
trying to work with an Act dealing with youth that has proven 
time after time not to be working for everyone, that there really 
is time for a change. 
 
We can’t use a cookie-cutter approach when it comes to dealing 
with young offenders. There is different needs and different 
circumstances with each one of these young offenders. The 
police and the court and the jails are not the only way to deal 
with young people involved in crime. 
 
The new Youth Criminal Justice Act recognizes that . . . 
replaces the Young Offenders Act . The Act is emphasizing 
responsibility of community and society to work with young 
people to integrate them back into society. 
 
There is no one single right way to help these young people just 
as there’s no one single reason why young people are involved 
in crime in the first place. We believe that their search for their 

own identity, recognition, peer pressure, and their perceived 
needs drives many to commit crimes. 
 
There’s learned behaviour, lack of family support and love, 
homelessness, and cognitive disabilities that also are leading 
towards these problems. For far too many years we’ve been 
dealing with these people by ostracizing them into our criminal 
justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principles of the new Act focuses on shared 
social responsibility to address the needs of young people and 
to rehabilitate and integrate young people into society and to 
prevent further youth crimes. There is more of an emphasis on 
keeping young people out of custody and using measures 
outside the court process, encouraging . . . and encouraging 
involvement in the community. 
 
The Youth Criminal Justice Act is the federal government’s 
latest attempt to resolve the long-standing debate over which is 
the best way to deal with adolescent offenders — to try and get 
tough with them, or to try and rehabilitate them. 
 
The law which comes into force is designed to take . . . to strike 
a very delicate balance. It makes it easier to impose an 
adult-style sentence on youth as young as 14 for offences such 
as murder, manslaughter, and aggravated sexual assault. But it 
also provides for out-of-court settlements, probation, 
community services, and other non-jail solutions for things like 
shoplifting, theft, property damage, breaking and entering, and 
drug offences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on both sides of the House have heard 
me speak many times about the issue of FASD, fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder . I attended a number of conferences lately in 
dealing with the issue and one of the speakers, Judge Sheila 
Whelan, spoke eloquently about the number of FASD-affected 
youth within our justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of FASD youth in youth justice courts 
are anywhere from the ages of 12 to 17 years old. There’s very 
seldom that they have been diagnosed at an early age. They 
have multiple secondary disabilities and often there is very few 
supportive measures in place. They become both the victim and 
the perpetrator in many cases. They are vulnerable in the 
community and to custodial sentences. We have to balance the 
needs of youth and society when it comes to dealing with youth 
in our youth justice courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, there are really only two 
doctors in Saskatchewan that are able to deal with diagnosis and 
neuropsychological assessments. The hard numbers aren’t 
available yet, yet statistics from Dr. Blakely show uneven 
selection — 55 per cent of the youth in Saskatoon Provincial 
Court have FASD, 76 per cent ages 12 to 17 and 24 per cent of 
them ages 18 to 25; 86.5 per cent of these young people are 
males. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is . . . 63.1 per cent of FASD-affected youth 
in our youth justice courts have cognitive disabilities. The types 
of offences by these referred youth are property related at 39.6 
per cent, system related at 27.1 per cent, violent at 18.4 per 
cent, and other at 14.9 per cent. 
 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

(16:00) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the bigger picture, Saskatchewan youth 
crime statistics are very alarming; 5.4 per cent increase in crime 
rate in the year 2000 and 2001. The national crime rate was 
only up by 1 per cent. 
 
We have the highest . . . (inaudible) . . . in Canada for the last 
five years. We have the highest provincial custody rate and the 
Canadian custody rate is higher than the United States. And we 
have the highest proportion of persons under the age of 14 years 
amongst all the provinces. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a youth affected with FASD is a poor fit 
in the youth criminal justice system. They don’t understand 
principles such as punishment, remorse, and rehabilitation. That 
has very little to no meaning for them. Procedures aren’t easily 
understood and they don’t accommodate cognitive impairments. 
 
Advocacy models can conflict with diagnosis, and assessment 
and identification frequently occurs after the youth has acquired 
secondary disabilities. The assessment needs present difficulties 
because we need trained individuals. And we have to have the 
mother actually admit that there has been drinking while 
pregnant and this isn’t something that is easy to attain in lots of 
cases. We really don’t have the resources that are geared to 
FASD sufferers and the fitness process is a short-term measure. 
 
The new Youth Criminal Justice Act promotes community 
responsibility for addressing the challenges of youth justice. It 
promotes community alternatives to criminal charges in 
custodial sentences, community consultation and discussion, 
and community participation and rehabilitative measures. We 
really do have an opportunity to have a new approach. 
 
It addresses the underlying cause of youth crime. We can 
intervene and enforce in a timely manner, take measurements 
which are meaningful given the youth level of development. 
And we can respond to the needs of the youth with special 
requirements and specifically respond to the needs of our 
Aboriginal youth. 
 
The Youth Criminal Justice Act provides for alternative 
measures and sanctions. It provides for youth justice 
committees, conferencing, and child welfare referrals. 
 
The sentencing has changed. There’s restrictions on remand in 
custody and we now have orders reserved for very serious 
offences, not just for what we consider minor offences. It’s only 
going to be the repeat offenders who are dealing with the 
criminal system and incarceration. Judges in the criminal 
system must consider community alternatives, community 
supervision, and integration with every custody sentence, and 
individualized sentencing. 
 
Aside from the other issues that have been identified by many 
of my colleagues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that this Bill 
really is lacking a lot of answers, not just for us but for 
members of the public in general. The Bill doesn’t talk about 
increasing funding or resources and we know that this is going 
to be a lot of money that’s going to be needed to provide 
community resources and community services and supports that 
the youth are going to be requiring. 

It doesn’t give specifics about existing or new programs and it 
doesn’t tell us how the police forces, social workers, 
community workers, victims groups, or educators will be better 
equipped to deal . . . to enforce this Bill. It simply leaves 
everything up to regulations and really we don’t have any 
answers at this time. 
 
There are a number of questions that need to be answered. What 
kind of preliminary work has already been done with respect to 
how various organizations and departments are going to work 
together? 
 
We wonder if they conferred with other provinces to see what 
measures or actions are being taken there. Was there a way that 
things could be adapted to fit here in Saskatchewan that have 
already been worked out in other provinces? We wonder how 
soon the transition period this will be and what kind of 
measures have been or will be put in place to help these things 
along. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the minister brought forward this 
Bill he talked about the minister’s authority to set up and 
operate custodial facilities. This really is a grey area and I’ll be 
looking forward to hearing what the minister can answer on this 
issue. 
 
He indicated that to assist in the implementation of this Act, 
they are committed to supporting community infrastructure or 
extrajudicial sanction and they’re planning to increase 
provincial capacity by 10 per cent across the province. 
 
The government has said they are going to staff another 15 
positions to work with courts and community-based 
organizations to supervise youth in the community. They also 
believe that the key to the new policies and programs is risk 
management and case management. This means there must be 
support for victims, communities, and youth at large, using 
multi-disciplinary approaches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, communities neither have the manpower nor the 
resources to implement any new programs at this time. What we 
require would be the funding as well as the actual trained 
personnel to deal with this issue. 
 
There isn’t enough police officers, social workers, or 
community aid workers to help young offenders under the old 
Act, so we really can’t expect that there’s going to be under the 
new Act as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Act is something that many people in 
the province and community have been waiting for, for a 
number of years, and what we have now really does have to be 
replaced. And I believe that anything is going to be better than 
what we have right now. 
 
So there’s a number of questions that will be asked later on, but 
at this time I’d like to move the Bill into Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

 

Bill No. 36 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Serby that Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural 
Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour to get on my feet to speak to Bill No. 36. It’s been, you 
know, a very, very long decade now that this NDP government 
has severely mishandled the Agriculture portfolio, and more 
recently the economy of the province as a whole. 
 
And the result, Mr. Speaker, with three years of deficit 
budgeting and a debt that’s increasing by $1 million a day, the 
result is that even if they had the political will to do something 
meaningful for the farm families of this province — which 
they’ve demonstrated time and time again that they don’t have 
the political will — but even if they did, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they ran the province’s finances so far into the ditch that they 
can’t do anything beyond crisis management. And they can’t 
even do that very well. 
 
So what do they do, Mr. Speaker? It’s quite simple. They blame 
someone else. They blame the federal government. They blame 
the opposition. They blame the producers themselves. They 
give the public the false perception that the farmers of this 
province are just a financial burden to society. And then, and 
then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they turn around and they chastise 
the producers for having a bad attitude. 
 
But they never, they never take responsibility for anything 
themselves. And they never admit that time and time again they 
dropped the ball. And sadly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the ones who 
pay the price for the lack of leadership shown by our 
Agriculture minister are the farm families of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister told us that Bill No. 36 is needed so 
that Saskatchewan can meet the parameters of the revised safety 
net stabilization account program under the agricultural policy 
framework; a program he said that he believes will be good for 
Saskatchewan. Well let’s just explore that for a minute, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s the new NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) or the 
super NISA, or more accurately what the Last 
Mountain-Touchwood member has deemed AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) or CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program) with premium. 
 
It has the producers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of this province very 
concerned and quite rightfully so. It leaves a lot of questions in 
the minds of the producers, and this government has done 
absolutely nothing to alleviate the producers’ fears or to even so 
much as to keep them informed as to what their new risk 
management tool is going to look like. 
 
And you know why that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well I think 
it’s because the Agriculture minister doesn’t have a clue 
himself. 
 
He doesn’t know how it’s going to be linked to crop insurance. 
Now that the producers are going to be required to pay two 
premiums, he doesn’t know if a claim under one program will 

be considered income when calculating a claim on the second 
program, which would mean, Mr. Speaker, that the producers 
may have to pay two premiums for only one coverage. He 
doesn’t know if it’s going to be an advantage or a detriment to 
the producers to move from gross margins to production 
margins in the calculations. And he does not have a clue, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if it’s going to be an effective risk 
management tool or not. 
 
But he says, he says that he believes it’s going to be good for 
Saskatchewan. And in his explanation of the intent of the Bill, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister pointed out that he viewed the 
directive of the new NISA to meet the need as a positive one. 
And in theory I agree. 
 
But what if the formula, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is severely 
lacking in its ability to identify where that need is? And that’s 
not unheard of. We’ve seen it in AIDA, we’ve seen that happen 
in CFIP, and by all indication we’re going to see it again in the 
new program. 
 
So one must wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if our minister’s 
enthusiasm about the new NISA is in fact that if no one 
qualifies for a claim or if very, very few producers qualify for a 
claim, the province doesn’t have to worry about coming up with 
the money to contribute their share of the cost. Quite frankly it 
would explain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why the minister feels 
quite comfortable about slashing the agriculture budget year 
after year. 
 
But you know whose fault it’s going to be at the end? Ah, it’ll 
be the federal government’s or the opposition’s or the 
producers’ — someone, anyone — as long as the NDP 
government doesn’t have to take any responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when AIDA was first introduced in Ottawa, 
Saskatchewan initially refused to sign the agreement. The 
minister of the day, Eric Upshall didn’t participate in the design 
of the program. The NDP had tore up the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) contract in 1992 and unlike the other 
provinces, with the exception of Manitoba, they never replaced 
it with another program. So they had no provincial risk 
management program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they hadn’t 
had one for a number of years, and they had no desire or no 
ideas of how to even design a program to suggest to Ottawa. 
 
So what did Mr. Upshall do at the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Well he went on holidays, and he waited for Ottawa to simply 
come up with something that would be designed by everyone 
but the province with the most arable land. And when that 
program failed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when AIDA sadly failed 
the farm families of this province, he blamed the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
When CFIP was introduced, Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture 
minister of the day, Mr. Lingenfelter, he refused to participate 
in the design. He walked out of the meeting. To quote from an 
article that was written at the time — it was written on January 
20 of 2000 and entitled, “Vanclief Gives Prairie Ministers 
Warning After Meeting Walk-Out,” by Barry Wilson — and I 
quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Federal officials insisted that unless opting-out provinces 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

develop Ottawa-approved provincial programs to distribute 
their required 40% of the cost, they would not get the 
federal portion of the funds. Dwain Lingenfelter said (that) 
he would be surprised if the federal government withheld 
from prairie farmers aid that . . . (flowed) to farmers 
elsewhere. A federal official said Ottawa would be 
prepared to negotiate with an opted-out province over what 
program design is necessary to trigger . . . federal funds. 

 
That’s a significant statement that Ottawa made, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because that was our golden opportunity right then and 
right there. It was our prime opportunity to develop a 
made-in-Saskatchewan safety net that would have been cost 
shared by the federal government, a safety net that would have 
addressed the industry as it looks here, and we let it slide 
through the fingers. 
 
What did Mr. Lingenfelter do at the time? He says that the 
federal government was mean-spirited and he dropped the ball. 
He simply dropped the ball. 
 
On January 15 of 2000, Bruce Johnstone wrote: 
 

Are Lingenfelter and Wowchuk really “fighting the good 
fight” against Ottawa, or simply reneging on their 
responsibilities to do what they can for their own farmers? 
 
Farmers and taxpayers need to know the answer to that 
question and soon. 

 
So here we are again, Mr. Speaker — another program where 
the NDP Agriculture minister has refused to participate in the 
design, and the farmers and the taxpayers have a lot of 
questions that need to be answered once again, and once again 
we have a minister that has no answers. 
 
It’s ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in 2001 when Ipsos-Reid 
prepared a NISA review report for Agriculture and Agri Food 
Canada, it was stated that it was a fairly well-liked program 
nationwide and it suggested only a few minor changes in order 
to enhance it, in order to make it work better, in order for it to 
address some difficulties that it had. 
 
(16:15) 
 
It’s ironic that the federal government would choose to scrap 
that particular program, for that is indeed what they’re doing. 
 
The only reason that the new program is being called NISA is 
to deceive the producers into thinking that it will be a good 
program because they liked NISA. But they have no idea how 
rare a program they had in their hands. 
 
Kevin Hursh once said — and I don’t have a direct quote, I just 
remember him making the comment — that pursuing a safety 
net program that would be generally liked by all, that would be 
simple to administrate and user-friendly, and that would work 
effectively for all the different sectors of the agriculture 
industry is similar to the quest for the elusive Holy Grail. And 
he’s quite right. 
 
Many agriculture economists will tell you that to design a 
program with a one-size-fits-all criteria is to plan to fail 

especially when you are dealing with a land mass as vast as 
Canada and an industry as diverse as agriculture. You don’t 
need to look any farther than Newfoundland quite frankly to 
know how diverse our industry is because the president of 
Newfoundland’s Federation Of Agriculture is a fur farmer, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We have a very diverse agriculture industry. 
 
So how do you come up with a one-size-fits-all program that’s 
going to work for all? But that’s exactly what Vanclief intends 
to do. And we’re going to throw away a program that was, 
rarely, very well-liked and was effective for certain needs. And 
we’re going to pursue a program that’s going to be designed 
after not just one but two programs that have proven to fail. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my fear and the fear of the families of the 
province is that we’re going to see many, many more headlines 
such as those that we seen on Wednesday that said, “Farm 
incomes tumble.” 
 
So I have concerns. I know that the producers of the province 
have concerns. The different industry leaders have concerns 
about the new proposed risk management tool that’s being 
proposed by the agriculture government or by the . . . sorry, 
pardon me, the federal government in the agriculture policy 
framework. 
 
So there will be questions that we would like to ask and address 
in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 37 — The Crop 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when the minister first explained the intent of 
Bill No. 37, he told us that the Bill would provide for the type 
of crop insurance programs being developed under the 
agriculture policy framework as well as ensuring that changes 
can be made to capture the scope of future enhancements. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think that there is anything that 
demonstrates the serious repercussions of mismanaging the 
province’s finances and the failing to grow this province as a 
whole than our crop insurance program. 
 
It’s a program that’s been gutted of spot loss hail and variable 
price options by this NDP government. It’s a program whose 
premiums have increased by 50 or more per cent for each of the 
past two years. And it’s a program that for all real purposes has 
been the only risk management tool, quite frankly, that many of 
our producers have had. 
 
I would like to quote from an article written on March 2, 2002 
by Murray Mandryk. And even though it was written a year 
ago, it’s just as relevant today in reference to our crop insurance 
program. It begins with a quote which is: 
 

“I think everyone recognizes that when you have a tight 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

 

fiscal situation governments cannot always fund all the 
priority items,” said Hal Cushon, assistant deputy minister 
of Agriculture. 
 

And he was referring to the concern that crop insurance 
coverage will be scaled back considerably. Murray Mandryk 
went on to write: 
 

We are now witnessing a provincial government that is 
either oblivious to the real root cause of the province’s 
economic problems, like agriculture, or is simply too 
overwhelmed by the nature of such problems that it just 
can’t come up with a single creative idea of its own to 
effectively address it. Given the NDP’s penchant to blame 
agriculture as the cause of most of its problems, one should 
assume it’s the latter. 
 
But the fact that we’re hearing a Department of Agriculture 
official suggest crop insurance is just one of many 
government priorities right now is all a little frightening. 
Maintaining a properly managed and funded crop insurance 
program in these economic and weather conditions isn’t 
just another one of the government’s many priorities. 
 
This is Saskatchewan. Agriculture accounts for 11 per cent 
of the jobs and 9 per cent of the GDP, and there’s a drought 
out there. 
 
Frankly, using a lack of money excuse isn’t just tiresome, 
it’s unacceptable. The thing is though, if the government 
took a bolder, more creative approach to problem solving, 
it might be able to preserve crop insurance without cutting 
elsewhere. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a good, effective, strong crop insurance program 
would go a long ways to alleviating the need for other risk 
management tools. But in order to have such a program, a 
government must be able to do two things — they must 
seriously view it as a priority, and they must have a strong 
overall economy so that they can deal with severe years such as 
what we’ve just faced for the past two years in our province. 
And sadly this NDP can’t do either. 
 
And the real dilemma that the NDP face is: who can they 
blame? Crop insurance is, after all, a provincial government 
responsibility. 
 
Oh but they do still find ways to blame the federal government 
and we need look no farther than the fiasco that occurred last 
summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party called 
upon the government to write off crops in a more timely manner 
so that the sparse fields could be used for grazing or cut for 
field . . . feed before they were rendered useless from lack of 
moisture. And the minister made excuses that he couldn’t do 
that because the federal government wouldn’t allow it. 
 
But at the same time in Regina, Mr. Goodale was announcing 
that the federal government would allow any flexibility, that the 
provincial government needed, to crop insurance in order to 
address the severe drought problems. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the minister was blaming the weather and the extreme 
conditions for the extreme . . . sorry, increases to the premium. 
 

And yet let’s just examine that as well. In Alberta they also 
suffered a severe drought and record levels of claims, and do 
you know what they did, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They wrote 
down some of that debt from the General Revenue Fund and 
they did not pass the total burden on to the producers who were 
already facing the financial challenges of a year of poor 
production. 
 
And that’s what a province can do when it makes its number 
one industry a priority. And that’s what a province can do if it 
grows the population and the economy through 
well-thought-out and responsible policies. That’s what they can 
do if they have money to work with instead of destroying the 
economy and chasing people out of the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to try to save face, our Agriculture 
minister has bragged about the enhancements that his 
government’s made to the crop insurance program. But quite 
frankly they’re a little bit of an embarrassment when you 
compare them with the enhancements that Alberta made to their 
program. And in fact, if the producers of this province put their 
numbers through the programs offered in any of the other 
provinces, they would find out that they would be far better 
protected anywhere else. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, an all-risk insurance program is 
fundamental to our agriculture industry. So let’s just hope the 
Premier will screw up the courage to call an election soon so 
that we can get this province growing, so that we can get our 
general revenue growing, and then we can afford to put the crop 
insurance program in place that the producers of this province 
deserve. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move this Bill 
into Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 38 — The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to speak to Bill No. 38, The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2003 because it’s an important Bill and a Bill 
that has probably become even more important since it was first 
introduced by the minister. 
 
Before I begin addressing specifics within the Bill though, I 
would like to point to an article or bring attention to the article 
entitled “Ban Alberta beef, NDP says”, because apparently 
there was questions earlier from the member from Regina 
Northeast and the member from Saskatoon Nutana concerning 
as to which NDP member had made statements. And the article 
goes on to say: 
 

. . . the provincial NDP said Wednesday. 
 
Agriculture critic John MacDonell said (that) he thinks a 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

ban would be wise until officials are certain where the 
infected cow came from and whether there might be other 
cases. 

 
So in answer to their questions, that is which NDP made that 
statement and the article’s entitled “Ban Alberta beef, NDP 
says.” 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is home to the 
largest cattle herd in Canada. And many statistics and 
comments were made on Tuesday from the members from both 
sides of the House as they spoke to the motion put forward by 
the member from Saltcoats. Comments were made in support of 
the industry in recognition of its importance to our province and 
to our nation as a whole. 
 
Bill No. 38 makes changes that are being asked for by the 
feedlot sector of our cattle industry. And sadly, that is also the 
sector of the industry that’s going to be most quickly impacted 
by the recent closing of the US borders because the cattle in the 
feedlots need to move in a very, very rapid and timely manner. 
 
There was a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) article 
that came out on May 28 that I would like to quote from: 
 

“Basically the industry is on shut-down and that will 
probably stay until we (can) get some idea when the border 
will open,” says Brad Wildeman, who runs Pound-Maker. 
 
In the meantime, the cattle still have to eat and even though 
they get fatter, their value continues to drop. That extra 
feed isn’t cheap. 
 
“It’s costing us about $2 a day, or maybe a little more than 
2 dollars a day to feed these cattle,” says Wildeman. 

 
Those costs add up and feed lot operators say they could 
lose up to $50,000 dollars a day on the herds they’re 
holding. 

 
So with each and every day that this continues where the 
borders are closed, feedlots are losing on the average of about 
$30,000 a day, and that’s a huge impact. 
 
So beyond this Bill and the changes that it’s making that the 
feedlot industry would like to be made, I hope the minister is 
looking beyond this because the problems the feedlot industry is 
facing now is well beyond what this Bill is going to be able to 
address. So I hope the minister is putting, as we speak, putting 
together a committee, quite frankly, of invested stakeholders in 
the feedlot industry. 
 
I hope that he’s getting his head around what strategy are we 
going to have here in our own province to help save the feedlot 
industry that we have in our province. I hope that strategy 
covers what’s going to happen if the borders are closed in the 
next week, in the next two weeks, in the next month, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because we’re going to have to think ahead 
here. We’re going to have to get a strategy. We’re going to have 
to get our heads around what can be done. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move this Bill 
into Committee of the Whole. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 27 — The 
Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a privilege to debate and clarify some of the issues 
presented in The Condominium Property Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, right off I want to indicate for the record that 
as a condo owner and as a chairperson of a condominium 
association board, I come at this from two different points of 
view, of some of the concerns that I as a condo owner and our 
board as a condominium corporation have expressed for a 
number of years. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And I have had the opportunity to speak with a number of 
condominium property managers and tried to get an 
understanding of the kinds of things that this Bill proposes to 
ensure that the items that are being proposed are on track and 
will deal with the concerns. 
 
So I want to thank the different individuals and groups that have 
forwarded information to my attention that will allow me to 
make some comments on the various sections. 
 
A special thank you to Randy Heathcote who, Mr. Speaker, is 
the president of the Saskatchewan chapter of the Canadian 
Condominium Institute. Mr. Heathcote, through ICR Denro 
Property Managers, has made some comments on various 
sections of this Bill that will, I think, explain a number of the 
conditions and concerns that individuals may have about the 
Bill. 
 
One of the first changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
previous way of assessing a condominium was in an 
entire-building state, where the condominium would be 
assessed, market value based on the entire size of the building 
and then through unit factors. Depending upon whether an 
individual owner contained a one-bedroom or a two-bedroom or 
a three-bedroom unit, a unit factor would be applied to each 
owner. And as a result the assessment would be distributed in 
that fashion. 
 
It’s clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that way of assessing a 
value is not always accurate because not all condominiums that 
are in the same building that are rated as a two-bedroom are all 
going to sell for the same price. 
 
And this new change has now implemented a system that will 
enable each condominium building to be assessed by way of an 
assessment on each unit. Hopefully I haven’t clouded that 
definition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know that the members that are sitting near me understand this 
very well, and have an understanding of course that the 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

 

assessment will now be derived by market value of the 
individual unit, a request that has been before the condominium 
association for quite a while. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other concerns of course is 
around the reserve funds that condominium corporations 
maintain. Newly created condominium associations or 
condominium associations that have relatively new property, 
the reserve fund accumulates on an ongoing basis, so as a result 
the reserve fund that is necessary to ensure that capital projects 
can be completed is there. 
 
But what has been detected, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that not all 
condominium associations — or corporations I guess is the 
better word to use — not all condominium corporations have 
significant reserve funds to deal with problems that would occur 
in a need for a capital request. 
 
The Act proposes that a study be conducted within three years 
of the actual putting in place of this Act, whereby a 
condominium association will be required to do a reserve fund 
study to determine what is an adequate reserve fund to be 
maintained by a condominium corporation. 
 
I think this is an excellent plan and I’m sure that boards, 
condominium boards, are looking at doing exactly that because 
there needs to be a reserve fund that would be in place so that 
special assessments need not occur whereby individual amounts 
are again charged against the various owners. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that individual assessment charge is 
probably the most significant part of this Bill. When 
condominium corporations make an assessment on a — what 
I’ll refer to as a common expense — a capital improvement to 
all the properties of a condominium corporation, there may be a 
need to do a particular project that is significant in size and that 
is in its monetary size. So there is an assessment that is levied 
against each condominium owner if the reserve fund is not 
adequate to handle that. 
 
So what has happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that certain 
individuals who own property have had an assessment levied 
against them. And by the way, all condominium corporation 
owners vote on that assessment according to the bylaws of the 
corporation. But the majority of course is what is needed to pass 
an assessment or a charge that is applied to each owner. 
 
There have been instances in the province of Saskatchewan, in 
various condominium corporations, where owners have become 
delinquent in making payments. In other words, the assessment 
is now in arrears. What this amendment proposes to do is to 
place the special assessment or the special levy that is assessed 
against the condominium owner ahead of a mortgage that is at a 
financial institution. And this is what is necessary to ensure that 
owners . . . other owners within that same condominium 
corporation are not left with a balance that is unpaid by one 
particular owner. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is of course a concern with 
financial institutions and how financial institutions are going to 
react to the fact now that no longer is their mortgage the first 
thing as far as a lien; that indeed if there is an assessment 
charge that has become delinquent, payment has become 

delinquent, the arrears that exist will now rank ahead of the 
condominium mortgage that the individual has at a financial 
institution. 
 
I think what it will do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is allow — or not 
allow but it will ensure — that there is far greater discussion 
with the financial institution regarding a mortgage by a 
prospective owner or purchaser of a condominium. The 
prospective owner must be clear that a mortgage of whatever 
amount that is being applied for is indeed within the fiscal 
framework of that individual’s capacity to pay. 
 
And secondly, there has to be an assurance that the estoppel 
certificate that is provided by a condominium corporation that 
describes all of the plans of a condominium corporation — it 
talks about encumbrances that might be on the property — 
these are going to have to be much more clear and much more 
descriptive in terms of plans of condominium corporations. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a prospective owner now is 
going to have to be aware that a condominium corporation is 
planning a large project — and I’ll use a number like $1 million 
in size. If a project of $1 million is being proposed, there will be 
an assessment on every condo owner. That condo association 
then must make that information available to a prospective 
buyer. 
 
So a buyer will have the ability to not only look at what the 
current market value is of the property, what assessment may be 
levied against this property, but most importantly he’s also 
going to have the ability to look at what changes will take place 
in the actual assessed value if the project is completed. In other 
words, is there value for the expenditure? 
 
So there is a bit of a trade-off with the financial institutions and 
I note in the minister’s comments that there has been 
consultation with representatives of the financial institutions 
who seem to be in favour of the proposals that have been put 
forward. So the lien that is described, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
becoming first . . . ahead of a mortgage, I think will alleviate 
many of the concerns that condominium corporations have. 
 
But one of the concerns that will require far greater explanation 
in Committee of the Whole will be a description of what the 
words “prescribed interest or claim” mean, in section 
63.1(2)(b). Those are words that suggest that there may be an 
interest or claim by someone else other than the financial 
institution and other than the condominium corporation. So 
those will require clarification. Those kinds of concerns need to 
be looked at. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the property managers that I have spoken 
to have taken a good look at this Bill, have looked at some of 
the terms, have looked at some of the suggestions that are being 
made in this revision. And there is agreement with the kinds of 
things that are coming into force. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will be a number of 
questions that we have regarding certain sections where there is 
a need to clarify the definition of a particular phrase, or the 
definition of what is meant by an interest rate that is applicable 
at the time. Those are words that will be clarified in Committee 
of the Whole. 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2003 

 

And at this time, I would allow the Bill No. 27, An Act to 
amend The Condominium Property Act, to proceed to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 28 — The Health 
Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure to speak briefly on The Health 
Information Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we know, one of the big, driving issues 
surrounding the providing of medical health records is the issue 
of confidentiality and privacy. And certainly that the original 
health information Act was not proclaimed because there were 
difficulties in ensuring that there was a proper balance between 
access to the information in a responsible way and also 
safeguarding individuals’ privacy and confidentiality. Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill attempts to adjust those issues so that there is 
this proper balance of these two competing issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I think it’s important to say that we very 
much support the concept of the unified medical health record 
for every citizen in the province that uses the health system. 
 
Certainly when I had the pleasure and opportunity to tour the 
Mayo Clinic, this was a cornerstone of the way that they 
provided their services, that there was a unified health record 
that was the property of the client and moved to the different 
departments so appropriate access to these files could be 
utilized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the SHIN network, the Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network is going to do a job properly, that we all 
are committed to seeing happen, I think this legislation of 
reconciling these issues are very important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is legislation that’s in the right direction. 
We have some questions to ask in the Committee of the Whole 
and we would suggest that it proceed at that time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to put some remarks about this Bill on the public 
record. 
 
I want to initially say that it’s important that we, as part of the 
Canadian health system, move to an electronic record whereby 
— regardless of where we live in this country — if it’s required, 
that health providers will at our urging have access to our 
particular individual health file. 
 
I do want to make this point — which I believe is an important 
point — that with the advances in information technology and 
with some of the cases that we’ve seen lately where health 
information has been used in the public domain because trustees 
have not provided the necessary safeguards, that there are some 

issues we need to be concerned about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to put on the public record that there may 
be some medical procedures or some medical events that 
happen in individual lives that that individual may wish to keep 
confidential and may not want to have entered into the health 
system in the first place. 
 
And I’ll give you a few examples. As you know, Mr. Speaker, 
the whole notion of having a therapeutic abortion in this 
country is a controversial issue and there are people that have 
divided views on this issue. There are people who believe that a 
woman has an individual right to choose whether to have a 
therapeutic abortion, and there are others that believe that 
abortion should not be a medical procedure that is paid for by 
our public health system. 
 
(16:45) 
 
We also know that we are not yet at the stage in civilization in 
this country where, if a women . . . woman chooses to have a 
therapeutic abortion, that it is viewed on a societal basis as 
proper. And I have had individuals raise with me certainly, that 
they would like to have the right to have that kept from an 
electronic file. And so one of the things that I think the minister 
needs to consider is the notion that if a person wishes not to 
have a therapeutic abortion put into their medical record, 
electronic file, that they should be able to do so. 
 
The other point I want to raise is the whole issue of drug and 
alcohol abuse. And as we know there are moments when 
employers or institutions may want to know whether or not 
you’ve had a history of drug and alcohol abuse, or have had 
some . . . have had the health system intervene on your behalf to 
deal with drug and alcohol abuse. And we know that not all 
employers have a positive outlook and view these two particular 
diseases, I will say, as diseases. They see it something . . . They 
see it as something else. And I would like to suggest that if an 
individual wishes to, they may wish to have their drug and 
alcohol abuse situation kept out of their medical file. And I 
would like the minister to consider that as well. 
 
There are other instances, Mr. Speaker, such as mental health 
issues that individuals may not want to have put into an 
electronic record. Even though this legislation indicates that 
individuals will have the right to prevent that medical record 
from being shared, you may not want to have that information 
in the system in the first place. 
 
And I wanted to put those few comments on the public record, 
Mr. Speaker, because I think in terms of where this issue of an 
electronic record and information technology is going, that it 
has broader societal implications for individuals. And I thought 
that it was important given that I have specific concerns about 
therapeutic abortions, drug and alcohol abuse, as well as mental 
health issues being part of a system, that my colleagues in the 
legislature might want to consider amendments to the 
legislation that would give the individual the right not to have 
those particular medical procedures or medical events placed on 
electronic record if the individual didn’t want them placed 
there. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks and I 



May 29, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

 

understand that members are ready to have this Bill proceed to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 40 — The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve 
talked a number of times on this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
the Bill itself kind of . . . it actually increases local 
decision-making authority for municipalities. It talks about 
municipalities working with other municipalities, and property 
tax changes to phase it in over four years, which would go 
along with the normal reassessment. SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) wants sales verification 
forms used; it’s talked about in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We would certainly have questions on that. It also deals with 
truck weights on municipal roads, and we’ll have questions on 
that. 
 
But other than that, Mr. Speaker, we have no problem with this 
Bill at this point and would like to pass it on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 39 — The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Some 
parts of this Bill we still have out to concerned groups out there 
right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we’ll be holding on to this 
Bill a little bit longer; adjourning this debate once more on this 
Bill. 
 
It talks about the implementing of the funding, the new funding 
for municipalities, and I guess our concern is that . . . and the 
municipalities’ concerns. And you heard the city of Regina and 
all the other cities talk about the shortage of funding from the 
provincial government for the problems that need to be 
addressed in the cities. And I think we heard the debate in the 
city of Regina, for an example, the controversy went on there 
about how much they tried to hold the line on taxes but had to 
increase their mill rate in the city. 
 
That’s happening all over the province, Mr. Speaker. So I think 
it boils down to, once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that from 
early in the 1990s till 2003 now, that funding has fell far behind 
the rate of inflation and the costs that have been passed on to 
local municipalities. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seeing the clock, I think that we would 
adjourn debate on this Bill and talk to it another day. 

Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:54. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1293 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1294 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1294 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Junior Curling Champions 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1295 
 World Catholic Education Day 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
 Convocation at Saskatchewan Universities 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
 Palliser Regional Library Wins LibraryNet Award 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
 Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
 Métis Role Model Awards 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1296 
 50th Anniversary of First Summit of Mount Everest 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1297 
 Health Research Funding 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1297 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Federal Response to Distress in Beef Industry 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1297 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1298 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1298 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1298 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1299 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1300 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1300 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1301 
 Ambulance Charges in Rural Saskatchewan 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1301 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 National Health Council 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1302 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1303 



 

 

 Regina Auto Theft Strategy 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1303 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1304 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Waiting Period for Employment Insurance 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1304 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1306 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1307 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1308 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1309 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1310 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1311 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1312 
  Hagel (transmittal motion) .............................................................................................................................................................. 1315 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 8 —The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1315 
 Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1317 
 Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1318 
 Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1319 
 Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1320 
 Bill No. 28 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2003 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1322 
 Bill No. 40 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1323 
 Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1323 
 
 
 


