















































Hansard: May 27, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1215 
 May 27, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today on behalf of people from the Kelvington and area 
who are concerned about Highway No. 49: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Okla and 
Sturgis. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district concerned about 
the lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Signature on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens that are concerned about the fairness for Crown 
leaseholders. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and Kerrobert and 
district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 

Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the centre 
of Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — I hereby advise the Assembly that the petition of the 
Radville Christian College has not met the filing deadlines laid 
down in rule 64 and accordingly may not be received. 
 
Mr. McCall: — On behalf of the petitioners for a private Bill 
respecting the Radville Christian College, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to suspend rule 64 to enable the petition to be 
received and the private Bill process to proceed. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. Petition 01 is 
received and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills for consideration. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 27, 36, 41, and no. 100. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April 2002 
how much money did SaskTel spend on television ads? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have other questions for following months. 
 
Also I give notice that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April 2002 
how much money did SaskTel spend on radio ads? 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I have questions for subsequent 
months. 
 
And finally I give notice that on day 50 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April 2002 
how much money did SaskTel spend on print ads? 
 

And again I have questions for succeeding months. 
 
I’m pleased to present these questions to the government. 
 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce to you a group of school 
students from Maymont Central high. They are in the east 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I had an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) visit 
with this group of students and their chaperones and I wish 
them an interesting day today in the legislature and hopefully 
you have an interesting next day and a half as you visit many 
different areas in Regina and district. 
 
So please join me in welcoming the class from Maymont 
Central School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated in 
the west gallery are 52 of the finest students from one of the 
finest schools in one of the finest cities in the greatest province 
in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
I am referring to the students from St. Luke School. They are 
truly an awesome bunch. You might look up there and see 
students; I look up there and see a budding commercial pilot, a 
veterinarian, a podiatrist, an optometrist, and I’ve lost track of 
all the dreams that that these young people have. 
 
I would hope that everyone would welcome them and their 
teachers, Donna-Marie Muzzolini, who is involved with the 
best bakery in Saskatoon — Christie’s Mayfair Bakery, and 
Darryl Holowachuk, as well Stewart Stangby, and Veronica and 
Elizabeth Fabian. 
 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to make them 
welcome here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased this 
afternoon to be joined by my uncle, Ervil Stromberg. He’s 
seated in your gallery. Uncle Ervil farmed for many years in the 
Hearne district and now resides in Calgary. 
 
And I’d ask all members to kindly join me in welcoming him to 
the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know a lot of people may not be aware of the fact that here 
in Regina we employ some 100 people at Genex, where hog 
genetic research is done and in fact represents 20 per cent of 
Canada’s market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well this morning I had the pleasure of announcing that we are 
merging with a company and will now have access to markets 
across the world, primarily into the US (United States) and into 
Brazil. We are partnering with a company from the 
Netherlands, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker — Nutreco — and some 
of those good folks are here today joining us in the gallery from 
the Netherlands. 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming — and as I say their names, if they would just 
please stand — Roald van Noort, managing director of Nutreco; 
Paul Moonemans, manager, planning and control for Nutreco; 
Niek Streefkerk, business development manager of Nutreco; 
David Libertini, who will be the new president of the merged 
entity, Mr. Speaker — it’s Hypor international incorporated. 
Also with our guests, Mr. Speaker, is Zach Douglas, senior 
vice-president in Crown Investments Corporation and also, 
John Hicke, vice-president of Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
If you would please join me in welcoming these good folks to 
the Chamber today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to welcome the officials who 
have travelled here from Netherlands, as well as officials from 
the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to rise today to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the House, sitting in your gallery, Phil Reeves, the 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Mining Association. 
And I’m very pleased that Phil could return today to be with us 
for the afternoon’s proceedings. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Access Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all of us 
sitting in this Chamber today know a thing or two about leading 
a busy life. Now imagine trying to live that same life without 
being able to walk, to hear, to see, or to speak. For many 
Saskatchewan residents, living with a disability is a fact of their 
daily lives. 
 
May 26 through 30 is National Access Awareness Week. First 
recognized in 1988, this week is designated to promote access 
for people with disabilities. This week also draws attention to 
the importance of accessing . . . accessibility facilities and 
services, setting measurable goals, making practical 
improvements, and celebrating successes to date. 
 
At the request of this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government, the Saskatchewan committee on disability issues 
published a disability action plan in 2001. This comprehensive 
report dealt with a number of issues that affect people with 
disabilities, accessibility being one of them. To date there has 
been no official response to the report from this NDP 
government. I urge this NDP government to give its official 
response to the disability action plan. Two years is too long. I 
would also ask members of this House to recognize National 
Access Awareness Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

 

Child Care Week 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week has been 
proclaimed as Child Care Week in Saskatchewan when we 
recognize the dedication of child care workers and volunteers 
across the province and thank them for the quality care they 
provide to our province’s children. Mr. Speaker, along with 
child care workers, our government is committed to the 
well-being of children and families living in our province. 
 
On June 1, our government will be raising child care subsidies 
by an average of $20 per month, and we have created 500 new 
child care spaces this year. These initiatives and others will 
increase access to quality, affordable child care while parents go 
to work or school, and they will also help workers provide the 
best care possible for our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re extremely pleased to recognize the child 
care workers and volunteers of this province, and we’re 
extremely proud to be part of a government working with them 
to ensure that the future of our children is wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Livestock Exchange 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
many years the livestock exchange in Weyburn has been the 
market of choice for many cattle producers in the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency, as well as those from surrounding areas. 
 
Last fall the Weyburn Livestock Exchange was purchased by 
Nilsson Bros. of Alberta. At that time many local producers 
were concerned that the new owners would hold fewer sales 
than the previous owners had held, and there was even concern 
by some that the exchange would be closed altogether. The 
impact of fewer sales or the closure of the exchange was also of 
great concern to Weyburn business owners because of the 
negative effect it would have on our local economy. 
 
Through diligence and determine by local cattle producers to 
find a solution, I’m happy to report today that the livestock 
exchange in Weyburn will remain open. Improvements to the 
site will take place over the summer months. An on-site 
computer system will be installed to allow for same-day 
settlement of all producer cheques. And most importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, starting in September regular weekly Friday sales will 
be held. 
 
This is great news for the city of Weyburn and for all area cattle 
producers. I would like to thank Nilsson Bros. on behalf of all 
constituents from the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency for 
their commitment to the community of Weyburn and their 
commitment to the cattle producers throughout the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Temple Gardens Mineral Spa 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s a 
40-second statement that was a few years in the making, Mr. 
Speaker — years of visionary planning, hard-slogging 

development and construction, and vigorous, innovative 
promotion. 
 
I’m speaking of course of Saskatchewan’s tourist getaway or 
tourist get-to place, the Moose Jaw Temple Gardens Mineral 
Spa. How has the work all paid off? Well, Mr. Speaker, for the 
fiscal year ending September ’02, profits for the spa over the 
previous year were up, and get this, Mr. Speaker, 158 per cent 
— 158 per cent — from over 300,000 to over $800,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did I hear someone say that the future is wide 
open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Joseph’s Seniors Club Honours St. Louis Woman 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many of 
the seniors of our province are remarkable inspirations to their 
family and their communities, and such is the case of . . . in St. 
Louis, Saskatchewan, for they have a member of their 
community named Elmire Royer. Ms. Royer was honoured 
recently by the St. Joseph’s Seniors Club as a founding member 
and given a lifetime membership to the club. 
 
Ms. Royer, who is 93 years old, is the eldest member of that 
club, as well as the oldest member of the village of St. Louis. At 
a tea hosted by St. Joseph’s Seniors Club, Ms. Royer was 
presented with a certificate and a pin by Marie Rancourt on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan Seniors Association. 
 
Her children were in attendance, as well as her grandchildren, 
and they presented her with roses. Sister Helen Moreski 
presented her with a guest book and a single rose, stating that 
Ms. Royer was indeed the rose of that community. 
 
Elmire Royer celebrated her 93rd on April 20 and she continues 
to be very, very active. Today she continues to be an avid 
gardener and this spring, at the age of 93, she has decided that 
she’s going to plant strawberry plants. And in order to work 
those plants, Mr. Speaker, she has just recently bought herself 
her very first Rototiller and she’s going to be tending to that 
garden. 
 
So this woman is truly an inspiration to those in her community 
and those around her, and I’m very proud to announce that 
she’s one of my constituents. So I congratulate Ms. Royer again 
on receiving the very worthy award from the Saskatchewan 
Seniors Association, and wish her the very best in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Moose Jaw Community Groups Receive Funding 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this government put the Community Initiatives Fund in place to 
help increase opportunities and provide access to a variety of 
activities for Saskatchewan youth and families. 
 
Last Friday, on behalf of the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation, I was pleased to present six community groups 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

from the Moose Jaw area with CIF (Community Initiatives 
Fund) grants totalling more than $10,000. 
 
The Moose Jaw Parks and Recreation Advisory Board received 
$2,000 for its youth activity centre program; the South Central 
Recreation and Parks Association received $2,000 for its 
wellness wagon program; the school-aged refugee children’s 
summer program of the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council 
received $530; and the Moose Jaw branch of the Saskatchewan 
Association for Community Living received $1,575 to help 
deliver its Kids Kamp program; and $2,000 will help the 
integrated case management program launch its summer mentor 
day camp. Also, Mr. Speaker, the mentoring mothers program, 
in partnership with the teen and young parent program received 
$2,300 for its parent and child aquatics project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1997 the CIF has provided more than 2,300 
community groups with a total of almost $13.5 million. I’m 
sure all of the members of this Assembly will join me in 
applauding this further investment in Saskatchewan youth and 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

House Lights Knocked Out by Lightning 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier is reading the polls but now some even more 
significant portents deserve his attention. If he’s looking for a 
sign, well yesterday he got it. When lightning knocks out the 
lights, you know that some very important figures are annoyed. 
 
Saskatchewan has appealed to help from the federal Liberals 
but . . . They want our sound system to get working again. But 
it seems that an even higher authority is working against the 
NDP. I’m not the only one who finds the present session barren. 
 
The Premier tells us he isn’t going to call an election because he 
has work to do, and what might that be? There are no Bills 
before the House that have any purpose beyond boosting sales 
of pulp and paper. The province’s ethanol strategy is in tatters. 
The Crown corporations and their minister refuse to answer 
questions. Information Services continues its fruitless search for 
customers. Most recently, Nova Scotia looked at 
Saskatchewan’s land titles technology and said no thanks. 
 
Does our Premier have to be hit by lightning to figure out that 
things aren’t working? 
 
The NDP has tried to keep this House in the dark. Now they 
have the proper lighting conditions. Let’s not test the fates any 
further. If the government is not prepared to face the voters, it 
needs to bring forward some business that deserves the light of 
day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inclusive Educational Environment 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During National 
Access Awareness Week, I want to comment on the excellent 
work of the Saskatoon (East) School Division and its director of 
education, Mr. Norm Dray. 

What society expects of all schools is that they will treat each 
student with dignity, respect, and fairness — giving all students 
their best chance to achieve academic, personal, and social 
success. That’s easy enough to say; it’s much more difficult to 
carry through. 
 
However, Mr. Dray, the teachers, and staff of the Saskatoon 
(East) Division have taken the concept of inclusion and made it 
a child-centred mission that is the heart of their curriculum. 
Inclusion means simply that students with special needs and 
disabilities are included in the general population. The 
Saskatoon (East) School Division uses a team approach that 
involves parents, teachers, and students to create programs for 
students with special needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an inclusive environment, education looks a lot 
different than it did even 10 years ago. This creates special 
challenges but in this case they are being met. There are no 
losers, only winners. 
 
As Mr. Dray says simply and eloquently, quote: 
 

It’s our philosophy that all children have a place in our 
schools and in our classrooms. There’s no magic to it. 

 
No magic perhaps, Mr. Speaker, but dignity definitely. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
There has been progress over the past week in the search for 
answers as to how a cow sent to slaughter in Alberta last 
January contacted BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy). 
But concerns are increasing among the beef industry in 
Saskatchewan about the length of time the investigation is 
taking and that the borders to the United States and other 
countries who purchase our beef products may not be open as 
soon as first hoped. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the minister said that he thought the ban 
on Canadian imports into the US may only be in place two 
weeks. We are now in week two of the investigation. Will the 
minister tell us today whether or not that two-week timeline is 
still realistic, and whether he expects Saskatchewan beef will 
actually begin moving to the United States next week? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
asks an important question as it relates to what happens in the 
beef industry over the next couple of days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We were always of the opinion, led by the discussion that 
Minister Vanclief has provided for us, that it would take at least 
a two-week window in order to deal with this very difficult 
issue. 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

 

In our discussions with Mr. Vanclief, and as many may have 
heard him, in the last day he’s indicated that he is in continued 
conversations with Secretary Veneman and that it remains his 
hope that the borders to the US will get opened, hopefully, by 
the end of the week or early into the new week is what Mr. 
Vanclief has indicated to Canadian consumers and to all of us 
who’ve been paying attention to the news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister and US government officials have spoken about the 
conditions that must be met before the US will reopen its 
borders to beef imports. 
 
The minister has spoken very generally about the issue, and 
he’s spoken again generally this afternoon, but there have been 
no actual details discussed about what specifically the US will 
be looking for from the Canadian beef industry. It has only been 
generally said that our international customers want to know 
that our beef is safe and our system is sound. And we think it is, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister has said that federal officials are working with our 
American counterparts to ensure the process will meet these 
conditions and move along as swiftly as possible. 
 
Could the minister tell this Assembly very specifically what 
exactly will convince the US that our beef is safe and that our 
system is sound? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not in the position to 
speak for Secretary Veneman, or for that matter the United 
States government, or for that matter the other seven countries 
who in fact have placed a ban on Canadian beef. But I would 
expect, Mr. Speaker, that any one of those countries today will 
have this kind of request of us. 
 
One is that they’ll want to unequivocally be satisfied that there 
is no other infected beef in the system. Secondly, what they’ll 
want to be convinced of is that in fact into the future we have a 
system in Canada that is able to trace and track in a way in 
which it has in the past, or even in a more significant fashion. 
 
Those I think would be the kinds of issues that the international 
marketplace will be demanding of our Canadian government 
and of our Canadian provinces. 
 
Today we can report, as we have on a daily basis, that we have 
now corralled, it looks like, the number of herds in Canada to 
17. We’ve been tracing back both the feed and the siblings of 
the cow. We’ve put some herds down now today. We’ve done 
some testing. We’ve made tremendous progress in a short space 
of time. And hopefully that will be sufficient, in the next few 
days, to convince the international community to open up their 
borders again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are hoping 
that the minister is pressing to find out what exactly is required 

so that the borders can be opened. We know that he doesn’t 
make the decision but we would ask him to relay that 
information to the industry here in Saskatchewan in a very 
timely fashion because it’s urgent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the Saskatchewan Party is putting forward a 
private member’s motion which reads as follows: 
 

That the Assembly expresses its complete confidence in the 
Canadian beef industry and urges other nations to reopen 
their borders to Canadian beef imports as soon as possible. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we believe Canadian beef is safe and that our food 
system is one of the best in the world. This BSE case is of 
concern; however, its discovery also proves that our system 
works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government join us in expressing their 
support and confidence for our beef industry today? Will they 
be supporting our motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
motion of the opposition this afternoon and will be speaking to 
it as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to also say in response to the Leader of the Opposition 
Saskatchewan Party’s comment, is that I listened very carefully 
yesterday to Premier Klein when he did his national broadcast. 
And what he said — which I think applies fully to all of us — 
and that is that no amount of political pressure, no amount of 
political pressure will convince the United States or any other 
country that’s put a ban on Canadian beef to open their borders. 
 
What will convince, Mr. Speaker, the other countries to open 
their borders will be in fact an assurance that we have done due 
diligence on the process; that it meets with the scientific 
examinations that are underway, Mr. Speaker. Those are the 
realities of which will change the minds of those international 
communities that trade with Canada in the beef industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to thank the minister for offering his support to our motion and 
also for bringing up the response of the Government of Alberta. 
Because in light of the BSE case, yesterday the Alberta 
government committed to a farm-to-fork review of agriculture 
practices within the federal government and the agricultural 
industry. 
 
The Premier of Alberta also committed to an international 
marketing campaign for Alberta beef aimed at restoring the 
confidence of the public and our international trading partners 
in the safety of beef produced in that province, the exact point 
that the minister made. 
 
The Alberta beef industry has definitely taken a hit as a result of 
this BSE case. And, Mr. Speaker, I would say that 
Saskatchewan has taken the same hit as producers in the 
province of Alberta. So it’s imperative that our reputation as a 
producer of high-quality, safe beef products is secured and even 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

strengthened through a review of food safety processes and 
procedures and through aggressive marketing of our industry. 
 
So I would ask, Mr. Speaker: what is the government prepared 
to do to support the beef industry in Saskatchewan and help get 
that message out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what should be 
recognized in this Assembly — and I paid very close attention 
to what Alberta said and have spoken with the minister from 
Alberta — what this issue will not be, Mr. Speaker, it will not 
be a one-of for any province. It will not be a one-of for Alberta; 
it will not be a one-of for Saskatchewan because this issue, Mr. 
Speaker, is not about a province. This issue is about the 
Canadian food system. 
 
And the people who market the Canadian food system are not 
the provinces, Mr. Speaker, individually. They’re done through 
the Canadian system. And will we be partners in the future to 
market the Canadian food system? Absolutely. We’ll be 
alongside Alberta and Ontario and Quebec promoting what we 
have done in this country in a very fashionable way — produce 
safe food and market safe food. 
 
I heard our Premier yesterday say, Mr. Speaker, that on the 
agenda of the first ministers’ meetings which coming soon will 
have on it the agricultural issue and the assurances that in the 
future that we have safe food. We’ll be promoting safe food in 
Canada as a group of provinces absolutely. And we’ll do that in 
concert with the national government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
more evidence today of how this NDP government is failing 
Saskatchewan farm families. Net figures released today show 
that Saskatchewan was the only province in Canada to have a 
negative farm income last year. Saskatchewan’s net farm 
income last year was a minus $242 million — $242 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That number shows what a disaster last year’s drought was. 
But, Mr. Speaker, it also shows what a disaster this NDP 
government has been in developing farm safety net programs 
that work for Saskatchewan and for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after cancelling GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program), this NDP government has had 12 years to develop a 
farm safety net that works for Saskatchewan, and they’ve failed. 
Mr. Speaker, why has this government failed Saskatchewan 
farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it is exactly that kind of a 
comment that has Grant Schmidt in the driver’s seat in that 
riding . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — For the member from Saltcoats to stand 
up, Mr. Speaker . . . For the member from Saltcoats to stand up, 
Mr. Speaker, and give this House and this government a lecture 
on what’s happening in farm policy, Mr. Speaker, when in four 
years coming up soon, there hasn’t been one iota or one word of 
farm policy from that group of men and women, Mr. Speaker, 
who say that they represent agriculture and rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. Not one word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And every time that they do make a comment, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve said on many occasions, it costs Saskatchewan farmers 
money, Mr. Speaker. It comes out of their jeans. 
 
It’s the member from Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, who accompanied 
us a couple of years ago to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. He gets back 
to Saskatchewan. We were killing AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance) when we were there. When we get back 
here, the member from Saltcoats and the Leader of the 
Opposition were supporting AIDA, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
kind of farm policy that we had when they were around, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the policies on this side of the 
House, as soon as we’re government, will look after farm 
families. They will not neglect them for 12 years as that 
government does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t like last year’s 
drought was a surprise. 2001 was a bad year also for 
Saskatchewan farmers. Last year was even worse. Last year’s 
net farm income fell by $455 million to a negative 242 million, 
and this NDP government did nothing to cushion the blow, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The NDP has had 12 years to develop a safety net program that 
works for farm families and once again this NDP government 
has failed. The net result was a quarter-billion-dollar loss in 
farm income last year. That’s a disaster for Saskatchewan and 
so is it for this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is there no workable safety net program in 
place when the NDP knew this drought was coming? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 
member from Saltcoats has been in the last couple of years. 
We’ve had a drought in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had 
a drought in this province. And the drought has affected, Mr. 
Speaker, the grains and oilseed sector, Mr. Speaker. The 
drought, Mr. Speaker, has affected the livestock industry, Mr. 
Speaker. And as a result of that, what we’ve seen is we’ve seen 
a depression, Mr. Speaker, in the amount of revenues that 
farmers in Saskatchewan have received. They know that, Mr. 
Speaker. Farmers in Saskatchewan know what the issues have 
been around the drought. 
 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

 

Do we have farm support programs in Canada today? Of course 
we have farm support programs in Canada today. We’ve had 
farm support programs, Mr. Speaker, for the last four years. 
We’ve had CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) and we’ve 
had NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) and we’ve had 
crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, nationally supported. And in fact 
all of the provinces in Canada have contributed to it and 
supported it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We shouldn’t be . . . We’re concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the 
level of funding that we have in the future for safety nets. 
We’ve worked hard at getting that. This Premier has worked 
hard, Mr. Speaker, in getting the additional $600 million for 
Canadian farmers, which we’ve gotten. 
 
Our Saskatchewan, Canadian farmers, Mr. Speaker, will be far 
better off into the future, Mr. Speaker, as long as they work 
together and not listen to some of the rhetoric that comes from 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
member’s got one thing right. Saskatchewan farmers will be 
better in the future as soon as this party on this side is sitting on 
that side and we’re the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fortunately moisture conditions have improved 
this year, because the NDP government has not improved. In 
fact it’s getting worse. Just look at what they did to crop 
insurance this spring — they jacked up premiums by 52 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, the NDP still hasn’t developed a satisfactory 
safety net program. 
 
APAS (Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan) is 
saying the new program developed by the federal and provincial 
governments still won’t work because it ignores net income. In 
other words, if we have another drought it still won’t work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally admit that after 12 years 
of being in power, they continually fail farm families in this 
province? It’s time to have an election and help Saskatchewan 
farm families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can understand why 
the member from Saltcoats every day is running about the 
country calling for an election, Mr. Speaker. Because when 
you’re sitting at the place of which the member from Saltcoats 
is sitting at, Mr. Speaker, you’d be calling for an election as 
well. Because you’ve already had one nomination of which he’s 
been defeated in, Mr. Speaker, and I expect that when they call 
their next nomination he’ll have a difficult time winning the 
seat again. And I expect, Mr. Speaker — I expect, Mr. Speaker 
— when he talks about where he’ll be sitting, when he says 
where he’ll be sitting, he’ll be sitting out on his tractor, Mr. 
Speaker, after the next election where he’ll be sitting, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to just say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, he 
worked in the old Conservative regime, Mr. Speaker, for the old 

representative from that area because he used to be an old 
Conservative, Mr. Speaker. And when he talks about the 
bankrupt, when he talks about the bankrupt of crop insurance, 
Mr. Speaker, you just need to look at the crop insurance 
program under the old administration of the Tories where they 
bankrupt crop insurance in this province, Mr. Speaker, and it 
cost farmers 10 years before they recovered and they want to go 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future of Crown Corporations 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Last May I gave a speech on behalf of the official opposition to 
the Regina chamber in which I suggested that the NDP was 
considering a joint venture with a private sector Alberta 
company that could involve a change in the structure and 
possibly the partial sale of one of the major Crown 
corporations. 
 
But when the Leader-Post asked the minister the question 
shortly after the speech, the minister said, and I quote, in part, 
he said, “Absolutely not.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, today senior Crown Investments 
Corporation officials admitted that the NDP government spent 
$480,000 last year to evaluate the market value of SaskEnergy 
and consider a joint venture with an Alberta company to 
potentially partially privatize that part of SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: why, at the 
time he was asked about this very deal, did he not tell the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well 
fortunately, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to spend, 
roughly half an hour ago, some time with the president of 
Crown Investments Corporation who reported to me exactly 
what he said in his answer to the response to that question, and I 
would suggest it resembles absolutely no similarity to what that 
member just said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as stewards of the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, it’s our responsibility of government 
to ensure that they continue to deliver services right across the 
province, Mr. Speaker, at affordable rates, Mr. Speaker, and, 
Mr. Speaker, that they are competitive and that they offer that 
service right across the province. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, it is our responsibility to ensure, Mr. 
Speaker, through avenues, Mr. Speaker, like CIBC World 
Markets, that our Crown corporations remain competitive. It’s 
through that type of analysis that we have been assured that our 
Crowns are competitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
officials at Crown Investments Corporation didn’t want to tell 
anybody what the 480,000 to CIBC World Markets was for. I 
wonder why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today they had to do it in Crown Corporations Committee and 
government officials were very honest. They confirmed that the 
government spent that much money last year to look at 
SaskEnergy’s assets — to evaluate them, to value them, to 
consider different corporate structure opportunities, including 
possibly a joint venture with an Alberta company that could 
perhaps involve privatization of parts of SaskEnergy. 
 
But an NDP member of the committee, the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone, said that the NDP would never consider 
any such change that would involve that kind of giving up of 
equity to a joint venture. That’s what the member for Greystone 
said this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP government has completely ruled out 
these kinds of changes to the major Crowns, why in the world 
would they spend a half a million dollars evaluating that very 
thing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let me 
make two observations, Mr. Speaker, in answering that 
question. 
 
First of all, on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, that member from 
Swift Current, from the Sask Party, stands up here and criticizes 
us for not having in his . . . from his perspective proper analysis, 
proper due diligence, proper independent advice, Mr. Speaker. 
Now that advice is provided, what does he do? He criticizes it, 
Mr. Speaker; there’s something wrong with it, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I stand here answering the question, Mr. 
Speaker, I can see the disappointment on his face, Mr. Speaker, 
that there isn’t an agenda for privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely not an agenda for privatization. 
There is no mandate from this government for privatization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, it is not inappropriate that we 
would ask world-renowned analysis be done by CIBC World 
Markets to determine for us opportunities, Mr. Speaker, to 
improve in this case, TransGas’s gas flow, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what we’re trying to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the minister is going to 
have to do a little clarifying because last year when he was 
asked about this very thing, the potential of this government 
approving the joint venturing of a major part of one of the 
major Crowns, in this case TransGas, the minister said to the 
Leader-Post, and I quote, when he was . . . It says here and I 
quote: 
 

Maynard Sonntag, minister responsible . . . refused to 
confirm any deals were on the table for SaskTel or any 
other Crown (he says). “To the best of my knowledge, 
absolutely not,” Sonntag told reporters. 

But he said the government would not be ideologically 
opposed to divestiture of Crown assets, if certain conditions 
were met. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, what’s true — what he said a year ago to the 
Leader-Post or what he just said in the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if that Sask Party wouldn’t 
be locked in philosophical ideals, Mr. Speaker — they would 
say the only option for improving services is privatization, 
which is ridiculous, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Speaker, they would 
understand where the people of Saskatchewan are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we do analysis with CIBC World Markets, 
we ask them to explore opportunities where we could, in this 
particular case, largely improve gas flows for TransGas. Mr. 
Speaker, I suspect, I suspect, that could include such things as 
strategic partnerships, Mr. Speaker. That could include such 
things as alliances, Mr. Speaker. It does not have to mean 
sell-off, privatization, Mr. Speaker. There are all kinds of 
avenues where you can improve the gas flow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their analysis that is exactly what they do. They 
provide suggestions to that regard. It is only prudent that we 
would try to ensure that the assets of Saskatchewan people are 
protected so that we can gain additional revenues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
understood the member for Greystone to basically rule out — 
on behalf of the NDP government — rule out any such 
divestiture of assets. But a year ago the minister said, and this 
reference in the Leader-Post says: 
 

But he said the government would not be ideologically 
opposed to (the) divestiture of Crown assets, if certain 
conditions were met. 

 
To the minister: when was he telling the truth, when he talked 
to the Leader-Post a year ago or just now in the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, when that member asked 
the question, he asked about what CIBC World Markets was 
doing. Mr. Speaker, CIBC World Markets was doing an 
analysis, Mr. Speaker, of how they could improve gas flows, 
and making recommendations about how gas flows could be 
improved for TransGas. 
 
We have an asset, Mr. Speaker, laying in the ground, Mr. 
Speaker. We have gas here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
where we will be a net importer of gas likely in the next six to 
seven years. Mr. Speaker, it only makes sense that we would 
look to Alberta to try to increase gas flows through those 
pipelines, thereby increasing revenues for Saskatchewan people 
and maintaining the low gas prices which Saskatchewan people 
have enjoyed for the past many, many years and we hope into 
the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear. 
It’s pretty clear that the minister has one thing that he tells to 
the public and quite another thing that’s happening behind 
closed doors at the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the Crown corporation officials indicated 
they believe it was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today Crown 
corporation officials indicated they believe it was their mandate 
and their job to consider changing to the structure, including the 
ownership structure of the major Crowns, if those changes 
would add value for the shareholders, the people of the 
province, and if those ownership or structural changes would 
contribute to growing the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, guess what? That is the Saskatchewan Party 
position on the major Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So we say congratulations to Mr. Frank Hart at 
CIC and his officials, and we ask the following question, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the minister to finally join 
the rest of us. Will he now stand today in the House and agree 
with the Crown corporation position of the Saskatchewan Party 
and his own officials? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if the 
people of Saskatchewan were listening to that question, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think they’d be disappointed if the lights went 
out again today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me be absolutely clear. Mr. Speaker, that 
member accuses us of having different positions, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, he said what his position is today, yet a couple of 
days ago he said anything and everything was for sale. He 
wouldn’t rule anything out for privatization, Mr. Speaker. He 
wouldn’t rule anything out for privatization. 
 
While this government, Mr. Speaker, this party works with 
communities, works with our Crown corporations, works with 
the private sector in partnering, seeking opportunities, strategic 
alliances, Mr. Speaker. We work with the private sector to 
ensure that our Crowns remain strong, Mr. Speaker, that they 
continue to provide services — good services at low, affordable 
rates right across our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to the rest of the Assembly some special guests 
we have up in your gallery today. There’s 10 students from 
Poplar Grove School in Grandview, Manitoba. And 
accompanying them is Roger Loewen and other chaperones. 
 
They’re here today . . . Due to the election call in Manitoba, 
they’ve come to observe our proceedings. 
 
So I’d like to welcome them, and have the rest of the members 
welcome them also. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I’d also like to take the opportunity to 
welcome our guests from Manitoba. You can see we have lots 
of exciting things happening in the legislature here. I’m sure the 
same thing would be happening in your legislature if it was in 
session. 
 
I had the opportunity to visit Grandview a few years ago, and it 
was a very nice place to be. And I’m sure that you’re . . . you’ll 
bring back lots of good memories to your fine town when you 
come back from Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New Mining Regulations 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to inform you and all hon. members that 
Saskatchewan’s long-awaited new mining regulations will take 
effect on July 16 of this year. 
 
These new regulations will help to ensure the protection of 
mineworkers’ health and safety here in Saskatchewan. They are 
the result of six years of collaborative work by mine owners, 
mineworkers, and officials from Saskatchewan Labour. 
 
I’m very pleased by the fact that all concerned, owners and 
workers alike, support the new regulations. And this is no small 
accomplishment. Developing stakeholder consensus in an area 
as complex as mining is not easy. Six years of effort, hard work, 
flexibility, and goodwill have gone into creating these 
regulations with the entire process being marked by extensive 
consultations every step of the way. 
 
The current mining regulations in Saskatchewan were put in 
place 25 years ago. The technology of mining, best practices in 
mining, and occupational health and safety programming have 
all come a long way over that time. 
 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

The Mines Regulations, 2003 update and modernize the 
concepts, definitions, and language used to regulate mining in 
our province. It’s been a long road indeed but the journey is 
well worth it. To those who have contributed to creating the 
new regulations over the past six years and helped to make 
them a reality today, you should be very proud of what has been 
accomplished. Today we say thank you to each of you whose 
work has contributed to producing a set of mining regulations 
tailor-made for Saskatchewan. 
 
These new regulations represent major enhancements in mine 
safety. There are new standards for mine rescue that require 
written plans for responding to surface and underground 
emergencies. There will be more underground emergency drills 
and there will be more underground refuge stations. As well, 
the use of remote-controlled mobile equipment in modern 
mining operations is increasing. The new regulations will make 
provisions for the safe use of this equipment. 
 
Further, the brakes on new heavy equipment used underground 
will now have to meet Canadian Safety Association standards. 
Measures for monitoring and reducing worker exposure to 
diesel exhaust underground have also been introduced. And 
standards for underground exits from mines have been clarified. 
New standards have also been set for underground fuel and 
lubricant depots. 
 
I want to give full credit to the mining industry, owners, and 
workers alike, who’ve put in so many long hours of work to 
create these regulations — regulations that will guide mining in 
Saskatchewan well into the 21st century. 
 
I would also like to thank the Saskatchewan Mining Association 
and the United Steelworkers of America, United Mine Workers 
of America, Rocanville Employees’ Association, and the 
Communication, Energy and Paperworkers for all their work 
and support during the development of these regulations. 
 
In the final analysis, Saskatchewan works best when we work 
co-operatively. The Mines Regulations, 2003, are just the latest 
example of what we can accomplish working together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been a long time coming but I think these 
mine regulations have been very well received, and they will 
truly guide the Mining Association and the mining industry in 
our province into our wide open future. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
have the opportunity to respond to the minister’s statement and 
to recognize the new mine safety regulations. 
 
Safety is a primary concern of every workplace. It is the 
responsibility of all employers and employees, and can only 
work with the co-operation of both working in a partnership, 
Mr. Speaker. Mine safety and workplace safety has changed . . . 
The mine standards, excuse me, and the workplace have 
changed and evolved very much in the last 25 years, and it is 
indeed time that the regulations were upgraded to meet modern 
expectations of the workplace. 
 

My colleague, the member for Thunder Creek, our critic for 
Energy and Mines; our critic for Labour, the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone; and indeed the entire Sask Party 
official opposition wish to commend those involved in 
Saskatchewan mine safety . . . mining industry — both the 
employers and the employees — in their constant and 
continuing concern for the safety of all mineworkers. Their 
co-operation with the Department of Labour over the last six 
years in helping to draft the new regulations will make a safe 
mining industry an even safer occupation. 
 
Mining under the past regulations was one of our safest 
industries in which to work in Saskatchewan. I wish to 
congratulate industry leaders and employees in their diligence 
in making our mines a safe and rewarding workplace in 
Saskatchewan for people to earn their livelihoods. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Care in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Right on, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
welcome the opportunity to speak about child care here this 
afternoon because here in Saskatchewan we truly do mean it 
when we say our children are our future in our province. And 
we know that high-quality child care has a tremendous impact 
on the health, safety, and success, and the happiness of our 
children both today and in the future. 
 
Parents have repeatedly told us that a significant challenge to 
employment or attending school is the availability of child care. 
Obviously if there is an expectation that people will move into 
or remain in the labour force, it is imperative that they have 
access to quality, affordable child care. 
 
Our objective is to promote early childhood development and 
support the participation of parents in employment, education, 
and training by improving access to affordable quality early 
learning and child care programs and services. That’s why I was 
pleased to announce yesterday morning, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatoon that the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment is boosting the number of child care spaces in 
Saskatoon by 70 this year. There will be an additional 48 spaces 
in Prince Albert, which I announced last Friday in that 
community. 
 
These places are among the 1,200 that our Child Care 
Saskatchewan plan will make available to Saskatchewan 
families at a cost over four years in excess of $13 million. 
Obviously the addition of 1,200 spaces will provide families 
with more options for the early learning and care of their 
children. 
 
As you may know, federal funding is very modest in the first 
year, some $800,000. But because our government believes it is 
important to get an early start on this expansion, the province is 
adding a further $2.2 million for 2003-04, for a total increase of 
$3 million in this fiscal year. This means we will be developing 
500 new licensed child care spaces this year, half of which will 
be subsidized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these child care initiatives represent the largest 
investment in child care in the history of the province. This is a 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

 

sound investment in the future of Saskatchewan, an investment 
that helps our children get a good start in life and ensures a 
future that is truly wide open to opportunity. 
 
The new child care spaces I have announced will make a 
difference in the lives of many young families in Saskatoon and 
Prince Albert, and I look forward to making a similar 
announcement regarding child care spaces here in Regina later 
this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all this is most appropriate this week because this 
is Child Care Week in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments regarding the ministerial statement 
we’ve just heard given by the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re aware of the fact that in today’s society 
education is certainly an important feature and factor in the 
ability of men and women to gain gainful employment. And for 
many individuals access to education is sometimes limited as a 
result of a young child in the family. And for many 
single-parent families certainly this is the case and I think this is 
part of what the minister’s been talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt we need to find avenues whereby 
children can be provided with care while a young parent 
endeavours to increase their education and their opportunities 
for employment at a future time in their life. And not everyone 
has the ability to have, say, grandparents or family members 
available to provide that type of child care. 
 
One of the questions that I think is on a lot of people’s minds 
though, in the province of Saskatchewan is when we look at the 
number of young, single-parent mothers, and most cases 
throughout the province, and a question that arises is why so 
many young girls find themselves in a position of expecting a 
child and therefore limit their opportunities to further 
educational opportunities, especially when it comes to raising a 
child and trying to provide for that child’s care as well as trying 
to further their education. 
 
So I think there’s some questions arising here that we need to 
look at in the long term but at the same time we recognize the 
need of individuals who would like to better themselves and 
like to open up the doors for future opportunity. And therefore I 
think that’s where the minister is coming from today when he 
talks about these child care spaces in meeting some of those 
needs of individuals who find themselves in those 
circumstances. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, as we look at child care spaces and putting 
more money into child care spaces we also, as was mentioned 
on one of the open-line shows this morning, acknowledge the 
fact and the hard work and dedication of parents who work very 
diligently and very deliberately to try and provide not only for 
themselves, but for their family members. So while there is 
funding being made available today for individuals who find 
circumstances difficult, we appreciate that; we need to look at 
ways as well of how we can meet the needs of others as they try 

to provide the educational opportunities for themselves. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 305 through 307 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 305, 306, and 307 have been 
submitted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased today to 
stand on behalf of the government and convert for debates 
returnable questions no. 308 to 388. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 308 to 388 have been converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 389 to 401 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 389 to 401 have been 
submitted. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to convert for debates returnable questions no. 402 to 473 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 402 to 472 inclusive have been 
converted to orders for return (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
once again to stand on behalf of the government and table 
written responses to questions no. 474 through 483 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 474 through to 483 
have been submitted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6 — Confidence in Canadian Beef Industry 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise today to present a motion, seconded by the Leader of 
the Opposition, member for Rosetown-Biggar, to express our 
complete confidence in the Canadian beef industry and urge 
other nations to reopen their borders to Canadian beef imports 
as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what this Legislature can do . . . And by 
the way I want to thank the government for supporting our 
motion because I feel that this is such an important issue for the 
province of Saskatchewan, but certainly for the ranchers and 
farmers in this province whose livelihood depend on exporting 
a lot of their commodities across the border, especially to the 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

USA (United States of America). 
 
We now understand that there’s as many as eight countries that 
have banned the exports of our beef to their countries. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as soon as possible we have to create confidence 
within these jurisdictions, that they will once again accept our 
beef and become our trading partner that is so crucial to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought it might be interesting for some of the 
public to find out just how crucial it is to this province and how 
important it is to Saskatchewan farmers, just by the numbers 
that we grow and sell in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker — and these are approximate numbers of course — but 
over 2.4 million head of cattle we have right now in 
Saskatchewan, over 1 million beef cows, Mr. Speaker. We have 
approximately 15,000 beef producers so you can see how many 
people, just on the beef side, that are actually raising beef out 
there that this will affect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the short term if this problem is over right 
away, it’s already cost millions of dollars for Saskatchewan. 
But I think the concern to ranchers and farmers out there that 
raise beef, to big feedlots out there that have beef probably by 
this time in many cases ready for market that are already 
holding them back, costing them thousands and thousands of 
dollars a day; and not only for what it’s costing them to feed 
these cattle to try and hold them, but the beating they may take 
on these cattle when they eventually can put them on the market 
because of being overweight or the lower grades that they may 
receive for these animals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan produces over $700 million in farm 
cash receipts from cattle each year. Beef production is the 
largest livestock commodity, second only to hard red spring 
wheat. 
 
In 2002 the number of cattle and calves marketed through 
Saskatchewan auction marts and to Saskatchewan packing 
plants and abattoirs totalled 1.74 million head. In 2002, Mr. 
Speaker, 373,580 head of cattle and calves were marketed or 
slaughtered. Mr. Speaker, again in 2002, slaughter cattle 
shipments out of the province totalled 206,720 head. Exports 
were 26 per cent above the five-year average. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, once again these enormous numbers tell just 
how important the ban on our market and our cattle going to the 
US especially, but to other markets, how devastating this can be 
to our economy in Saskatchewan and how devastating it will be 
if it carries on for long to farm families here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1.366 million head of feeder cattle and calves 
were marketed last year. Feeder cattle shipments out of the 
province totalled 941,560 head. Of the 206,720 head of 
slaughter cattle exported from Saskatchewan last year, 103,730 
went to the USA. Mr. Speaker, that’s half of our exports go to 
south of the border. 
 
So again it just tells us how crucial it is that we can create the 
confidence in our cattle and that this is one isolated case, Mr. 
Speaker, of mad cow disease. And after, Mr. Speaker, 
slaughtering, I believe, approximately 400 head now, that is the 
only case to rise and show its ugly face in our cattle herds in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I might want to talk about too, Mr. Speaker, just take a 
minute to talk about the CFIA, the Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency, who I believe, Mr. Speaker, has done a tremendous job 
of, number one, bringing the problem to light — not hiding it, 
not sweeping it under the rug — being out front with the public 
and explaining what has happened here, but being there to find 
the problem in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s probably jurisdictions where that wouldn’t have 
happened. And we’ve been accused of being a little slow in 
bringing this to the forefront. Well, Mr. Speaker, I might say 
that there might be jurisdictions that may never bring it to the 
forefront. 
 
The CFIA did their due diligence, brought it out, let the public 
know. It would have been a lot easier maybe to not have done 
that, but they let the public know because that’s part of the 
confidence that they want to keep with the people that are 
consuming and purchasing beef in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I maybe just want to talk and just go through a 
little bit of the last eight days. It seems like a lot longer, Mr. 
Speaker, but this is out of the Leader-Post, and I thought it was 
quite interesting — chronologically the key events that have 
happened through this BSE or mad cow’s disease. And if you 
will bear with me, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to go through 
this, and the history of the cow that we’re talking about today. 
 
The spring of 1997, Black Angus cow believed to be born on 
the McCrea farm in Baldwinton. And I will say again believed 
to be, because I don’t believe that is proven to this point. 
 
Spring of 1998 that cow was sold to Heartland Livestock 
Services in Lethbridge, Alberta, which then sold it to Stan 
Walterhouse of Tulliby Lake, Alberta. 
 
The summer or fall of 1998, Bryan Babey, who ranches with his 
brother near Sandy Beach, 20 kilometres northeast of 
Lloydminster, bought the cow. She was there for four years and 
gave birth to four calves. 2002, the Babeys sell the cow along 
with several other cow-calf pairs due to a lack of feed — 
probably, Mr. Speaker, probably partly due to the drought. 
 
C.J. O’Grady, a cattle broker in Lloydminster, sells her to 
Nilsson Bros., a cattle exchange based in Vermilion, Alberta. 
 
August 23, 2002, Marwyn Peaster, a farmer near Wanham, 
Alberta, buys the cow along with others on August 23, 2002. 
 
January 2003, Peaster notices the Black Angus cow on his farm 
near Wanham in northern Alberta is unable to stand up. He 
ships the cow for slaughter. 
 
January 31, Mr. Speaker, cow is condemned as unfit for human 
consumption on the kill floor; head sent to a laboratory in 
Fairview, Alberta. 
 
And this again, Mr. Speaker, is where I go back to the 
confidence that we have and everyone should have with the 
CFIA because they were there to do their job when it needed to 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

 

be done. 
 
On February 8, part of the cow’s brain stem arrives in 
Edmonton lab for testing for bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
— BSE in other words, Mr. Speaker, or mad cow’s disease; 
that’s a little easier to say, Mr. Speaker — listed as low priority 
at that point because it’s not common for mad cow disease to be 
found in Saskatchewan. 
 
May 12 and 13 tests are done on the brain at a provincial lab in 
Edmonton. May 16, Mr. Speaker, tissue shows positive for BSE 
and a sample is sent to Canadian Food Inspection Agency in 
Winnipeg. The result is confirmed and a sample is sent to an 
international lab in the United Kingdom. The Peaster ranch is 
quarantined. Already, Mr. Speaker, the CFIA has the wheels 
turning. May 20, British lab confirms test results. Canadian 
Food Inspection Agency announces the cow was infected with 
BSE. 
 
And the problem starts at that point as the public became aware 
of it, Mr. Speaker. May 21, Sask Ag minister, Clay Serby, says 
the infected cow may have spent some of its life in the 
province. The McCreas get a phone call telling them that their 
ranch must be quarantined because the infected cow may have 
been born there — and I reiterate, may, Mr. Speaker. 
 
May 22, quarantine increased for a total of nine farms — seven 
in Alberta, two in Saskatchewan. Investigators look at two 
possible birthplaces for the infected cow. Investigations expand 
to British Columbia where three farms are put under quarantine 
to look at the feed products. Another one in Alberta is added for 
a total of 13. And the list just goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, we’re up to possibly 17 farms that are 
under quarantine, Mr. Speaker. I believe there’s probably about 
. . . approximately about 400 head have been put down, and to 
this point not one other animal has tested positive for BSE. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s so important that we have 
confidence as politicians and the leaders that we are in this 
legislature and pass that on to our constituents and the people of 
Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, also pass it on to our 
neighbours across Canada from the west and pass it on to all the 
countries that have put a ban on our beef in Saskatchewan 
because I think, as is coming to show right here, that the 
inspection agencies that we have in place, the rules that we have 
in place, not saying that they can’t be improved . . . In fact I 
would believe, Mr. Speaker, once the smoke has cleared for 
this, I’m sure that we probably can find ways of improving the 
system. But we’ve never had anything like this happen to this 
degree before, causing this much concern in the public. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I personally have every bit of confidence in 
what our inspection agencies are doing. I have every bit of 
confidence in eating beef; I did on the weekend. And from 
talking to other people in my constituency, I found no one that’s 
altering their plans of buying beef, continuing to eat beef. We’re 
in the barbecue season right now, Mr. Speaker. So I believe 
most here have confidence in the system that we have in place. 
 
It’s my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that unless you eats parts 
or tissues from the brain or the brain stem or the spine, there is 
no possibility of contacting or picking up this disease through 
eating beef. Which, as far as I know, Mr. Speaker, I have never 

ate parts of brain or the spine in my life, and I don’t think very 
few probably have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as far as hamburger or steak or roasts or 
anything like that from any beef cut, to my knowledge — and I 
think that’s the message we’re getting out of here — that beef is 
every bit as safe today as it was three months ago or three years 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the public will bear with the 
farming community and the ranchers in this province, because 
the longer this problem goes on, the more devastating it’s going 
to be to ranchers in this province. And that in turn goes to the 
packing plants, the abattoirs — there are thousands of people 
whose job relies on the beef industry in this province. And not 
just this province, Mr. Speaker, but in Alberta, Manitoba, BC 
(British Columbia), we have farms quarantined. It’s all across 
this country and it will be devastating, Mr. Speaker, if we 
cannot bring this to an end, convince our trading partners that 
our beef is safe. And I would hope that they would open their 
borders, Mr. Speaker, as soon as possible. We can convince 
them that it should be trading as usual and that we have a very 
safe product for them to import. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move this motion: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its complete confidence in 
the Canadian beef industry and urges other nations to 
reopen their borders to Canadian beef imports as soon as 
possible. 

 
Seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, member for 
Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like 
to thank the member from Saltcoats for moving the motion, not 
just on behalf of the official opposition but on behalf of the 
Legislative Assembly here in Saskatchewan, which I believe 
speaks to the importance of the issue of food safety, particularly 
in light of the recent BSE case that was discovered in the 
province of Alberta. 
 
I will keep my remarks brief, Mr. Speaker, because I would 
encourage others to also express their confidence in the safety 
of our food and particularly the safety of the food industry. I am 
pleased that the Minister of Agriculture has agreed to support 
this motion and, I believe, speak to the motion. We welcome 
that. 
 
We would also encourage the Minister of Health to speak to the 
motion, the Minister of Finance whose bottom line is enhanced 
somewhat by the beef industry and the agriculture sector here in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and others on both sides who 
might wish to express their support for not only the safety of 
our food, but the way this issue has been dealt with over the last 
seven or eight days. 
 
(14:45) 
 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, the safety of Canadian food is second to none in 
the world. Many of us have had the opportunity to travel to 
many countries around the world. And I think I can speak with 
confidence that all of us agree that we don’t feel any safer going 
and eating food or purchasing groceries from a grocery store 
than we do here in Canada, after having travelled to many 
countries around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the safety of our food starts with the industry. And 
the beef industry is no exception to that insistence upon safety. 
It starts with the producers in that industry, producers who 
practise proper methods to ensure the health of their herds and 
proper record keeping. And, Mr. Speaker, it concludes with the 
highest global standards to ensure safe food. Mr. Speaker, we 
want to express our appreciation to the Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency for the role that they are playing in ensuring 
the continued high and strong reputation for safe food here in 
the nation of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that as the details of our food 
inspection process have been revealed in light of this BSE case, 
we find out that Canada’s standards are superior to those of the 
United States, Mr. Speaker, the country that is at the current 
time not allowing imports of Canadian beef into their country. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we believe that because of the high standards 
insisting upon food safety that are adhered to in our country, 
that this ban should be removed as soon as possible to recognize 
the safety of Canadian food and the confidence that everyone in 
the world can have that the products, the food products that they 
import from Canada, whether it be beef or others, are absolutely 
safe. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have talked about the role of the 
provincial government. And we recognize that in this case the 
CFIA must take the lead role, Mr. Speaker. But we have 
encouraged our provincial government to offer all the support 
that is possible to offer through the Department of Agriculture 
or through the Minister of Health and whatever other resources 
that we can put forward to communicate not only to the people 
of Canada but to people around the world who are following 
this issue that in fact due diligence is being done, the proper 
steps are being taken, and that we can assure with confidence 
that our food will be safe into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we discourage knee-jerk reactions. We discourage 
people going to extremes and being concerned and spreading a 
message of fear about Canadian food and particularly about 
beef in Canada. 
 
We encourage and we applaud those who have shown 
confidence, who have shown respect for our system and our 
procedures. We do not . . . We respect the role that science is 
playing in this issue, where we are not being lax in identifying 
herds that need to be quarantined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we are not lax in actually slaughtering herds 
if that be required, but on the other hand, we are not alarmists 
who want to go around just slaughtering herds willy-nilly even 
upon rumour that there may be some connection with this 
infected animal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are thankful to the professionals, the experts in the food 
safety area who are very methodically and very carefully 

following procedures to ensure that every precaution is taken to 
maintain the standard of food safety here in our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask the provincial government and we ask all 
citizens of Saskatchewan to counteract the nonsense and the 
fearmongering of those like Senator Dorgan in the United 
States, Mr. Speaker, a senator in a country whose food 
standards are not equal to those of Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we think it’ll be more profitable for Mr. Dorgan if he would 
focus his resources and his efforts upon improving the food and 
safety of his own nation rather than offering criticism and 
condemnation for Canada, a country who has set the highest 
standards for food safety anywhere in the globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are particularly pleased with the Canadian 
consumers’ response to this crisis. As my colleague, the 
member from Saltcoats, has indicated, that people in Canada, 
people in Saskatchewan are still consuming beef and have every 
confidence that when they place a steak on their barbecue or 
when they drive through the drive-through to pick up a 
hamburger when they’re on the go and in a hurry, that that food 
is absolutely safe, that that beef product is without a doubt safe 
and nourishing to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems that the consumers understand that they can maintain 
confidence in our beef products and, Mr. Speaker, we are 
encouraged by that. We are encouraged by the common sense 
that Saskatchewan people and Canadian people are showing 
towards this issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are issues that will have to be dealt 
with as we move forward on this issue. We know that there’s a 
compensation schedule that the federal government negotiates 
with the owners of herds who have to be disposed of and we 
anticipate that that will be done in a fair and equitable manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is not resolved soon, we know that there is 
further compensation that will have to be considered for the 
industry. We trust that that will not happen because of the high 
standards that we have set. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that the future for the beef industry in 
this country and in this province is high. We believe that it’s an 
industry that can be expanded and we commend all of those 
who are working together in this, we hope, short period of crisis 
to ensure the longevity of one of the most profitable and one of 
the most worthy industries in our province and in our country, 
of those who provide safe food, safe meat for the consumers, 
not only of Saskatchewan, not only of Canada, but around the 
world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is indeed my pleasure this afternoon to stand, although I was 
careful about the selection of the word because it’s never a 
pleasure to stand up and talk about an issue of this magnitude, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s affected our country. But I want to join this 
afternoon in the resolution that’s been put forward by the 
official opposition as it relates to assuring Canadians around a 
couple of fronts. 
 
One is that we have a system today, Mr. Speaker, that is second 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

 

to none in terms of the tracking and tracing. And we also have, 
Mr. Speaker, today an industry, in that of the beef industry, that 
we hold in high regard because of the work that it’s done, not 
only in ensuring Canadians that we have a safe food system as 
it relates to beef but also that in fact they have done a good deal 
of work in identifying a tracking and trace-back system. 
 
A year and a half ago, Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to speak at a 
chamber of commerce luncheon here in Regina. And at that 
luncheon was the president of the Canadian Cattle Association 
out of the US. 
 
And he stood at his microphone and talked for a long time and 
gave high praise to the Canadian Cattle Association and our 
Saskatchewan leadership, which is managed through people 
like Mr. Jahnke, about how we have been able to take this 
particular industry in the last couple of years and establish a 
system of tracking and trace-back in a fashion which isn’t done 
anywhere else in North America, Mr. Speaker, for sure. 
 
And this afternoon I want to, first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, is 
pay a tribute and credit to our Canadian cattlemen’s 
associations, to our beef industry, today in the way in which 
they have been able to assure Canadians that we do have a safe 
and healthy beef system in this country. 
 
As we are speaking in the legislature here today, as you know 
last night or yesterday afternoon at the Parliament Buildings in 
Ottawa, there was a debate at the national level, at the federal 
level, about this very issue. Provincial governments and . . . or 
provincial legislatures across the country are raising this as a 
significant issue, Mr. Speaker, and are wanting to be on record 
about doing the two things that we are doing here today —
speaking about the strength of the industry and the future of the 
industry. 
 
I want to start out or further my comments, Mr. Speaker, by 
saying that we have done some things in this province to stay 
close abreast to this particular issue. We’ve had a committee 
established, an industry committee established, that is advising 
me. Today, Mr. Bob Ivey spoke to the media about the 
importance of the industry. And as the Leader of the Opposition 
suggested a moment ago, that we don’t react here on a knee-jerk 
reaction, that we let the science take its course, and at the end of 
the day what we’ll have here is a situation that will serve us 
well into the future as it has in the past. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been spending a good deal of 
time on a daily basis advising the public of exactly what’s 
happening in Saskatchewan, exactly what’s happening in 
Canada. Those briefings are involving the media, our own 
provincial media, who have done, in my view, a wonderful job 
of imparting that information to our Saskatchewan citizenry. 
 
And I can tell you when in fact it is that we’re doing a good job 
of making sure that the public is well informed and when it is 
that we’re not by the number of telephone calls that I get in the 
minister’s office, that ministers get in their office. I can tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, that I have few calls in my office about this 
particular issue and I’ve had few calls in my constituency office 
about this issue. And partly it’s because we haven’t taken this 
matter and politicized it at all in Canada — not in this province 
for sure. 

And nowhere in Canada have we heard anybody say that one 
individual or one part of the industry is more responsible for 
this than another because the reality here is that this is not a 
provincial issue, this is a national issue. And accordingly, we’re 
dealing with it from a national perspective. And I want to this 
afternoon pay tribute to the work that the media has done in 
helping us communicate the information on a regular basis to 
all Saskatchewan citizenry, enabling them to better understand 
this particular matter. 
 
I want, Mr. Speaker, to also talk a little bit about the confidence 
that the consumers currently have in the system. I have with me 
today just a couple of articles. One I see is in The Ottawa 
Citizen. The other article, Mr. Speaker, is in The StarPhoenix. 
They both read this way: 
 

Canadians haven’t stopped buying steaks, (or) hamburgers 
or other beef products, in the week since mad cow disease 
. . . (has found its way into) Alberta, (and) the head of the 
Canadian Council of Grocery Distributors (has) said. 

 
So by and large, Mr. Speaker, the kind of work that we’ve done 
in highlighting the . . . and capturing or corralling the issue to 
the 17 farms across Western Canada today, and making the 
public aware of what it is that we’re doing on a daily basis, has, 
in fact, restored or at least sustained the confidence that the 
public has in the consumption of beef in Western Canada and 
for that matter across the nation. 
 
Now I know that the members opposite talked a little bit — 
from the Saskatchewan Party — talked about the importance of 
this industry. And I have a couple of statistics, Mr. Speaker, that 
I would like to share with you and the House this afternoon 
about really how important this industry is to Saskatchewan. 
 
Canada, as you know, Mr. Speaker, is the 11th largest producer 
in beef in the world but is the fourth largest exporter of beef, so 
when people here talk about the importance of opening the 
borders, clearly Saskatchewan has a large, large dependency on 
its export outside of Canada and particularly into the US. 
 
My note continues, to say that 50 per cent of the beef 
production supplies about 12 per cent of the world exports. And 
Saskatchewan has, Mr. Speaker, the second largest cowherd in 
Canada — we’re at 1.2 million head in this province — and that 
the Canadian food industry sales are estimated to be about 65 
million, of meat comprising about 11.3 billion. And the 
Saskatchewan food industry sales are estimated to be about 2.2 
billion, and with meat comprising about $1 billion. 
 
And so when people talk about the importance of the beef 
industry to Saskatchewan, it is a very, very large industry and 
has a large number of ancillary spinoffs — we have the trucking 
industry, we have the feeding industry, we have the feedlot 
industry, we have the packers, and we have the processors — 
which are all jobs and most of those jobs are located, Mr. 
Speaker, in large communities across the province. 
 
So you have your primary producers in Saskatchewan today 
that are making a huge contribution to this province and the 
beef industry, and supplying a number of jobs. And when we 
get into a situation like we are today, we really do recognize the 
very significant contributions that the beef industry makes to 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
I view this, Mr. Speaker, as a bump in the road; that at the end 
of the day we’ll be able to demonstrate as we have already 
through the work of CFIA . . . It’s incredible that in a period of 
eight days, which is not a very long time when you go to 
examine the number of herds, there’s 17 herds in Western 
Canada that have been identified where there has been 
association either through the mother or the offspring of these 
animals, or where the cow who was infected actually lived, or 
in fact feedstock that made its way on to some of these farms. 
 
So it’s not only the examination of CFIA of the animals, but 
they’ve also been able to take the feedstock and examine the 
feedstock back to the various different farms that we have in 
Western Canada — Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Manitoba . . . 
or British Columbia. That is an incredible piece of work that 
these men and women have been able to do. And it clearly 
demonstrates that our system works. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Here you have an animal that has the disease, that was on the 
slaughter line. Somebody noticed that this animal should not be 
making its way into the food chain, removed this animal from 
outside . . . out of the food chain to ensure that today we only 
have the one cow that’s been identified, that never did make its 
way into the food chain. And that’s an incredible piece of 
examination that takes place today, when we’re talking about 
the importance of the structure, the system that exists. 
 
Furthermore in my comments, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk very 
briefly about where do we go from here. We all know that 
there’s been a good deal of work done in the agricultural policy 
framework; that in fact there’s a chapter within the agricultural 
policy framework that addresses itself to food safety. What 
we’ll find I expect in the next couple of months here, or within 
the next couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, is that there’ll be a 
larger concentration and necessity placed in investment into the 
food safety pillar. 
 
And from time to time we’ll hear those who will argue that we 
should not be signing the implementation agreement as it relates 
to the agricultural policy framework. We’ll need to remember 
this very incident that we’re talking about today, Mr. Speaker, 
about how important it will be to make larger investments into 
the food safety pillar given that there are a number of 
examinations that are going to take place here. 
 
One of the examinations that will take place at the national level 
will be whether or not there should be mandatory registration of 
all livestock in Canada. Mandatory registration, in that there be 
a mandatory record-keeping system by all producers of 
livestock in this country. This could be in fact a residue that 
comes from this particular issue. 
 
We shouldn’t discard the notion that, coming from this incident 
today, is that there may be tougher penalties here for people 
who are not complying with some of the regulation that will be 
established along the way in the livestock industry, given the 
significance that it’s put this industry under today. 
 
We should also be cognizant of the notion that there’ll be some 

decisions that will need to be made about what we do with 
rendering, into the future, and whether or not there should be 
any ruminant product making its way at all into the food chain, 
the animal food chain. 
 
It’s interesting that this morning, Mr. Speaker, coming out of 
Manitoba is the decision that they’re no longer going to be 
allowing animal beef . . . animal ruminant to enter into the 
system. That’s a huge, huge decision that that province has 
made and leaves the rest of the provinces today to having to 
work at making decisions about how it is that we’re going to 
deal with animal ruminant. 
 
I heard just recently from a conversation that I had with my 
colleagues across the country that if we choose not to render the 
ruminant of the beef animals, or the animals that are destroyed 
in this country, we’ll have to find a different way of disposing 
of it. And if it’s going to be stored or if it’s going to be put in 
waste sites, this will require huge tracts of land in order to deal 
with it. 
 
Or will it be incinerated? And many people who have provided 
advice for us today tell us that this issue will not . . . we don’t 
have the capacity today to incinerate that. 
 
So the offshoots of this particular issue, in terms of the kinds of 
decisions that will need to be made, will be huge. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard on a number of 
occasions today . . . or to date, about the importance of 
enhancing the testing system, on having a more profound way 
of making sure that we do more tests in Canada of the animals 
and that we record that in a more timely fashion, to be sure that 
at the end of the day we have a record keeping system and that 
we have a system that will meet a standard that is even higher 
than it is today. 
 
I want to congratulate, Mr. Speaker, the members of this 
Assembly because we have not taken the occasion . . . this is in 
Assembly, where we’re all politicians, Mr. Speaker, and we 
come here with our own political ideologies, with our own 
views, with our own expectations of achievement, and at the 
end of the day work at doing that through the political system. 
 
On this particular issue I want to say clearly, Mr. Speaker, that I 
have very much appreciated the fact that the members of the 
opposition have been colleagues in the approach to how we deal 
with this Saskatchewan issue and this Canadian issue, and how 
they, along with what we’ve been portraying, Mr. Speaker, is 
that this is a national issue. 
 
And when I speak to my colleague in Alberta, who on occasion 
don’t agree with the same political ideologies or issues, but on 
this particular issue, Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Minister of 
Agriculture for Alberta has been very clear. She has publicly 
stated in a conversation that I’ve had with her, just last night – 
and I know she wouldn’t mind me sharing this – has said that 
when we go to find resolution to this particular issue we need to 
do that as a national body. This is not an Alberta issue alone, 
even though they have 12 farms. This is not a Saskatchewan 
issue or a British Columbia issue. 
 
And we can’t accept the language that’s coming out of Quebec 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

 

by the Premier of Quebec, Mr. Charest, who says that this issue 
should be captured in the notion of regional decision making or 
regional management. It is not about regional management; it’s 
about Canadian management, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because it would not be unusual today to find an animal that 
could have lived in four or five or six provinces through its 
lifetime. The way in which we do business today in Canada, in 
the North America, and with the European world, it would not 
be unusual for an animal to spend time in this country, to have 
come from somewhere else, or to be born here and to spend its 
lifetime in other parts of the world. 
 
And so when we go to address this issue from a broader 
perspective of tracking and tracing, as much as we’re leaders 
today, we need to address it from a national perspective under 
the national food strategy and the work that’s been done by the 
national . . . or by the Canadian food agency to do its work. 
 
We’re heard and talked a little bit about the compensation 
piece. Clearly there is regulation in place today to deal with the 
animals that have had to be put down, and there are now two 
farms that have been put down, Mr. Speaker — one in Alberta 
and one in Saskatchewan. There may be others that CFIA may 
decide need to be put down. And they’ll be . . . those decisions 
will be made from a variety of different perspectives. Clearly it 
is our hope that those decisions will be made on a scientific 
basis, that animals will be destroyed, that testing will occur on 
the basis of what CFIA finds. 
 
But at the same time I listen carefully to what the Leader of the 
Opposition said about the words of Mr. Dorgan, or Senator 
Dorgan out of the United States. It won’t take much, Mr. 
Speaker, to have that kind of language attach itself to the 
seriousness of a statement that says our Canadian beef wouldn’t 
be safe if we continue to hear that kind of language. 
 
And it’s incumbent upon us, Mr. Speaker, to do what we can to 
assure the international marketplace from a scientific 
perspective, but also to be cognizant about what the 
international community might demand of us. Because at the 
end of the day people like Minister Vanclief who is the Minister 
of Agriculture federally, or Mr. Pettigrew who negotiates trade 
agreements for the world for our country . . . we don’t know yet 
fully today what the expectations of those countries will be to 
permit our beef to be back into their environments. 
 
And so we should be careful in our language when we go to 
express ourselves about what others are saying. Because it may 
not only be around the scientific evidence that will need . . . 
lead us to make decisions at the end of the day to open up the 
industry to where it can serve not only our country 
domestically, but internationally, and to make sure that it can 
preserve this industry to the future. And those decision will be 
difficult ones when it . . . when we get pressed in the weeks, or 
the days and the weeks ahead here as we deal with our 
international community. 
 
It is our view on intelligence that we receive from Ottawa in our 
press . . . or in our ministerial discussions with Ottawa, that 
what it will take from the international community to open its 
borders is to be assured that our beef is safe — is absolutely 
safe. 

And we can stand in this Assembly and assure Canadians that 
our beef is safe, which we’ve been doing, that there’s no 
evidence to date to demonstrate that it isn’t. It’s only one cow 
that we’re talking about today that has not made its way into the 
food system. But our work will continue to demonstrate and 
hopefully, at the end of the day, through CFIA it’ll be shown 
that it is only one animal, that it was an isolated situation, and 
that in fact our feedstocks are safe and that Canadians can rest 
well assured, and the international community, that in fact our 
meat and our food system is safe. 
 
So as we speak today in the House, Mr. Speaker, the industry is 
in Ottawa. Agriculture, livestock producers are in Ottawa. This 
afternoon and tomorrow, they will be talking about how it is 
that we’ll need to deal with the broader issues of compensation, 
what we do with the issues around rendering, talking about the 
kinds of communication challenges that we’ll have in assuring 
Canadians that our meat is safe. And that work we’ll continue 
we’ll do. 
 
And in the meantime we’re going to support as best we can, all 
of us in Canada, the work of the CFIA. We’ll provide whatever 
resources we need. We’ll do the kinds of international protocol 
that’s required to encourage the countries who are traders of 
ours in the past to open their borders again to our food system. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we will once again 
demonstrate that Canadian producers are top shelf when it 
comes to producing food, that Canadian producers are heads 
and shoulders on many fronts ahead of other communities in the 
world in terms of tracking and tracing, and that, when you line 
Canadian producers up with any other producer anywhere in the 
world, we’ll come out on top. 
 
And so in . . . I, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government are 
pleased this afternoon to support the resolution of the official 
opposition. And I expect that this message will be 
communicated to the national level of government commending 
them on the good work that they’re doing today, and will assist 
them I think in their work as they talk about not only 
confirming within the minds of Canadians that we have a good 
system, but also communicating that message to the 
international marketplace, from which are producers that we 
will do . . . will benefit and grow our industry into the future. 
 
So thank you very much for the opportunity. And I’m pleased 
on behalf of the government, Mr. Speaker, to support the 
resolution as it makes its way to those areas of the country 
which will be helpful in our work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great deal of 
pleasure to speak on this motion today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as pointed out, we’ve all been in the last week, 
been very, very . . . well really excited about the consequences 
of the detection of an animal that has BSE. As we know, last 
Tuesday morning it was announced that this animal . . . the test 
had come back on this animal and this is the first animal in 
many years that was recognized as having the disease. 
 
As we know, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency went to 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

work even before the announcement and has been doing an 
exceptional job with this issue. And I think it’s important that 
we recognize the job that the Canadian Food Inspection Agency 
has done on this issue. 
 
They’ve really taken control, and naturally it is the right of the 
national government to look after this type of outbreak, this 
type of disease in Canada. It’s not a regional issue; it’s a 
national issue. And we must recognize the important role that 
the federal government has in looking after this very serious 
concern that . . . when there’s an outbreak in the livestock 
industry. 
 
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency naturally has 
quarantined a number of herds. And they have taken every 
precaution, I believe, that is reasonable in quarantining the herd 
that has a possible link to mad cow disease. They have 
depopulated at least two herds and may be in the process of 
doing some other herds. The initial tests have come back 
negative and that’s a very important signal that this disease is 
under control, that the Canadian Food Inspection Agency has 
done their work, has done it well. 
 
It’s interesting, a bit of the history of the Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency. They have been dealing with other health 
concerns in livestock industry in Canada for a number of years. 
Formerly I believe they were called the health of animals. And 
we know through testing livestock, with tuberculosis and also 
Bang’s disease, that they have a history and they have a good 
record of dealing with diseases in Canada; they have done an 
exceptional job in eliminating brucellosis as a disease in 
Canada. 
 
And every now and then we still have TB (tuberculosis) 
outbreaks, but the CFIA has done an exceptional job in 
quarantining those areas, slaughtering those animals, and 
keeping the industry in Canada safe and healthy and free from 
problems. 
 
(15:15) 
 
They’ve also done an exceptional job dealing with chronic 
wasting disease in elk. They have done a wide-ranging job of 
quarantining and depopulating herds that have had . . . come 
down with chronic wasting disease. 
 
So they have a lot of experience this area. They’ve done . . . 
They have a very good track record. They’ve done an 
exceptional job, and as it’s been pointed out in a number of 
other speakers, we support the Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency; the members on both sides of the House do. 
 
I know the livestock industry certainly supports what the CFIA 
has been doing now and in the past, and will be doing in the 
future. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, Canada prohibited the use of 
ruminant waste being put into feed back in 1997. As we go back 
into the history of BSE, we know that that was one of the 
potential causes of BSE in Great Britain in the outbreak that 
they had. 
 
It was not allowed after 1997, but as someone that’s in the 

industry, I know that it was not commonly used before that. 
Animal remains, ruminant animal remains were not generally 
put into ruminant feed even before 1997. As we know, these 
by-products are being put into chicken rations and pork rations. 
There’s a possible cross-contamination there. Again highly 
unlikely. Only theoretically possible that this has taken place, 
but it is possible. 
 
And before 1997 again, the reason that, the main reason that 
bone meal was not put into animal feed was because of the 
low-cost source of other sources of protein for animal feed. And 
they obviously . . . In Western Canada we had an oversupply 
where a cheap . . . maybe not an oversupply but a very 
inexpensive supply of canola meal. And I know in our own 
rations through the years, when we were needing a protein 
supplement when canola meal wasn’t available, it was usually 
because of the price of soybeans coming out of the US. And so 
that was the two products that were going into livestock feed. 
 
And far as bone meal is concerned, it was very rarely used. I’m 
sure it was used at some point, but very rarely. So even before 
1997 it was only theoretically possible that bone meal was used 
in protein supplements for livestock. 
 
As we know, CFIA has not only quarantined 17 herds and 
depopulated some of the herds — and to date the results have 
been negative — but the CFIA has also gone into I believe a 
feedlot that has been quarantined; also into the feed industry 
and have worked with the industry. 
 
And the owners of the milling industry that owns these 
operations have gone back into their records to see if there’s 
any possible connection from the sale of their feed to any 
livestock producer. And to date we haven’t heard of any 
problems in that area. But it’s possible, either through error or 
misjudgment or cross-contamination of some way, that bone 
meal was put into livestock feed. 
 
And if that has happened, I know the federal authorities to the 
CFIA will find that and will take steps to remedy that. I do not 
believe that anyone would intentionally do that, but errors 
happen and we must find out if that’s a possibility. And if that’s 
a possibility, take steps so that it never happens again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s a lot of talk right now about 
compensation. The animals that are being depopulated, I 
believe they can . . . they’re eligible for compensation up to 
$2,500 a head maximum, and the producers will be paid out 
based on the market value of their animals before this problem 
started. So for the most part, producers will be compensated 
adequately. 
 
There’s always cases where there’s animals that are purebreds 
that are higher valued and quite frankly the sentimental value of 
herds in cases where people have spent their whole lifetime 
building up the genetic bank in their herds, and that’s something 
that may not be compensated for through this program, but it’s 
certainly an issue with those producers. 
 
When you look at possible compensation, it’s just not the 
animals that have been put down or those producers. As we 
know right now the industry’s been shut down for a week. 
There’s been no exports into the US or other countries for a 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

 

week. So we know that there is a loss to the industry. 
 
Probably the first group of individuals that would lose are the 
feedlot industry that have fat animals that are ready for 
slaughter. And as we know, those cattle were not slaughtered. 
They are still at the feedlot. Those animals can wait some time, 
but the more . . . of course the longer they wait, the heavier the 
animals will get. And once the border is open and they are 
slaughtered, there will be a lot of deductions because of being 
overweight or too fat. 
 
Or there’s other options of basically putting these cattle on a 
lighter ration. That’s a very ineffective, inefficient way of 
feeding cattle, but those are the alternatives producers have that 
are producing cattle for the slaughter market. And naturally 
with no cattle moving, the trucking industry is at a standstill, so 
there’s a loss there — the workers there. And the companies 
that own the livestock industry certainly has had a loss. If the 
borders are closed for a short, short time I believe a lot of the 
economic loss can be made up once things start rolling again. 
 
Of course we know that packing plants are either closed or 
running at a third or a quarter capacity, and people have been 
laid off. So naturally there’s a loss to those workers and their 
families because the jobs are not there while this problem 
continues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we know there’s been some beef that was 
on transport to Japan, and I believe that the ships brought the 
beef back to Canada and was not unloaded in Japan. And I’m 
sure at the end of the day that we will . . . We’re confident that 
all of the food in the Canadian food chain is very safe. But there 
again, there’s another economic loss that has happened. 
 
Of course there’s not only the trucking industry but the auction 
barns and their lack of business which obviously affects their 
business a lot; naturally producers at the ranch and at the farms 
have animals that they may want to sell. This is a slower time of 
the year for auction sales, but naturally there are a number of 
producers that need to sell animals to make commitments, to 
pay their bills, and they are not able to do that. Of course the 
price of livestock naturally has declined because of this — 
really there’s limited opportunity to buy and sell cattle now. 
 
But once the borders open, hopefully all the market . . . the 
marketplace will take over and the prices of livestock will come 
back and normality will come back to the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course of grave concern is what our trading 
partners think about what’s happening here. Right now, as we 
know, there’s only been one animal that has BSE really, and 
that animal did not go into the human food chain. And so it’s 
important to note that there is no risk to human health in any 
way concerning this issue. The Canadian food supply is safe 
and will remain safe. 
 
But perception may be as important or more important than 
reality. The border to the US and to other customers around the 
world is closed. We cannot export to those customers. So we 
have to satisfy our American partners, or our American 
customers that our beef supply is safe and we’ve taken all the 
steps necessary to remedy this situation. And I believe the CFIA 
has done an exceptional job on that. 

The federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Vanclief, has said that 
he expects the border to be opened in a matter of a few days. 
And we hope he is right and I’m sure the CFIA is working to 
bring that about as quickly as possible. 
 
We also know that Americans have sent their officials to 
Western Canada to observe what we’re doing and how we’re 
doing . . . how we’re looking after this crisis. And to date, I 
believe, that they are very satisfied with what we’re doing and 
how we’re dealing with this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also need to take a look at some of the 
improvements that’s taken place in identifying the animals. 
There was a program brought in the last two or three years — a 
tagging system — and it has proven very valuable. There was a 
lot of concern and disagreement about that in some circles. 
 
At the time the livestock industry was completely behind this 
new tagging system from day one and realized that we needed 
to improve our tracking system in case of an outbreak of a 
disease. And the industry has been proven right. The 
government was proven right to bring in this new tagging 
system and to date it helped quite a bit in tracking this animal. 
 
Of course it only goes back two or three years but the previous 
system of tracking also was adequate, and going back to 1997 
or pre-1997 to the manifest system and records from producers 
and information that’s out there . . . So we have a very good 
system in place. We have improved it with the new tagging 
system. 
 
And in the future we’ll need to look at other ways of identifying 
cattle, possibly microchips. This certainly is available and if 
that’s something that the industry and the government feels that 
should be done, certainly that could be a more effective way of 
tracking animals. 
 
And also it has the added benefit of being able to detect disease 
in animals through higher temperatures and monitoring cattle 
because they have this microchip in them. So that’s something 
in the future and I don’t think that it’s too far off in the future, 
and it’s something we need to seriously look at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at more of the broader picture about 
the framework agreement in — agriculture framework 
agreement — we certainly need to know now that we need to 
know what we’re signing. Is it an adequate agreement? And 
when we look at disease and the environmental side of the 
framework and the other areas — we as elected officials who 
represent the people of Saskatchewan and producers around the 
province — we need to know what we’re signing. And it’s very 
important that the government of the day go the extra step and 
have a lot of the i’s dotted and the t’s crossed before we sign on 
to the agriculture framework agreement and make sure that we 
have adequate safeguards in for all of agriculture, and not only 
in this particular situation with the beef industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, other things that we’re going to 
need to look at in the future after this problem we have with 
BSE has passed . . . and it will pass. It’s just a matter of how 
long it takes to satisfy our own scientists, our own industry, and 
our trading partners around the world. And I have the fullest 
confidence that this situation will resolve quickly and we’ll 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

move on. 
 
But after that, we as elected officials will need to sit down and 
take a look at what we have learned from this situation. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe what we see today is a system that is 
working, that will work, and will solve this problem. 
 
We have to look at the future and one of the areas where . . . is 
of great concern is in our vet college at the University of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a college that is funded both federally and 
provincially and with our neighbouring provinces. Each 
province gets a number of seats at the vet college. 
 
As we know in so many other areas of our society, the 
veterinary profession is aging and we need to bring more people 
into the profession. And not only to do that work that is so 
important in an outstanding industry that everyone in 
Saskatchewan hopes to have in the future, but also to have 
people basically on the ground — the troops on the ground — 
in a disease emergency. 
 
As an example of what happen is if a disease that happened that 
is more infectious, that travelled much easier, it would be more 
important that we have the troops on the ground to put a stop 
. . . to quarantine, to put a stop to the disease from spreading. 
 
And we have to look at what we have in place today. We have 
to look at what we may need in the future for other situations 
that may come along. And we have to invest in our . . . well in 
the infrastructure of our industry and the veterinary end of 
things — pathology departments, testing departments. We need 
to have adequate testing facilities to do timely tests. 
 
As we know we’ve been doing tests in the chronic wasting 
disease situation in elk, and really our testing facilities were tied 
up with that when this BSE outbreak came along. And so we 
need to take a look at the expanding area of testing and being 
able to handle larger numbers. 
 
(15:30) 
 
As we know we’ve been testing animals right along, high-risk 
animals in the beef industry have been tested on a regular basis, 
and this is of course the first positive that we’ve incurred. 
 
The other area of future concern is not only having more 
veterinarians but we need other officials that are qualified to 
help in this outbreak, and we have to co-ordinate that with a 
particular outbreak of a disease. 
 
We also have to make sure that our vet college at the University 
of Saskatchewan is adequately funded – not only the 
infrastructure it has. There’s been some funding put to the 
university but it’s . . . naturally it’s never enough. But I think 
we need to take a long look at adequately funding the university 
vet college and making sure that it is well placed in Western 
Canada to be really the centre of excellence as far as concerning 
disease and disease control. It’s done a great job in the past, but 
we need to make sure that that continues in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just in my last few remarks, I might want to just 
take five minutes before I sit down, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
speak really to the industry, the whole veterinary system that we 

have in place, the CFIA, and governments, that we must all be 
very aware of the situation of the world we live in. The industry 
must be more aware of the possibilities of diseases, and that’s 
really an awareness program going right back to the industry 
and the producers. 
 
This situation which developed was found because we have a 
very good surveillance program, a surveillance program that 
detected this animal, that there was something wrong with this 
animal. And the vet that looked at the animal and identified the 
animal did the right thing. He condemned the animal; it did not 
go into the human food system. The head was sent away for 
testing. 
 
There’s questions about how long that took, and I think I 
addressed that with the testing facilities we had. It wasn’t 
identified as a high priority but it was tested at the end of the 
day and the system worked. 
 
And we need to make sure that in Saskatchewan we have that 
high level of surveillance. Federally inspected plants have their 
criteria, but I believe there has to be possibly improved 
surveillance at the local abattoirs, the smaller slaughtering 
houses in the province, so that in many cases some of these 
animals that have problems on the farm may be directed more 
towards the local abattoir or the local slaughterhouse because 
that animal may have developed some problem and can’t be 
transported very far. In many cases, a broken leg for instance, 
an accident, the animal can be slaughtered and is fit for human 
consumption. 
 
So we have to identify that, I believe, as a priority and put more 
resources towards the local abattoirs and our slaughterhouses so 
that we keep the food system safe in this province and we keep 
the borders open. As we’ve seen, it’s a very high-risk situation. 
When something does happen, it affects the whole industry. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly will be supporting this motion. It’s 
a very important motion. I’m pleased that the members opposite 
are supporting this motion, and we will continue to support the 
Canadian Food Inspection Agency and the work that they’ve 
done in the past and are continuing to do in the future. 
 
And I’d just like to make the point that our beef supply is safe, 
there is no concerns about eating beef, and I certainly continue 
to eat beef and will continue . . . last week and I ate beef a 
number of times and I will continue to do so in the future. 
 
So at this time I’d like to take my seat, and again will be 
supporting the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to support 
this motion and to congratulate the mover and seconder. I think 
it is definitely appropriate for this House to express its 
confidence in the Canadian beef industry, and our support for 
Canadian producers, and our continuing confidence in the 
quality and the safety of the product that we are putting out to 
the world market. 
 
However, if I have any reservations at all about the motion, it is 
that I think it’s still incumbent on us as producers to keep in 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

 

mind that the onus is always on us to satisfy our trading 
partners that the product we are presenting to the world market 
is safe, it is top quality, and that all possible measures have 
been taken to ensure that the customers receive the very best 
product possible. I’m glad that we are expressing our 
confidence in the inspection, the health system, the regulatory 
system, the surveillance system in Canadian beef. 
 
But we cannot afford to lose sight of the fact that the customer 
is always right. Sixty-eight per cent of Canadian beef is 
exported beyond the borders of this country. So as with most 
product produced in Canada, the industry depends on world 
customers and those world customers are always right. It is up 
to us to prove to them, and to take all steps required by them to 
satisfy them, that this is a product safe to enter their countries 
and to appear on their supermarket shelves. 
 
It is never a case that it is open for us as producers to tell our 
trading partners that they are wrong to be concerned and that we 
are right. It is up to us to say to our trading partners that we are 
listening to all measures demanded by you and required by you 
to satisfy you that Canadian beef is safe. I’m confident that we 
can meet that challenge. 
 
We do not yet know how this one animal came to be infected as 
it is. It is important that that be tracked down. It is important 
that we demonstrate, as I think we have, that we are being 
aggressive about this situation. I think we are showing that we 
take this very, very seriously. And I think it is important for us 
to talk and listen to our trading partners to see what measures 
they require in order that their borders will be opened up as 
quickly as possible. 
 
However I say I am pleased that the mover has brought forward 
this motion. I think it is appropriate that all of us stand together, 
united and unanimous, in expressing our confidence in this 
industry, expressing our confidence in the regulators that every 
step necessary to be taken will be taken to get to the bottom of 
this and to ensure the safety of the product we are offering. 
 
And that this is a $4 billion industry to Canada, mostly of 
course to the two provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. This 
is an industry that we must protect, but the way we protect it is 
by demonstrating to our trading partners our very, very deep 
commitment to providing to the world markets the best and 
safest and healthiest product possible. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to take a few moments to enter into the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to support the motion put forward by 
the member for Saltcoats, the motion that reads: 
 

That this Assembly express its complete confidence in the 
Canadian beef industry and urges other nations to reopen 
their borders to Canadian beef imports as soon as possible. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at a situation I guess that seems 
very grave, and sometimes there’s a lot of fear and panic that 
surround an issue such as beef contamination, and especially 
with contamination that’s relating to mad cow disease, we do 

look back at another country that had a serious issue with this. 
And of course we want to ensure that our food product is safe as 
we feed it not only to people in Canada but around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but the fact remains that the animal that was 
detected with mad cow disease in Alberta, it has been shown 
clearly that this animal and neither do other animals, has 
entered the food chain. And so that should give confidence to 
the many consumers in our country, as well as the consumers 
around the world. 
 
The other fact that remains and is very clear, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the ruminants from the cow that certainly was put down, 
did not enter any of the beef industry. For instance, it’s not in 
hamburger; the protein could not possibly get into hamburger or 
into wieners or that kind of thing — it’s prohibited by law. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, we do commend the CFIA on its very 
wonderful and responsible action as far as protecting our food 
thus far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we reiterate how very 
important the beef industry is here in Saskatchewan and in 
Canada. It’s important for people to know and to recognize that 
over 2.4 million head of cattle . . . there are that many in 
Saskatchewan. There are over 1 million beef cows and we have 
15,000 beef producers. Saskatchewan is home to the largest 
indoor, commercial cattle show in North America and that takes 
place right here in Regina. 
 
Saskatchewan produces over $700 million in farm cash receipts 
from cattle each year. Beef production is the largest livestock 
commodity and it’s second only to hard red spring wheat 
overall. 
 
In 2002, the number of cattle and cows marketed through 
Saskatchewan auction markets into Saskatchewan packing 
plants and abattoirs totalled 1.74 million head. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the facts, these are some of 
the statistics that it’s important for people to recognize. And 
throughout all the years of our beef industry, it’s also important 
to notice that we have had an excellent regulatory system in 
place, that we have been ensuring that our food chain is safe, 
that our meat stock is safe for our consumers. And when you 
look at those large numbers of cattle that have moved through 
the industry onto the tables of consumers, you can recognize 
that in the past, because of good regulatory measures, we 
haven’t had any disasters. 
 
Now some of the members in the Assembly here today have 
made the statement that it is very, very important that we ensure 
our international friends and consumers, our trade partners, that 
we do have a safe food supply. Well, Mr. Speaker, the CFIA is 
taking every measure and has done a tremendously wonderful 
job to this point. 
 
It is my hope that we will have this cleared up within the next 
few days so that the many families out there, the families that 
have beef and they produce many, many cattle for their markets, 
will be able to get those stocks rolling and do it very quickly. 
Because Brad Wildeman, the president of Saskatchewan 
cattlemen’s association, has indicated if this goes on longer than 
two weeks, there is going to be a major disaster in the industry. 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we have this 
cleared up shortly. And I am completely confident that the 
CFIA will do that very thing, and that our industry will move 
ahead and all of the measures will be taken to ensure that we 
continue to have a regulatory system that nips these things in 
the bud when they happen. 
 
Certainly we want to make sure that our international trade 
partners are confident of our livestock and our produce that is 
marketed around the world, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubt that 
they deserve to have the confidence that they are eating safe 
product from Canada and from other countries. 
 
And there may be the need to change some of the regulations a 
bit. And so, if that is the case, I’m confident too that the CFIA 
will be on that immediately. And so, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 
to be among those in this legislature today that supports this 
very important motion put forward by the member from 
Saltcoats. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, by leave, 
I move that the Assembly move to government orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate right is Mr. Ron Styles, who is the deputy minister 
of Finance; directly behind Mr. Styles is Kirk McGregor, who 
is the assistant deputy minister of taxation, intergovernmental 
affairs; and directly behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle, the assistant 
deputy minister of the treasury board branch. These are the 
officials here to discuss interim supply. 
 
Before I move the motion, the first resolution, I would just like 
to talk a bit about interim supply and what it means. This is our 
second interim supply motion request. This is based on 
one-twelfth, which would cover the cost of servicing the public 
service for the month of June. It is a straight one-twelfth 
request. 
 
As you know, Mr. Chair, the budget estimates for each 
department are before the Committee of Finance. We had the 
budget presented on March 28. We recognize that it’s unlikely 
that the final appropriation Bill will be agreed to within this 
House in the very near future so this requires an interim supply 
motion to be presented and passed so that the activities of the 
government can be paid for in due course. 
 

So that is the intent of this particular motion and resolution and 
the appropriate Bill that will be moved later today, Mr. Chair. 
 
So with that I would move resolution no. 1: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $493,721,000 be granted to Her 
Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 
2004. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And to 
the minister and the officials, welcome this afternoon. 
 
We have a few questions regarding interim supply. And I’d like 
to ask the Page to have a copy of the interim supply request 
brought over as quickly as possible so we can double-check, 
indeed, the numbers. 
 
But before that material arrives for me, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. 
Minister, some general questions regarding the state of the 
economy, not only in Saskatchewan but in Canada. A lot of the 
budget projections of course are based on prices that were 
determined in about, you know, the months of February and 
March. 
 
And we’ve seen tremendous changes in the Canadian dollar 
since that time. Your comments, I believe, last time at Finance 
estimates when you indicated that your budget documents 
suggest that for every 1 cent change in the value of the 
Canadian dollar, there is a subsequent change in the amount of 
money that you have available to pay your bills, as you said. 
 
And the question, Mr. Minister, is that the Canadian dollar has 
risen significantly. It has, as you indicated, been a positive thing 
for part of the government’s undertaking. But on the other hand, 
we see now articles in the newspaper regarding STEP 
(Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.), which is the 
Saskatchewan exporting agency. They’re very concerned about 
the export market, indeed that Saskatchewan exporters are 
going to be doing, you know, much, much poorly as the dollar 
value changes. 
 
Could you, Mr. Minister, indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan how you see the current value of the Canadian 
dollar affecting not only the budget projections for your 
department as far as revenue, but how it might affect exporters 
and of course their contribution to the Saskatchewan revenue 
fund by taxation in light of the fact that their exports may be 
affected negatively? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. When we 
talked about the very similar question in the first interim supply 
Bill, we had just got the figures in for the end of March in terms 
of the dollar projections. 
 
And our end of April forecasts are very close to the overall 
forecasts for the calendar year 2003 at this point in time. Even 
though the Canadian dollar is now in that 73 cent range, it still 
hasn’t had an impact in terms of our projections for the overall 
year. 
 
When we look at the impact on exporters and importers, 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

 

obviously if you were buying products internationally with 
Canadian dollars you have an advantage. If you’re exporting 
these and having to sell them in an international context, of 
course you’re at a disadvantage. 
 
Without doing a sector-by-sector analysis, and you’d almost 
need to do that on a business-by-business analysis, it’s hard to 
know what the overall impact will be. There are lots of offsets 
to consider as well. We’re still looking at significant oil and gas 
prices that haven’t really dropped even though we’ve seen some 
resolution to the Iraqi conflict. 
 
So at this point in time, I guess the response today is the same 
response as a month ago. It’s too early to know what the 
changes in the Canadian dollar or some of these commodity 
prices might have on our overall projections. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
your budget document you indicated on page 21 of the budget 
summary pages that the Canadian dollar averaged 63.7 US 
cents in 2002. And then as you’ve indicated, the comment about 
the current Canadian dollar on page 53, you indicate that a 1 
cent change in the value of the Canadian dollar compared to the 
US dollar from the level assumed in the budget would change 
the estimated cost in 2003-04 of servicing government gross 
debt by approximately $2.8 million. So that is, that is significant 
as we’ve seen the value of the dollar rise from that 63.7 average 
in 2002 to an average of . . . I don’t know what it is today but I 
understand it’s around that 73, 74 cent range. 
 
So on one hand obviously we’re going to see some significant 
savings in terms of the debt and the interest rate there. But I 
understand your comment today being that this is a month and a 
half into the new fiscal year that you foresee no economic, you 
know, significant economic impact yet. 
 
But on the negative side, if the value of the dollar holds to 74 or 
continues to grow somewhat — and I think economists are 
pretty convinced that we’re not going to see massive increases 
in that 74 cent value — what kinds of negative things would 
there be in the budget if indeed that dollar holds at that 74, 75 
cent range over the long period of the budget? Where do you 
anticipate, or where do your officials anticipate a problem to 
occur in the appropriate sectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. When we 
look at the potential impacts on our large exporters, an 
increasing Canadian dollar will have an impact for example on 
potash sales in a negative way. 
 
If we look at oil and gas prices, of course, and the price that 
they’re trading at now, it’s Canadian dollar amounts, it’s world 
market driven. So there’s a bonus in that situation. 
 
(16:00) 
 
We have some, for our manufacturing in Saskatchewan, many 
of their inputs are imported, so there’s an advantage to them as 
well. So again, I guess what we would have to say is that it’s 
too early to tell what the impact would be on the corporate 
sector in terms of potential corporate income tax revenues, what 
the impact might be because of the fluctuations that can occur 
over the course of the year. And wasn’t I think just last week, 

where we saw a drop of over 1 cent within 24 hours. 
 
So these sort of dollar numbers, until we know the impact of the 
averaging across the piece it’s hard to actually determine what 
the impact might be in each sector. So I guess the answer again 
is that we can predict that there might be some negativity 
associated with potash sales if the Canadian dollar were to 
remain high, but again it’s way too early to determine what the 
overall impact on the economy or certainly on the revenue 
projections of government would be at this time, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I 
think as I’ve indicated in this Assembly before, it’s very useful 
for the taxpayers of this province to understand the quarterly 
reports. And your government has promised quarterly financial 
reports, and I’m sure that you’re going to continue with that, so 
we as an opposition and the people of Saskatchewan will be 
looking forward to that first quarterly report to see the direction 
that you’ve indicated. And I thank you for that comment. 
 
Mr. Minister, on that same line you’ve mentioned of course that 
the revenue projections for the province in your budget 
indicates that, you know, we’re anticipating almost $1 billion 
worth of revenue from our non-renewable resources, things like 
oil, natural gas, potash. In your budget projections, if I could 
ask you, Mr. Minister, to clarify what today’s value is for each 
of the sectors. 
 
I notice that you indicated that the US per barrel for oil in 2003 
is expected to be at $25. Are we on target? Is today’s price more 
or less $25? Natural gas, you indicated that your budget 
documents are based on 4.29 per gigajoule in 2003 and the 
potash prices are at $200 per tonne. Those were the numbers 
that were used to develop your document. 
 
We know that of course you’ve indicated wheat and grain and 
barley prices there, and we’ve seen some, some decline in those 
prices. When we look at a canola price estimated in your 
document at about $367, that’s far above what the current price 
is, and we understand that there’s fluctuations. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you could clarify those three significant 
revenue-generating commodities of oil, natural gas, and potash 
as far as the current price today versus what your budget 
document used for 2003 projections. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, with regard to the oil 
prices, that’s up from our projections at the time of the budget. 
Natural gas prices are up from our projections at the time of the 
budget. And potash is down slightly in terms of the commodity 
prices. 
 
But I would just like to indicate, Mr. Chair, that these are 
projections and they are based on a year average. The year 
average is our best estimate, using the models and forecasts that 
most forecasters and economists would use in terms of 
determining the best guess for their prices. 
 
Those numbers, what they will be at the end of the year we 
don’t really know. But those are the projections, they are the 
estimates. And certainly we, at this point in time which really is 
a photograph today, we can say that the oil prices have been up 
from our projections, as well as natural gas, and potash is down 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

slightly. 
 
So again, if you’re looking at this in context of an entire year, 
it’s too early to tell what the impact might be if we were to have 
sustained oil and gas prices. Or if potash were to rebound or 
even to drop, it’s too early to tell what that impact might be. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
question on everyone’s mind, not only here in the Assembly but 
right across Saskatchewan and Canada of course is the crisis 
that agriculture is facing today with regards to the cattle 
industry. And we’ve seen a withdrawal now of revenue in that 
sector, very significant declines as options have closed and 
there’s closure of borders. And as indicated in question period 
today, we see as many as eight countries, I believe, now having 
closed the borders to Canadian beef. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated before when we’ve had 
discussions about the gross domestic product, the GDP of 
Saskatchewan and how agriculture will affect the GDP. And of 
course within agriculture there is a sector of the cattle industry. 
And we’ve seen of course charts that the media has put forward. 
And we’ve seen graphs that indicate of course that the livestock 
industry is a billions — billions and billions of dollars of 
revenue in Canada, and a very significant portion in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question of course is that we want to alleviate 
the fear. And our goal and our hope is that the border, 
especially to the United States with cattle being able to cross the 
border, is going to be open very quickly. But, Mr. Minister, I 
guess we need to be aware of an impact. And have your 
officials studied the impact of the livestock industry on the 
revenue for the Saskatchewan government and looked at what 
impact a prolonged closure of trading with a number of 
countries, what effect will that have on Saskatchewan’s 
economy and of course the revenue projections of your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly when we look at 
the mad cow situation, we’ve had a long discussion and debate 
earlier today and both sides of the House are strongly 
supportive of the agriculture community and livestock in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The answer at this point in time, without knowing all the facts, 
without knowing the extent of the BSE in Western Canada, 
what the response of the international communities might be, 
we still don’t have enough information. We’re very early on. To 
know the impact at this time I guess would be no more than a 
guess. 
 
Certainly we’re not prepared at this time obviously to make any 
sort of assumptions that there might be any impact with regard 
to either our GDP or our revenue forecast. It’s way too early to 
tell. We’re hopeful of course that this can be resolved very 
quickly, that it is an isolated incident, that we will maintain 
consumer confidence in beef products from Western Canada, 
and that we can return to a more normal environment in the 
very near future. If that’s the case, obviously the projections 
from the budget we would go with in terms of the direct and 
indirect spinoffs. 
 
And at this point in time it’s too early to say whether there will 

be a direct affect or an indirect affect, and if this is short term or 
prolonged, what the potential rebound might be once a 
resolution is achieved. So it’s again too early. We’re dealing 
with averages across the piece in our projections for the entire 
year and it’s too early to know what the impact might be on our 
livestock industry at this point. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
specific question about the interim supply motion and the 
one-twelfth share. You’ve indicated, your explanation to the 
people and to this House, that this is strictly a one-twelfth of the 
expenditures necessary in all of the departments. And I have a 
specific question about the Department of Health, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in I believe it was your budget speech or in one of 
your budget documents — and I apologize for not knowing 
exactly which document the comment was made — I believe 
you stated that in health we will see, or your government will 
make, additional announcements regarding capital projects and 
constructions as time would pass. And I’m sorry for not having 
your direct quote. But I believe you were suggesting that over 
. . . as you passed March 28 you would continue to make 
announcements about capital projects in health. 
 
Your request today is for one-twelfth share in Health, which is 
about $210 million. Mr. Minister, the question of course is that 
there are many communities in the province who are waiting for 
announcements with the Department of Health and with the 
regional health authorities to get busy and begin construction. I 
know Moosomin is waiting for an announcement. Preeceville is 
waiting for an announcement. And I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, does the interim supply motion hinder that process or 
does it still allow the regional health authorities in consultation 
with the Department of Health to make those plans and to get 
busy with their projects? 
 
When will the department be making the announcements? Is 
that dependent upon the Department of Finance or is that 
dependent upon the Department of Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, what I stated of course at 
the time of the budget address is that the type of capital 
announcements that we made during the budget address — for 
example with regard to the Ile-a-la-Crosse hospital — similar 
announcements would be made. 
 
And since that time of course the Minister of Health has 
announced the Swift Current hospital. I believe he will be 
making another positive announcement in Regina tomorrow. He 
will be making an announcement with regard to Moosomin I’m 
sure in the very near future. 
 
But again, those sorts of announcements with regard to how 
they’re announced or how the Minister of Health announces 
these are within the purview of the Department of Health. 
 
There is no hindering in terms of the interim supply motions on 
the timing or the announcements. Oftentimes the capital 
announcements that are made are often based on final 
conclusion in terms of the planning, in terms of working with 
the community, in terms of when’s the best time to make the 
announcement; and those things are worked out between the 
Department of Health and obviously the communities that are 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

 

affected. 
 
So really the Department of Finance isn’t involved in that 
process. But in terms of the dollars applied, because of the 
planning phase and the long-term nature of capital 
announcements, interim supply really deals more with the 
operating side of government and payments that are required on 
a monthly basis as opposed to major capital projects, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
question around a press release that was issued in the city of 
Weyburn yesterday from Culture, Youth and Recreation. And I 
would just like to quote from this press release, Mr. Minister, so 
that you’re aware of what I speak. And it’s entitled, “Weyburn 
community groups receive funding.” And I quote: 
 

Two Weyburn community organizations, The Family Place 
and the Sun Country Health Region, today received grants 
totalling more than $34,000 from the provincial 
government through the Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
“The programs delivered by these community based 
organizations are important because they promote healthy 
living and they support vulnerable children, parents, and 
families,” Culture Youth and Recreation Minister Joanne 
Crofford said. “These programs will help to sustain and 
further enhance Saskatchewan’s healthy and vibrant 
communities.” 
 
The Family Place received grants totalling $30,000 to help 
with its operations, program delivery and continued support 
for children and families. The Family Place programming 
is based on the recommendations and needs of community 
groups, individuals and parents. The Family Place is the 
only family resource and support centre in the Weyburn 
area. 

 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Minister, I have to agree with the final statement that yes, it 
is the only family resource and support centre in the Weyburn 
area. My question, Mr. Minister, is how could the Government 
of Saskatchewan go to the city of Weyburn and imply that there 
was somehow 30,000 new dollars being given to Family Place 
through the Community Initiatives Fund when in fact this 
money is just to replace money that has not . . . is now not being 
received by the Family Place from other departments? 
 
I would like the minister to answer what departments are now 
not contributing to Family Place, and why it is now being 
funded through the Community Initiatives Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. The 
Community Initiatives Fund is not part of the appropriation Bill 
before the Assembly. 
 
But I might highlight that in the budget documents that were 
presented on March 28, that the Community Initiatives Fund is 
a total of 8.6 million for ’03-04. 
 
The specific detail with regard to Family Place in Weyburn is 
not detail that we would have with the officials in Finance. This 
question would be better put to either the minister of Social 

Services or the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
which is responsible for the Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
So I can’t provide the answer. I don’t know the detail of how 
these dollars are allocated to needy community groups in the 
province of Saskatchewan, or what the level of support they 
may get from base departments. That would be better . . . more 
better put, of course, to the actual department. And I think the 
Department of Social Services would be the one that would be 
able to answer that specific question, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your 
answer. However my understanding is that what we are 
questioning about today is the dollars that are being requested 
for interim supply. And if these dollars are now not coming 
from the departments but are coming from the Community 
Initiatives Fund, I would like to know which departments are 
now not expending the $30,000 that they previously expended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well certainly, Mr. Chair, as 
indicated earlier with the 8.6 million in the Community 
Initiatives Fund, this is a 45 per cent increase. 
 
The question that she asked me specifically is the dollars that 
are being provided through the Community Initiatives Fund, is 
that replacing other dollars? And we don’t have that answer and 
we don’t know. It may be; it may not be. That is a question that 
has to be asked for the Department of Social Services, the 
department that is actually providing the dollars. Certainly our 
officials don’t have that level of detail. 
 
With regard to interim supply, interim supply indicates dollars 
that would be allocated mainly for operating purposes within 
the Department of Social Services on a one-twelfth basis, which 
is a straight one-twelfth of the budget, the estimate, the vote, 
before the Assembly within the Department of Social Services. 
And whether that dollar amount would include some base 
dollars to Family Place in Weyburn, I couldn’t say. We just 
know the gross numbers; we don’t have that level of detail, so 
she’d have to ask that question to the minister of Social 
Services, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister, for the 
answer. I guess what I find alarming here is that the misleading 
press release that was issued in Weyburn insinuating that there 
was somehow new dollars coming to the Family Place through 
the Community Initiatives when in fact it is not new dollars. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would also like to ask another question 
which also refers to the Family Place, and it does directly 
indicate that there are less dollars that are going to Social 
Services and to Family Place in the city of Weyburn. 
 
Some five years ago there were 12,000 hours of community 
service provided and paid for through Social Services and 
administrated through Family Place. And now the Family Place 
is only receiving 7,200 hours of the same service to . . . funding 
to provide that service for 7,200 hours. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would like to know if there is a reflection 
in Social Service’s budget to indicate the reduction in these 
hours that are being provided? 
 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, again the purpose of 
interim supply is to provide dollars before the main 
appropriation Bill is voted off. 
 
The Department of Finance presents the gross allocation; it’s a 
straight one-twelfth of the budget vote for the Department of 
Social Services, or the Department of Learning, or the 
Department of Community . . . or, Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
And so what it comes down to is, we don’t . . . I can’t, and my 
officials can’t, give the detail in terms of the base funding of 
Family Place, what that funding level is, how it compares to 
previous years, whether the grant from the Community 
Initiatives Fund was over and above a grant they may have 
received last year — we don’t have that detail. And it’s not the 
purpose of interim supply to provide that detail. 
 
The purpose of Committee of Finance and the estimates that 
would come before the department within the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment or within the 
Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation, those questions 
that the member’s asking today would be . . . could be asked of 
those ministers and the information would be right at hand to 
provide those answers. 
 
So I’d ask that the member wait until those committees come 
up, or if she likes our department could ask those departments 
and provide that information to her on a written basis. Certainly 
we’re prepared to provide that to her. It’s just that we don’t 
have that information before us at this point in time, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister, I appreciate your 
answer that you cannot give details directly about the funding 
for Family Place. However because of the funding cuts that 
have occurred in Family Place from the Department of Social 
Services, there should be a reflection in the amount of dollars 
that are requested for Social Services from the Department of 
Finance. 
 
And I would hope that the minister would have detail of that, 
and it is very obvious that the funding is now being awarded 
through Community Initiatives Fund instead of through Social 
Services, the 30,000, and it is also very clear that the number of 
hours that are being provided for support workers at Family 
Place has also been cut considerably, starting five years ago and 
it continues to be decreased. 
 
So there should be a reflection in the budget. And, Mr. Minister, 
I will take your information under advisement and I will be 
asking the minister of Social Services these questions the next 
time I have the opportunity. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, the second page of your interim supply request is 
lending and investing amounts, where you indicate that for a 
one-twelfth share for certain companies, or certain agencies 
and/or corporations, they require a one-twelfth share. Others 
don’t, and your request includes 6.475 million for those various 
agencies or corporations that require. 
 
Could you explain the differences between why some 
corporations require a one-twelfth share now, others don’t? The 

explanation is not given as to why only 6.475 million is 
requested for very specific . . . I believe five agencies and 
corporations, and the others don’t require. Could you indicate 
why there is a difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, when we look at the 
lending and investment amounts that have been included in the 
interim supply numbers, we’ll note that the lending and 
investing amounts within the GRF (General Revenue Fund), 
that some of them have not . . . we have not asked for a 
one-twelfth interim supply. And the reason for that is that the 
dollars that are provided to these particular agencies within 
government are statutory amounts so they are provided for in 
legislation. The legislation has been approved. The numbers 
have been approved. 
 
So what we’re voting on in interim supply would be estimates 
that needed to be voted before the Assembly as part of the main 
appropriation Bill. And in this case these dollar amounts are not 
included for these particular groups because they are already 
provided for on a statutory basis, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I’ll just use 
two examples, Mr. Minister, then, if you could clarify. Because 
I’m not sure exactly what you meant. 
 
In the Department of Learning there is a $66 million lending 
request or investing request for the year, of which one-twelfth 
. . . there is a request for 5.5 million. You have listed 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation at 193 million and no request. 
 
Could you explain the difference why Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation appears on this document and does not have a 
request when Learning, of course which is a department of 
government then, has the request? Could you explain the 
difference between the two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — With regard to the examples 
provided by the member opposite, what it comes down to is 
what are the numbers that were included in the estimates to be 
voted before the House, and what were the numbers that were 
basically provided as part of the budget documents but were 
accounted for on a statutory basis. 
 
With regard to Learning, the 66 million that was included in the 
’03-04 estimates and to be voted is 66 million; of course 
one-twelfth interim supply would be 5.5 million. That is with 
regard to the Student Aid Fund and that is an estimate that is 
voted on before this Assembly. 
 
With regard to SaskPower Corporation, the 193 million is their 
estimated borrowing costs and of course this is provided for by 
legislation and is a statutory amount and is not included in the 
estimates to be voted, Mr. Chair. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — One final question in this area, Mr. Minister. 
Then for all of the Crown corporations that are listed on this 
document that you’ve indicated, this is the borrowing 
requirement of those Crown corporations through the General 
Revenue Fund on an annual basis, is that correct? 
 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And 
certainly the member opposite is entirely correct that the Crown 
corporations listed, because the Department of Finance centrally 
coordinates and manages the debt of the Crown corporations 
and of course their lending requirements, that they’re included 
on a statutory basis. 
 
But the member is correct that these would indicate what the 
borrowing needs of these Crown corporations would be as an 
estimate for ’03-04. Some of that may be for capital projects, 
some of it may be for refinancing, but that would be the 
borrowing needs of those Crown corporations for fiscal ’03-04, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, your 
officials provided me with the copy of all of the 
federal-provincial programs and the revenue that Saskatchewan 
will obtain from those various programs, and I want to thank 
them for that. It’s a good, complete list and it indicates the exact 
numbers that your province . . . that the province of 
Saskatchewan will be obtaining. 
 
Question, Mr. Minister, is, like we’re talking about a 
one-twelfth supply of revenue to the various departments. Does 
the federal government supply you on a regular one-twelfth 
amount of money or do you obtain the $194 million upfront? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, each of these 
federal-provincial agreements are unique in terms of the terms 
of how the dollars are provided from the federal government. 
For example, one agreement may indicate that there would be a 
quarterly payment. One agreement might indicate that a bill 
needed to be provided by the provincial government to the 
federal government, that would be concerned with that 
contractual arrangement. 
 
But each one of these are a unique arrangement and it could be 
monthly, quarterly, by account, by billing. And so it’s not . . . 
I’m not able to say that it would be provided on a one-twelfth 
basis. Each one would be unique to the particular agreement 
that had been signed between the provincial and federal 
government, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
specific question and I know you might . . . your answer might 
be the same in that your officials can’t provide you with that 
answer. But of course Health is the largest amount of money 
that is received from the federal government. Nearly $60 
million is obtained, and of course, one of the significant 
amounts of money is in the area of Health Reform Fund, a new 
amount of federally allocated money to the tune of 31.962 
million, if the number that I’m reading is correct. 
 
Can your officials indicate to this Assembly whether or not that 
money is obtained on a quarterly, monthly basis or has the 
Government of Saskatchewan received all of that $31 million 
already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, with regard to that 
specific example on the Health department and federal transfers 
to support the federal health accord, it’s my understanding that 
the actual, the trust funds that will be dispensing those dollars 
are still being set up, and the details of how the money will be 

allocated from those trust funds have not yet been worked out. 
 
So all I can say is that the federal legislation to support that, I 
understand, is before the House, before the House of Commons. 
The trust funds have not yet been set up, and the details of how 
those trust funds will allocate dollars to provincial departments 
has not yet been determined, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My final question 
this afternoon is regarding the legislative branch of government 
and you’ve indicated that everyone was seeking a one-twelfth 
share but I noticed that the Chief Electoral Officer, there is no 
one-twelfth share. Could you explain why there is zero in that 
column when everyone else seems to have some monies 
allocated to each of those departments? Is this unique? 
 
And I want to thank you, especially your officials for being 
present this afternoon and assisting us in understanding the 
interim supply request of nearly a half a billion dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Again 
following the logic of answers earlier, the Chief Electoral office 
as a legislative branch of government receives statutory funding 
so it doesn’t need to have an estimate or a one-twelfth interim 
supply. So the dollars are provided for, the legislation is there. 
They draw their dollars as required and it’s the same answer as 
the previous one we gave. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I would like to thank my officials 
who were here today to talk about this Appropriation Bill. And 
we have resolution no. 1 to deal with. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — With that, Mr. Chair, I would move 
resolution no. 2: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2004, 
the sum of $493,721,000 be granted out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 42, The Appropriation Act, 2003 (No. 2) be 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly and under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now 
read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 16:46 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 19 - The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment  

Act, 2003 
Bill No. 18 - The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 6 - The Podiatry Act 
Bill No. 7 - The Occupational Therapists Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 14 - The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 5 - The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 10 - The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Amendment 

Act, 2003 
Bill No. 9 - The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 

2003 
Bill No. 25 - The Personal Care Homes Amendment Act, 2003 
Bill No. 22 - The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 42  - The Appropriation Act, 2003 (No. 2) 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:51. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, leave to move a motion of transmittal. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Motion of Transmittal 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
thank the Government of Canada and the Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency for their immediate and thorough 
response to the bovine spongiform . . . BSE crisis, and 
further that the Speaker transmit copies of the private 
member’s (how did you like that . . . and the private 
member’s) motion and verbatim transcript adopted earlier 

today to the Prime Minister of Canada and the federal 
Minister of Agriculture and all opposition party leaders. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
. . . I would ask for leave to move to government orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1215 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1215 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1215 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1223 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1223 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Access Awareness Week 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
 Child Care Week 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
 Weyburn Livestock Exchange 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
 Moose Jaw Temple Gardens Mineral Spa 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
 St. Joseph’s Seniors Club Honours St. Louis Woman 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
 Moose Jaw Community Groups Receive Funding 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1217 
 House Lights Knocked Out by Lightning 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1218 
 Inclusive Educational Environment 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1218 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1218 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1218 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1220 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1220 
 Future of Crown Corporations 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1221 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1221 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Mining Regulations 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1223 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1224 
 Child Care in Saskatchewan 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1224 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1225 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1225 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1225 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 6 — Confidence in Canadian Beef Industry 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1225 



 

 

  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1227 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1228 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1231 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1235 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1236 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1236, 1240 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1239 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1241 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1241 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1242 
MOTIONS 
 Motion of Transmittal 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1242 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 ...............................................................................................................1242 
 
 


