















































Hansard: April 03, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 355 
 April 3, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise again on behalf of producers in the Cypress Hills area and 
other communities throughout the Southwest who are opposed 
to the position taken by the government on the issue of Crown 
grazing lease renewals. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by producers from 
the communities of Gull Lake, Tompkins, and Hazlet. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine very 
concerned about the condition of Highway 47. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, you petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Bienfait, 
Estevan, and Roche Percee. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of southwest Saskatchewan concerned about the issue 
of the renewal of Crown leases. And the prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Lancer, Abbey, Sceptre, and Eston, Saskatchewan. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition from citizens of 
my constituency that are opposing the government’s handling 
of the crop insurance rates. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Medstead 
and Glenbush. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 19, and 18. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, . . . (inaudible) . . . the Special 
Committee Rules and Procedures hereby presents the 
committee’s third report which is hereby tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased today to be able to speak to the report and to 
move concurrence of it. I will do so at the end of my remarks. 
 
I want to say to members of the Assembly that the work of the 
Rules Committee is now essentially complete. We have spent 
the last several years taking a look at how we can modernize 
our procedures here in the Assembly, how we can streamline 
them, and how we can open up our proceedings so that there’s 
more public, direct public input, into our discussion and our 
review of legislation. 
 
The proposals that we had first envisioned on this side in 1999, 
as I had . . . we’d come back from the ’99 election and I had the 
opportunity to speak to you, Mr. Speaker, and my colleague 
from . . . the new colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow about 
some of the things that we could perhaps be doing differently in 
this Assembly — things that would make this Assembly more 
open, more accountable, more democratic; that would allow us 
to have a better debate and hopefully restore some of the 
collegial atmosphere that I think citizens expect of us in the 
debates and the proceedings here. 
 
The result of this work has been a unanimous report out of your 
Rules Committee that enjoys a strong bipartisan support. I 
appreciate the advice that has been presented by members 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

opposite as they’ve come to the table with new ideas and other 
perspectives. And I very much appreciated the input that we’ve 
had from members on this side who come from a variety of 
different backgrounds, that have a real breadth of experience of 
many years legislative service — some very new, some who 
have been through many different . . . served in many different 
assemblies here. 
 
The result of this, Mr. Speaker, I believe is that we will have a 
committee system that is in place that is more effective, is more 
efficient, that provides us with an opportunity to engage the 
public very directly. And if I may just say, I think of all of the 
changes that we are making and recommending that the 
Assembly adopt, it is very much the change to the committee 
system that opens up the proceedings so that we can receive 
delegations and hear direct comments from the public in terms 
of the benefit and strength of legislation that we’re discussing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will change the way that we as members deal 
with our constituents. It will change the way that we deal with 
each other. I believe that this is a very important move forward. 
 
The basis of this, of these changes, really fall into the three 
areas. One is increasing the . . . strengthening the democratic 
process that we have here. The second, of course, is in terms of 
streamlining process. We have an institution that has served us 
well for most of the last hundred years in this province, but 
there are always ways that we can seek to find a more 
streamlined process and to modernize our Assembly. 
 
Over the last several years, the committee has reported twice to 
this Assembly and has sought changes. One of the biggest 
changes that we will now seek in terms of this is to recognize 
the impact that information technology is having on us: our 
ability to communicate with constituents; the fact that we have 
the ability now to put our papers on to the Web sites; for us to 
have streaming video and streaming audio carried across the 
Internet; and our ability through this report to provide the 
members here with the ability to access Internet while in the 
Chamber I think is very significant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that I think it’s important to 
recognize that while these are probably and have been 
characterized as perhaps the most significant changes to the 
way our legislature works since 1905, that they do in fact build 
on a strong record of democratic reforms that we have taken as 
members in this Assembly over the last decade in particular. 
And I think the public may be interested to know in terms of the 
approach that all parties have taken in this Assembly to moving 
forward with democratic reform. 
 
It’s hard to believe that it was just 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker, 
that we were debating whether or not the provincial budget 
should come down before the end of the fiscal year. This 
change has come into place. The budgets are now routinely 
presented before the end of the fiscal year. 
 
We have talked about and provided for the timely release of 
Public Accounts, which unfortunately fell out of favour during 
the 1980s. We’ve strengthened the support for the auditor’s 
office and the Ombudsman. We’ve undertaken Human Rights 
Commission reform. 
 

The fact that today we have province-wide TV and radio 
coverage is a democratic reform undertaken by this Assembly 
during the past decade. Other parties and our party have called 
for independent electoral boundaries commissions. I think it’s 
important to note that this Assembly has in fact acted on that, 
and we have changed our boundaries in accordance with 
independent review. 
 
We’ve enhanced the role for private members in this, and 
indeed this report we’re presenting today will further strengthen 
that by providing a more active role for private members on 
both sides of the House to engage in policy discussion, to have 
a more active role in legislation, in the study of Bills, and in the 
review of estimates and regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that you are elected by the members of 
this Assembly, as is the Deputy Speaker, is another democratic 
reform initiative that’s been enhanced over the last 10 years. 
There was a time when it was a pro forma motion to appoint the 
Speaker and as I think we all know, we have had in recent years 
contested elections for the Deputy Speaker’s position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen the strength of other reforms in 
terms of providing timely by-elections. We’ve seen the benefits 
of this government’s decision to implement a Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act. We have balanced 
budget legislation. We’ve got utility rate review process. 
 
Not all of these, may I say, Mr. Speaker, not all of these ideas 
come only from the governing party, from the NDP (New 
Democratic Party), but in fact the result is from work from 
other parties also. 
 
These are reforms that I think all members should be proud of 
because they do change the way that we have moved forward. 
 
I think that the reforms that are being proposed today that have 
been recommended by the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures, with strong bipartisan support, really do take us in a 
new and exciting direction and build on the strength of what 
we’ve seen. 
 
As such, Mr. Speaker, I want to move, seconded by the member 
for Cannington: 
 

That the third report of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures be now concurred in. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a privilege to stand today to comment on the new 
rules and procedures that are being presented to the House by 
the Rules and Procedures Committee. 
 
This project has been in the works for a considerable period of 
time. In fact I looked back on the Internet to see when we held 
our first meeting, and it was on December 17, 1999, Mr. 
Speaker, so three and a half years ago. Three and a half years 
it’s taken to sit down and work through the rules dealing with 
the legislature. 
 
The decision made early by the committee was that we would 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

 

emphasize, we would investigate and come forward with 
recommendations, and the first part dealing with two areas. And 
those areas, Mr. Speaker, were committees of the legislature 
and private members’ day. 
 
And I believe that we have come forward with 
recommendations that reflect the interests of both sides of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, and the needs of both sides of the House. 
Regardless of which party is in government and which party is 
in opposition, Mr. Speaker, these rules are, I believe, going to 
reflect fairly on the needs and aspirations of both groups, 
government and opposition, regardless of the parties. 
 
One of the items that it allows, Mr. Speaker, is indeed more 
participation by the public. Whenever legislation is presented to 
the Assembly, basically it’s a fait accompli. The government, 
because of the majority they have, have the ability to drive that 
particular piece of legislation through. And the public, who are 
just finding out about any particular piece of legislation, have 
very limited opportunities to have any input into this. 
 
Now it’s always hoped that the governing party has discussed 
the issue, the piece of legislation with the concerned 
stakeholders. But sometimes the general public has an interest 
in the issue as well and want to have an opportunity to have 
their ideas heard and have some input. 
 
These recommendations, Mr. Speaker, when implemented, will 
have that opportunity for the public to come forward and have a 
say during the committee sessions. I believe that’s a major 
change for most legislatures across Canada, that we will be in 
the forefront of legislative change when we implement these 
rules, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We took a look as a committee at the best practices we could 
find across the Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker, in those 
jurisdictions we felt that had a similar system to our own and 
that would serve the people of Saskatchewan to the most 
appropriate manner. And we believe that the recommendations 
coming forward from the Rules and Procedures Committee do 
provide that opportunity. 
 
(13:45) 
 
You know, when you just take a look at our Web site, Mr. 
Speaker, and you look at our committee system, you would 
think that we have a very good and strong committee system. 
Well appearances, Mr. Speaker, do not belie reality. 
 
We, actual fact, Mr. Speaker, have many committees that never 
sit — that have not sat for 20, 30, 40, 50 years. We have a 
number of committees, Mr. Speaker, that sit rarely in that time 
period. 
 
We have some committees that are very active and are very 
strong, Mr. Speaker, such as Public Accounts, Crown 
Corporations. We have the committees that do work during 
session, such as Private Members’ Bills, the Committee on 
Regulations, Mr. Speaker, and those were doing the job. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we believe as a committee that there was a 
role for all of the members of the legislature to play within the 
structure, and these rules allow for that, Mr. Speaker. 

Also the second part of the report, Mr. Speaker, is private 
members’ day. Private members’ day was becoming irrelevant, 
Mr. Speaker, because while motions were presented, they never 
had a resolution. The changes that we are presenting, Mr. 
Speaker, allow for both private members’ Bills and private 
members’ motions to have a resolution. They’re voted on, Mr. 
Speaker — yea or nay — and a decision is made. They’re not 
just simply presented and then lost in limbo. And we believe 
that that is going to provide a benefit for members on both sides 
of the House. 
 
There were many flaws in the rules of our Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, and those flaws were certainly seen in the 1980s and 
they were seen as well in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
why this committee was struck in 1999, to review all of the 
failures in the rules that this House was operating under. The 
lack of ability by members of this Assembly to participate fully 
as members was recognized and these recommendations move 
us down that road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A number of our committees, committees other than the 
Committee of the Whole and Committee of Finance which sat 
on the floor of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, were rarely, if ever, 
broadcast. We’ve had two or three examples in the last few 
years where committee work outside of the legislature was 
broadcast. Now, Mr. Speaker, all the committee work will have 
the opportunity to be broadcast. 
 
And we need, Mr. Speaker, to provide that opportunity for the 
public to see and understand the work of the legislature. I 
believe that’s a large part of the democratization of this 
Assembly, and providing the ability of the public to see and 
understand legislation and estimates by viewing it from the 
beginning, the introduction, to its closure, Mr. Speaker, on the 
final vote. 
 
And that helps people understand the work of the Assembly. It 
helps them to understand that the work of the legislature isn’t 
simply the 25 minutes of question period that is generally 
reported, Mr. Speaker, throughout the media of this province. I 
think it’s going to be very helpful for us as legislatures in 
dealing with our constituents, if they understand the process 
better. 
 
One of the new changes that wasn’t even envisioned, Mr. 
Speaker, when we started this Rules and Procedures Committee 
was the idea of Internet in the Assembly. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
again another enhancement that we need to move forward with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we need to support this motion 
to move forward the new rules of this legislature. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
recommendations before us do indeed represent some needed 
reform, but I think we should be alive to the fact that this House 
has lagged behind other parliaments and there’s much more that 
needs to be done. 
 
Some of the things that need to be done are matters of practice 
as opposed to rules. For example, as I’m sure the Leader of the 
Opposition can attest, in the federal government, standing 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

committees routinely examine legislation and have hearings on 
legislation prior to debate in the House of Commons. 
 
Recently I appeared before the standing committee on Indian 
affairs, northern Canada examining the proposed new treaty 
governance Act. The good thing of this is that they hear from 
stakeholders and interested parties. Party discipline tends to be 
much weaker at the committee level, and input is received from 
members of all parties, including government backbenchers. 
 
This has not been the practice in our House of course where 
typically the opposition does not see draft legislation until it 
reaches the floor of this House. 
 
In our committees, legislation is rarely, if ever, referred to them. 
And party discipline in our committees has been absolute and 
the federal government party discipline at the committee level is 
not absolute. And I think that is another reform that needs to be 
looked at. 
 
In the province, stakeholders are consulted about proposed 
government legislation but typically on a promise of 
confidentiality. In most cases there simply is no reason for that 
confidentiality and secrecy. There’s absolutely no reason why 
some of the proposed policy changes could not be debated in 
standing committee where opposition and government members 
together could receive input, where government members could 
feel free to offer views that may not be completely on par with 
those of the cabinets. 
 
So I think these are reforms, these are improvements. I support 
them, but I believe that they should be viewed as a first step 
rather than a final step. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
By leave of the Assembly I have some additional motions from 
the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. 
 
By leave I would move, seconded by the member for 
Cannington: 
 

That the modifications and amendments to the practices 
and rules of the Legislative Assembly, as specified in the 
appendix to the third report of the Special Committee of 
Rules and Procedures be adopted and; 
 
That when the said practices and rules are implemented by 
the Legislative Assembly, they be incorporated into the 
rules and procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan as soon as is practicable, and further; 
 
That upon implementation, the Clerk takes steps to ensure 
the rules and procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan are made, printed, and republished in 
English and French as expeditiously as possible upon. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Cannington. 
 
Leave granted. 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Wireless Access to Internet 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would seek 
leave to move, seconded by the member for Cannington: 
 

That in the interim period before refurbishment of the 
Chamber and technology upgrades can provide a more 
secure environment, the Legislative Assembly shall provide 
wireless access to the Internet from the Chamber and 
members’ lounges, and that the said access be in place as 
soon as possible during 2003 spring session. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Amendment to Order of Reference for the 
Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
By leave of the Assembly, I would move, seconded by the 
member for Cannington: 
 

That the order of reference for the Special Committee on 
Regulations be amended to provide a deadline for a final 
report, which shall be no later than 30 sitting days past the 
date of implementation of the new rules recommended in 
the third report of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures by the Assembly. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Redirection of Committee Business 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
the enthusiasm of members for all these motions that we are 
moving. 
 
I seek leave to move one final motion on behalf of the 
committee. I move, seconded by the member for Cannington: 
 

That any outstanding business identified by the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations in its fourth report be 
redirected to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies at such time as the Assembly implements 
the new rules recommended in the third report of the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: is any money paid out to 
the farmers who purchased crop insurance in the rainfall 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

 

pilot program of last year, 2002-03, in the forage side and 
grain side, and what was that amount? 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 
day no. 18 I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: since tobacco taxes were raised 
in the 2002-2003 budget, what has been the percentage 
increase or decrease in: (1) sales of taxable tobacco 
products; (2) sales of non-taxable tobacco products? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Health minister: in light of yesterday’s 
announcement for 500,000 in funding for planning and 
evaluation for a new regional hospital in Swift Current, has 
the government also formally approved its 65 per cent 
share of the funding for the actual costs of the new 
hospital? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
shall give notice on day no. 18 . . . ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization: how much money did the producers of 
Saskatchewan receive from the $6 million transition fund 
announced by the federal government in the year 2002? 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I shall give notice that on day 
18 I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: in 
reference to the commitment made by the Premier in the 
wake of the SPUDCO affair that all potential CIC 
investments will require a third party review, is the 
mechanism for such a review process in place; what is that 
mechanism; how many potential CIC investments have 
undergone such a review; and how many have been 
rejected after such a third party review? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like 
to introduce to you a constituent of mine. Seated in your gallery 
is Larry Johnson. Larry is from Estevan and he is here waiting 
for a load of vehicles to arrive in this city so he can transport 
them back to Estevan. 
 
So I hope you enjoy your stay here, Larry, today and enjoy the 
proceedings. And I also hope that you have a safe journey back 
to Estevan. 
 
I ask all members to please join me in welcoming Larry here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Sexual Harassment in the Workplace 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to address an issue that my colleagues in the 
Saskatchewan Party are extremely concerned about. That issue, 
Mr. Speaker, is workplace harassment, and more specifically 
sexual harassment. 
 
The events of the last few days have resulted in some very 
insightful and meaningful discussions on sexual harassment at 
our caucus table, in our offices, and our communities at large. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes that any kind of sexual 
harassment is unconscionable behaviour. The Saskatchewan 
Party believes that every citizen has the right to work in a 
non-hostile environment in which they are free from 
intimidation or coercion from colleagues or those in a 
supervisory role. It is disgusting and deplorable when someone 
abuses his or her power to sexually harass and bully a 
colleague. 
 
It is important to ensure those accused of sexual harassment are 
afforded due process. It is equally important that victims of 
sexual harassment have closure and peace of mind that 
appropriate action has been taken. 
 
Victims of sexual harassment must have confidence that their 
complaints are taken seriously and that there is a process in 
place that works and is being followed. Punishment must be 
meted out appropriately in relation to the offences and as 
expeditiously as possible so that victims can begin the healing 
process. 
 
Sexual harassment is completely unacceptable and we must 
work to ensure its elimination from the workplace. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Province Fulfills Commitment to Fix Roads 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the title 
of this member’s statement is province fulfills commitment to 
fix the roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in keeping with this government’s tradition of 
meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people while managing the 
province’s finances responsibly, we’re investing $292.6 million 
in highway improvements in fulfilling our three-year, $900 
million commitment to renew the transportation infrastructure 
in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that it’s imperative that we have a 
highway system that enables us to capitalize on our 
opportunities and therefore we’re accelerating the twinning of 
Highway No. 1 East and West and Highway 16 West. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re investing more than $90 million over 
three years to finish upgrading 450 kilometres of highways in 
rural corridors to support movement of commodities in 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

agriculture, gas, and oil industries. 
 
We’re finishing 30 kilometres of Highway 6 between Regina 
and the US (United States) border to support increased trucking 
along that corridor and we’re continuing to rebuild sections of 
northern highways to support the forestry industry as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition just can’t contain their excitement 
about us fixing the highways. Building a strong and competitive 
transportation infrastructure is part of this government’s plan to 
build Saskatchewan’s future. And with our vision and our plan, 
Mr. Speaker, the future of this province is indeed wide open. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Watrous Wildcats Provincial 2A Champions 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
honoured today to rise in the legislature to offer my personal 
congratulations to all the players and coaches of the Watrous 
Winston High School senior basketball team. On March 22 in 
Saskatoon, the team captured the provincial gold medals in its 
first-ever provincial basketball championship. 
 
Hoopla 2003, the Saskatchewan high school provincial 
basketball championship, proved to be a victorious tournament 
for the Watrous Winston Wildcats playing at the 2A provincial 
level. 
 
This team had fought hard for the wins which then advanced 
them to the number three ranking of the final four teams at the 
Saskatoon event. They then went on to defeat the number two 
ranked team from Birch Hills in the semi finals and completed 
the sweep with a final victory over the number one ranked 
Porcupine Plain Bears. 
 
Team coaches Darren Holland and Ralph Eliasson are 
extremely pleased with the team’s victory and great 
performance throughout the season. Mr. Eliasson said that the 
team won 32 of their 41 regular season games; were led by the 
four top scorers including Chas Potter, Kevin Sundquist, 
Mitchell Eliasson, and Andrew Penrose. 
 
Coach Eliasson said: 
 

I’ve been coaching this team since the grade 8 level and 
I’m retiring from coaching this year. Winning provincials is 
a great way for our team to end (this session . . . or end) the 
season. 

 
I would ask that all members join me congratulating the 
Watrous Wildcats and their gold medal provincial 
championship. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regional Economic Development Authorities 
in Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the strength of grassroots 
business and community development is due in large part to the 
activity of the regional economic development authorities. 
 

There are 28 REDAs (regional economic development 
authority) in the province, Mr. Speaker, developing and 
promoting the economic strengths of their regions. They 
represent collaboration among local governments, businesses, 
co-operatives, and First Nations. 
 
REDAs successfully promote local economic opportunities and 
support the work of entrepreneurs seeking to build businesses in 
Saskatchewan. They are shining examples of the partnerships 
that are building our economy. 
 
The REDA program was established in 1993. Under the 
program, the government provides each REDA with cost-shared 
operating funding to a maximum of 60,000 per year. REDAs 
can also access additional funding for youth employment, joint 
initiatives with other REDAs, and regional infrastructure 
projects. 
 
REDAs offer communities the opportunity to create jobs based 
on the strength of their regions. REDAs enable the projects that 
create jobs in many sectors — tourism, technology, 
manufacturing, and agri-value, to name a few. 
 
This government is proud to support local businesses through 
grants to REDA network, something apparently Sask Party 
policy does not embrace. They have a slogan bred by a 
right-wing agenda which ignores the realities of the 
Saskatchewan experience. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan and it’s 
working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kindersley Students Advance to 
Canada-Wide Science Fair 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Kindersley is 
home to two outstanding students who will be travelling, all 
expenses paid, to Calgary to compete in the Canada-Wide 
Science Fair in May. Sean Hillacre and Megan Olivier of 
Wendy Johnson’s grade 7 class at Westberry School were 
selected by a panel of judges at the regional science fair held in 
Leader on March 20. 
 
These projects were chosen from 230 displays by grade 7 to 12 
students from Leader, Beechy, Coleville, Kindersley, 
Richmound, and Plenty. Sean’s project, a study on cloning 
entitled, Just Cloning Around, earned him a second-place finish, 
and Megan’s display was entitled, Sink or Swim, and placed 
third. It explained the effects of different oils on plants and fish. 
 
Twelve of Ms. Johnson’s students took part in the fair and six 
of ten cash prizes to junior students went to her grade 7 class. 
Ms. Johnson said the entries required a lot of hard work by the 
students and they learned so much. She said it’s great that they 
are recognized for their efforts. The science fair really stressed 
the scientific method, which leads them through the research 
and guides them in gathering useful information. They can 
choose from a study, an innovation, or an experiment. 
 
The content at the science fairs have improved over the last 
number of years. The topics have become more sophisticated 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

 

due in a large part to access to technology. There are 12 
regional science fairs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Please join me in congratulating these inspiring young people 
on their achievements and wishing them great success in 
Calgary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investing in Northern Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, more good news from northern 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this government’s northern 
strategy is an integral part of our vision to build a strong future 
for this province with opportunity for all. 
 
Our focus in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, continues to 
be supporting the development of strong, vibrant communities; 
healthy, self-reliant families; and on creating opportunities for 
our young people. 
 
With these goals in mind, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
increased northern revenue-sharing grants to northern 
municipalities from $5.2 million to almost $6 million. We have 
allocated half a million dollars to northern health authorities for 
implementation of a northern health initiative. We have 
allocated 2.1 million for training spaces provided under the 
northern skills training program, and a further almost half a 
million dollars for additional training spaces provided under the 
northern health access program. We have increased funding for 
economic development, education, infrastructure, and housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are listening to northerners and building strong 
partnerships with them. Our policy, budget, and action are open 
and inclusive of people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Public Library Definition Derby 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Regina 
Public Library is an organization that is committed to providing 
services that build literacy and promote lifelong learning. As 
part of this mandate, they have organized a dynamic event to 
promote literacy and I was very pleased to attend this function 
last night. 
 
The Regina Public Library Definition Derby is a game-style 
event in which Regina media, business, and community 
organizations compete in a battle of word wisdom. Teams are 
asked to define the meaning behind a variety of different words, 
words that sound so foreign that it is difficult to believe that 
they’re actually from the English language, let alone from the 
Webster dictionary. 
 
What this event demonstrates, Mr. Speaker, is the unfamiliar 
world the English language is to thousands of Canadians who 
live in our country and who function with a limited or very low 
literacy level. The written word, the spoken word, even 
computer literacy can be like a foreign language to many 
Canadians. 
 
Literacy levels affect the jobs we get, shopping, driving, and 

finding an address, even the books we can read to our children. 
Literacy is the foundation of social and economic well-being in 
our community. Regina Public Library currently has over 250 
tutors matched with learners in Regina, but hundreds more are 
waiting to be matched with a tutor. 
 
The Definition Derby is much more than a game show. It is an 
event that successfully promotes awareness of workplace 
education and literacy issues. 
 
Literacy, make it your business. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Reaction to Harassment Allegations 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Public Service 
Commission. Mr. Speaker, yesterday and again today, the 
minister has commented to the media on the case of Murdoch 
Carriere. 
 
This morning on the John Gormley show, the minister was 
asked if the deputy minister, who was responsible for this 
discipline, fell short of what he should have done originally. 
The minister said, and I quote: 
 

I think the complicating factor in the department was that 
the person has worked for 32 years and was very, 
considered very, very good at their job. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government claims to have a zero tolerance 
policy towards sexual harassment. And the findings of the 
independent investigator state that harassment did occur both in 
terms of abuse of authority and in terms of inappropriate sexual 
behaviour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the investigator’s findings and the 
government’s policy, why did Mr. Carriere’s work record take 
precedence in the initial decision by the deputy minister of 
Environment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My purpose 
in reviewing this report was to determine whether the decision 
made affected our policy intent of zero tolerance. It was my 
determination that it didn’t. 
 
And what I do feel is that we do need to provide stronger 
direction on when the situation is serious enough that the zero 
tolerance overrides work record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, during her comments, the minister 
went on to say that the deputy minister and I quote: 
 

. . . had to make a determination whether the knowledge 
and skill and whatnot . . . 
 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

that that employee brought to the job was overridden by his 
behaviour. 
 

And as a result of the story breaking in The StarPhoenix and the 
minister’s review of the case since, it is very obvious to the 
people of Saskatchewan that the wrong decision was made 
initially. Yet today the minister is still suggesting that this 
man’s employment record had more influence than the fact he 
sexually harassed and abused six women over many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister read the report and determined that 
Mr. Carriere should be fired for his actions. Why is this minister 
still making excuses for the decision by the deputy minister and 
speaking so highly of Mr. Carriere’s work, when over the last 
decade he has sexually harassed fellow employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, it must be a wonderful 
thing to be able to see the world in such black and white terms, 
but I have to say that in a responsible public service we respect 
the contributions that people make when they dedicate their 
entire lives to the public service. 
 
I think what’s important is that in this instance when the matter 
came to my attention, I determined that we had a policy that 
took precedence over our desire to always pursue constructive 
discipline. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the policy of zero tolerance overrode the 
policy of constructive discipline. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has also said to the 
media that the number of complaints in this case influenced her 
decision to recommend that Mr. Carriere be terminated from 
employment with this government. The minister said, and I 
quote: 
 

I felt the volume of complaints, because you know you 
might sometimes have a complaint or a couple of 
complaints . . . 
 
But to have this volume of complaints and the seriousness 
of complaints . . . 
 
I felt that in order for people to understand that we were 
serious about zero tolerance, that firing was the only 
possible conclusion. 

 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister suggesting — that one 
complaint isn’t enough? Mr. Speaker, if this government is 
serious about zero tolerance policy, why should the volume of 
complaints have to be high before a decision is made to 
terminate an employee found guilty of sexual harassment and 
abuse of authority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

revealing a serious shortfall of knowledge in this area because 
there is a wide range of things that may be considered 
harassment — a wide range. Some of those are people not 
understanding that other people have different values than they 
do; some is not understanding that people feel different about 
things . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order, 
please, members. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now first of all I’m going to say that I 
will ask the member opposite, does she or does she not support 
the decision I made? I think that’s very pertinent because there 
are two standards we’re meeting here, Mr. Speaker. One 
standard is, did the harassment stop? Was the person removed 
from the ability to harass? That’s the first standard. 
 
And the second standard is, does it meet the standard of zero 
tolerance? And zero tolerance is related both to the level of the 
situation as well as the intensity of the situation. So I know it’s 
difficult to actually have to think about some of these other 
factors, but at the end of the day I thought about all those other 
factors and then made a decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very 
pleased to answer the minister regarding her question on 
whether I eventually did approve of her decision. The answer 
was, yes; the minister knows that. That decision was made 
though, after the government was caught not making the proper 
decision in the first place. Mr. Speaker, . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the minister made a statement just 
now in the House talking about not everybody has the same 
values as what the government does. Well I want to tell the 
minister today, I want to tell the minister today, that the women 
who were victimized by Mr. Carriere would certainly have 
expected that this government valued one of them, as well as 
six of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, under The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act it’s a requirement that every workplace 
in this province have an anti-harassment policy. And I would 
ask today that the Sask Party please table theirs with the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It now appears 
that the government and Saskatchewan taxpayers may be in 
some legal jeopardy over its handling of this sexual harassment 
case. 
 
These probably wouldn’t be much . . . There probably wouldn’t 
be much grounds for wrongful dismissal if the NDP had 
handled it correctly and fired Mr. Carriere in the first place. The 
problem is that they didn’t fire him. They instead made him a 
special adviser to the government and sent out a memo praising 
him for the excellent job he’s been doing. That probably opens 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

 

up the government to legal action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP mismanaged its own sexual 
harassment policy so badly that it may now face a costly legal 
action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, facts have become known 
related to this case this week that has brought a different result 
with respect to this case, as has been outlined in this House. 
 
Whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan will be made 
the subject of a civil lawsuit by Mr. Carriere remains to be seen. 
In the event that there is a lawsuit against the Government of 
Saskatchewan, it will be the position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan that the termination of Mr. Carriere was justified. 
We will defend that position vigorously in the courts. And in 
due course, Mr. Speaker, the courts will make the 
determination. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing that’s 
different about the events of this week is that now the public 
knows what the government has known for quite some time. It’s 
quite different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the question that most people in 
Saskatchewan are asking is, why did the NDP government 
initially decide to protect a sexual harasser? 
 
Now the Premier has promised to review how this happened. In 
particular he’s going to review the actions of Terry Scott and 
the initial decision — that wrong decision, Mr. Speaker — not 
to fire Mr. Carriere and make him a special adviser to the 
government. This Premier’s getting a lot of experience lately 
reviewing his government’s mistakes. 
 
Will the Premier please tell the people of Saskatchewan today 
what will be the terms of this review; how long will it take; and 
will he make the results known to the public like he did with the 
review of the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will be personally, with 
my most senior officials, reviewing the process of decision 
making and the processes around complaints of sexual 
harassment and other violations of the workplace and, in 
specific, with regard to the decision that was made that when 
reviewed by the policy-makers of this government we felt was 
not the appropriate decision. I’m doing that, I will do it 
expeditiously, and I will be obviously speaking to members of 
the press or to members of the legislature about my finding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, according to some of the 
victims, Mr. Carriere would often intimidate his victims by 
citing his political . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please. Order, 
please. I’d ask the members not to interfere with the question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Carriere 
would often intimidate his victims by citing his political 
connections to the NDP government and saying that he has 
fired people in the past. Now I’m not sure exactly what these 
political connections are other than what I’ve read in The 
StarPhoenix where it was reported that he’s related to the NDP 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are wondering how an experienced civil 
servant like Terry Scott could have made such a bad, bad 
decision to protect a sexual harasser. As part of the current 
review that the Premier has committed to take, the people of 
Saskatchewan want to know, will the Premier commit to 
examine whether anyone, anyone in his government, intervened 
in the Murdoch . . . intervened on Mr. Murdoch Carriere’s 
behalf to save his job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Please, members, take note of the 
accusation that’s being made in the Leader of the Opposition’s 
comments here. Please take note. He is suggesting that a senior 
public servant in Saskatchewan was influenced or directed by a 
member of government to come to that decision. That is the 
accusation that he is making. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I invite that Leader of the Opposition to go 
out into the corridor and make that accusation. Mr. Speaker, the 
senior public service of the province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — My knowledge of the senior public civic 
servant in Saskatchewan, in fact the entire public service in 
Saskatchewan, is a professional public service who, when they 
take decisions and make decisions and implement decisions, 
will be based on the best of their knowledge and the best of 
their ability and not, not, Mr. Speaker, on political influence 
other than representing the policy of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I make no accusation. I 
asked a question. The NDP, the NDP doesn’t want the Leader 
of the Opposition to ask a question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m almost 
feeling a little harassed myself here by the NDP. 
 
I make no accusation; I simply asked a question. People want to 
know . . . they want some assurance that there was no political 
influence by the NDP in the initial decision to save Mr. 
Murdoch Carriere’s job. That’s what they want to know. 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

And this is a legitimate question because he is reported, he is 
reported publicly by the media to have used his political 
connections to intimidate his victims. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because he is apparently related to an NDP MLA, 
this is relevant. It’s a legitimate question, one we ask because 
the initial decision not to fire Mr. Carriere makes so little sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier’s review simply ask the question, 
simply ask the question, did anyone in the NDP government 
intervene on Murdoch Carriere’s behalf? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . to note again the implication of that 
question. The implication of that question is to suggest the 
deputy minister of Environment would be influenced by a 
political instruction from this government. That is the 
implication. And if this Leader of the Opposition wants to go 
out into that corridor and suggest that this career public servant 
would take a decision about a matter of this significance based 
on political instruction, I invite him to say that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is little wonder that he would suggest this. It’s 
little wonder that he would suggest this today because it’s not 
long ago that Leader of the Opposition made very clear his view 
of the public service of Saskatchewan. When asked about the 
public service, he said the following: 
 

Before I agreed to run for the leadership I asked the MLAs: 
“Do you know who the deadwood are? Do you know who 
the skunks are?” (And) . . . They assured me they know 
who those people are. 

 
That’s his view of the senior public service of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP hand-picked president of SaskTel, Mr. Ching, made 
some clear statements about how SaskTel decides to make its 
investments. He said pretty clearly on the news that I saw that 
they will not make an investment unless there is a business case 
for that investment, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
has gambled $25 million on a high-risk US dot-com in Atlanta, 
Georgia called Retx.com. 
 
Now according to SaskTel’s most recent annual report, the 
NDP looks like they’ve lost about 7.5 million in taxpayers’ 
dollars in their Retx investment. They invested 25 million, 
they’ve lost 7 million, and we understand the losses continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what NDP business case was made to make this 
SaskTel investment in Atlanta, Georgia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let me 
say this first of all. SaskTel over the last number of years, since 
1987 roughly, has invested two and a half billion dollars, Mr. 
Speaker — I repeat, billion dollars — here in Saskatchewan for 

the benefit of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, what was said 
yesterday is absolutely accurate. They will not make an 
investment until a business case is presented and until they’ve 
done due diligence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me get to the heart of this real question, Mr. Speaker. 
The heart of this question is all about, Mr. Speaker, discrediting 
the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, so that they can put themselves in a 
position if they ever form government so they can sell these 
Crowns. Mr. Speaker, they have one single agenda — that’s sell 
the Crowns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what the minister 
should know is what this is all about is holding this NDP 
government to account for its irresponsible and risky 
investments all around the globe, Mr. Speaker. The truth of the 
matter is, is that when SaskTel keeps its eye on the ball in the 
province of Saskatchewan, it’s successful. It’s when this 
government — this NDP government — risks millions of 
dollars around the world and across Canada, that’s when we get 
into trouble, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another example of this is Persona Inc.. That’s an 
NDP stock market play. They acquired about 7 per cent of this 
Newfoundland company in 2000 — 1.2 million shares at a price 
of $12 a share. Well yesterday, Mr. Speaker, Persona was 
trading on the TSX at $4.20. That means on the share value 
taxpayers have lost another $9.5 million. 
 
So again, the question in light of Mr. Ching’s comment 
yesterday is this: what NDP business case was made to make 
this SaskTel stock market play investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that 
member can bob and he can weave and he can poke and he can 
jab but the point is, Mr. Speaker, the point is — the point is — 
is that SaskTel does a very good job for the people of 
Saskatchewan. They are over $100 million to the good, Mr. 
Speaker, on their investments. So that member can pick out 
losses in companies that are start-up losses, Mr. Speaker. Many 
of them will prove, I predict, Mr. Speaker, to be good 
investments for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The point is they have one agenda: privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m going to refer to a quote if I could from The Outlook, 
Mr. Speaker. February 17, 2003 and I quote. It says: 
 

But it is no secret the Sask. Party wants to rid the province 
of most Crown corporations, however, (and I quote) Brkich 
said the “core Crowns” — such as Sask Water, SaskPower, 
SaskTel and SGI — will be treated differently than the 
other “treasurey Crowns”, which (and listen to this) would 
not be sold off immediately, but when the selling price 
would reap the “best bang for the buck.” 

 
So the point is timing. 
 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

 

Closure of North Battleford Residential Facility 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are nine men 
residing in a halfway house in North Battleford who are 
halfway through a sexual offender treatment program. They 
have been told that the halfway house is to be closed and they 
are to be out by April 18. Their program is supposed to run until 
the end of June. 
 
The leaders of that program are afraid that these men will drift 
away and drift back to their home communities in northern 
Saskatchewan without completing their sex offender treatment 
program. The government has been contacted and to date has 
refused to make any alternate arrangements. 
 
My question for the minister: why is the halfway house being 
closed now in the middle of this sex offender treatment program 
and no arrangements being made for the inmates therein? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the 
member is better at fearmongering than he is at getting his facts 
straight. The fact is, is that of course we have a overcapacity 
within the CTR (community-training residence) system. We 
will be adjusting that as part of this budget. 
 
But I want to say very clearly, as it pertains to those people in 
the facility that are receiving sex offender treatment, that are 
there on either probationary order or conditional sentences, 
conditional sentences and probationary orders will be obeyed. 
And we will continue to work with the prosecutors and the 
court system to make sure that these people receive appropriate 
training. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is right, that the 
order that they continue their treatment program is still in place, 
but the judge’s order that they reside at the halfway house is 
not. And these people are not from North Battleford. They have 
no connections there. They now have no accommodation. 
They’re to be out on the street by April 18. 
 
The government has been contacted several times to say what is 
to happen to these men, where are they to go, where are they to 
stay. And the government has refused to make any provision for 
them, to make any arrangements. They’re going to be on the 
street. The chances that they are simply going to drift away is 
very, very strong. 
 
Why will the minister not commit to leaving the sex offender 
treatment program in place, a component of which is a place for 
these men to live and reside while it’s on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the member is asking me 
why we won’t leave the community-training residence in North 
Battleford open. I have answered that, that they have other 
spaces that can be dealt with throughout the province and they 
will be. Where we can offer this programming in other centres, 
and we do offer the programming in other centres, it will be 
dealt with. 
 
And the member should be aware of that and should be very 
cautious in this fearmongering that I see on CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) Radio and I hear in the House today. 
This is inappropriate, Mr. Speaker, because the court orders are 
very clear and the probation orders are very clear. And where 
they’re necessary, we will make sure that on a case-by-case 
basis, that each of these individuals will be dealt with 
appropriately, they will have the process in place and the 
member opposite can be assured of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the only medium-security 
sex offender treatment program in the province of 
Saskatchewan. A component of that program is that the men are 
in a halfway house where they’re being monitored and they are 
in at least a semi-secure environment so we know where they 
are and the leaders of the program can continue with them. 
 
The leaders of the program are asking, will you make provision 
so we know the men are being watched, they’re in at night, we 
know they’ll be at their program in the morning? The minister 
refuses to say what will be done, and he accuses me of 
fearmongering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not fearmongering to say, what is to become 
of these men who the minister has told are out on the street on 
April 18 with their program only half completed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is fearmongering 
to say that these people will be turned out on the streets. The 
courts have dealt with them. They have ordered programming. 
It is inappropriate and incorrect to say that there is no other 
programming available in the province. That is not true, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it is interesting to note, in fact, that for the past year this 
program has not even been offered in North Battleford. His 
concern is not well founded. 
 
We are going to make sure that every single person affected — 
not just in this community-training residence; the one in 
Regina, and in the . . . (inaudible) . . . Waden Bay — are dealt 
with appropriately. 
 
The member should be assured that we will deal with every 
single member, every single individual that’s involved, and they 
will receive the appropriate court-ordered treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, please, members. Order, order. Members 
. . . I would ask all members. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions 14 through 36 inclusive. 
 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

And just mentioning, the members opposite are now picking up 
the workload a little bit. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 14 through to question 
36 inclusive have been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 
amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to put on record some of my concerns and the concerns of my 
constituents about the budget. I think the way the budget is 
presented and some of the debate, I think that it’s not clear to 
the people back home how a budget and how the deficit and 
debt affects them in their communities and the service clubs 
that they belong to and the farms and businesses — and how 
that all affects them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we have seen, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a fictitious budget. 
The budget is not balanced even though the government of the 
day tries to hide a deficit through various examples — trying to 
dip into the so-called Fiscal Stabilization Fund, which does not 
exist, and also taking money out of the Crowns to hide their 
deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting when the government has 
been adding hundreds of millions of dollars onto the debt, what 
that does to the budget. As we see, the cost of servicing this 
huge debt is now $650 million a year. That’s the third-highest 
expenditure of this government. Health is approximately $2.52 
billion and Learning department is just over $1 billion in 
relationship to a $650 million servicing charge that the 
taxpayers of this province has to make up because of the 
growing debt of this government. 
 
As we see, the overall debt has risen to $12.2 billion now. In 
1991 the debt was $12.1 billion. So today’s debt is higher today 
than it was when Mr. Romanow took over in 1991. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that there’s always a 
great debate about where this debt came from. And as now, 
history shows us that a considerable amount of this debt that the 
province has was incurred during the Blakeney years. And of 
course through the 1980s more debt was added on. Well into 
1993-94 there was more debt added on under the NDP. And we 
have to give some credit to the . . . to Mr. Romanow and his 
government of the day that he did start reducing debt, did have 
balanced budgets. 
 
But what we’ve seen since the present Premier came into office 
— even though he wasn’t elected Premier; he assumed the role 
of Premier in this province by becoming the Leader of the NDP 
— and since the Premier came into office, there’s been $1.1 
billion further debt added to the provincial economy. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious point. Even the former 
Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, has wrote in articles and 
in her book that she has recently released that this is a serious 
concern to her and a serious concern to many economists and 
the people around Saskatchewan. Because as we have a 
growing debt, we have a growing service charge, and this really 
takes . . . Look all the things we could do with this $650 million 
if we could put it into health or into education or into rural 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is based on a 6.8 per cent economic 
growth for the province. And by all accounts, this is a number 
that is not accepted by forecasters — either private forecasters 
or government forecasters — anywhere in the country. The 
range of economic growth that is projected in Canada is 
anywhere from 3 to 4 per cent, and nowhere, no jurisdiction is 
estimating a economic growth of 6.8 per cent. 
 
So you just take that into context if, as we all assume, that the 
growth of Saskatchewan will be someplace around half that — 
3, 4 per cent — what that will do to our deficit. Right now it’s 
about a $500 million deficit. It could reach a $1 billion deficit 
by the end of this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, unless just 
everything turns out perfect in the economy, in agriculture, and 
so on and so forth. And so it’s quite a concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget, as I was mentioning before, since the new Premier 
came to power has been adding $1 million a day to the 
provincial debt. And this is a tremendous burden on the 
economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only just numbers, it’s something that 
really affects people in the day-to-day business. And I’d just 
like to talk about . . . a bit about the agriculture budget. The 
agriculture budget has been cut by $40 million or 14 per cent 
and this reduction comes entirely from farm stability and 
support programs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve just gone through at least two years 
drought in many parts of this province and in the Northwest — 
three, four, five, even six years of drought. And in this very dire 
situation, farm support policies are very important to the 
business people of this province, the farmers of this province. 
And those areas cannot stand the government backing away 
from supporting them in the future by not putting . . . by cutting 
back the Agriculture department. 
 
And of course we have seen the government increase the crop 
insurance premiums by a whopping 52 per cent. So not only the 
Department of Agriculture has been cut back by $40 million, 
we see the crop insurance premiums raised by 52 per cent, 
adding an extra financial burden onto the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One more thing, Mr. Speaker, that is very concerning. The 
government . . . the Premier made an announcement at SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 
that there was going to be a major announcement concerning 
the education portion of the property tax. So what do we see in 
the budget? Well we see that the government of the day is going 
to set up a commission, a committee, to go around and discuss 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

 

the issue. 
 
Well just for the record, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to put it on the 
record a letter from Prairie Pulse Inc., a Vanscoy company. And 
I’d just like to read this. It’s to the village of Vanscoy: 
 

Today we received our tax notices . . . for $60,550.50 from 
the Village of Vanscoy both dated August 7, 2002. We 
regret to inform you that Prairie Pulse Inc. will NOT be 
paying any of these taxes until such time as the Village of 
Vanscoy and the Saskatoon West School Board 
significantly reduce our taxes. 

 
And in the letter it states all the taxes that this company has 
paid. In the year 2000, it paid slightly under $19,000. 2001, it’s 
just about $48,000 and of course 2002, a whopping $65,000. 
The letter goes on: 
 

Our tax burden increased over 251% in 2001 from the year 
2000. Now in 2002 you are increasing our tax burden by 
another 36 per cent over 2001! Over the last two (2) years 
this represents an increased tax burden of more than 342%. 
You can blame the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency all you want. I do not care. In the end you have the 
power to adjust your mill rate, as does the Saskatoon 
(West) School Board. The amount that you are asking us to 
pay is nothing less than criminal! 
 
If the village of Vanscoy feels it necessary to cut all the 
services to Prairie Pulse Inc. — so be it. They only provide 
us with water and sewer! We already have to pay for our 
own garbage removal and the maintenance of our “private 
road”. We can arrange for our own water and sewer within 
one (1) week! We are so upset with the entire matter that 
we are prepared to go to the Supreme Court of Canada for 
justice. I suggest you get spending under control. We are 
willing to pay for our fair share — we just refuse to pay 
MORE than our fair share. 

 
So this is an example what taxation, overburdening taxation 
does on individual families, individual businesses in 
Saskatchewan in the cities and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to make a few comments about the 
Environment. I am the critic of the Environment. I notice, Mr. 
Speaker, that in the budget, Mr. Speaker, there has been a 
considerable decrease in the full-time equivalent staff. In 
2001-2002 there was 25.9. In 2002-2003 it went up to 43.7. 
And now in this year’s budget has dropped dramatically to 20.9, 
a drop of 22.8 full-time equivalent numbers. And there’s a lot of 
questions concerning this drop in the numbers of staff in the 
Environment department. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, have to point out that the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund has basically . . . has disappeared. The fund 
estimated in 2001-2002 was $40 million, Mr. Speaker, and now 
it is gone. So there’s no contingency fund. So I don’t know if 
the government is just crossing their fingers that there isn’t 
going to be any forest fires or what its plan is. 
 
But it certainly has an impact on the books and how the books 
. . . whether they balance or not. And I believe that there’s 
going to have to be money set aside at some point for the forest 

fighting. And I assume it’s going to come out of general 
revenue and it’s not really listed in the budget whatsoever, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another very important item in Saskatchewan is 
the Kyoto accord. Now nowhere in this budget do I see the 
government having set aside any money, or projections, or 
discussions in the Throne Speech or in the budget concerning 
the Kyoto accord. And as we have seen, Mr. Speaker, the 
provincial Department of Industry and Resources estimated 
Kyoto could cost as much as 2.6 billion in economic output by 
2020. 
 
SaskPower estimated that Kyoto would cost the provincial 
power utility as much as 250 million per year. IPSCO, one of 
Saskatchewan’s largest industrial companies, has indicated 
ratification of Kyoto could force the company to move to the 
United States. The Canadian Taxpayers Federation estimates 
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol will cost every family in 
Canada approximately $2,700 per year, and more if they live in 
Saskatchewan or Alberta. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite a concern that the government hasn’t 
done any planning, any foresight, or thinking about the impact 
of the Kyoto accord. And it’s very important that this 
government does some thinking in that area because it’s going 
to potentially cost Western Canada, and especially the oil and 
gas industry, a lot if this accord proceeds as we understand it, or 
as most people don’t understand it — probably the best word to 
put it. We don’t know where this is going. 
 
As we see the federal Liberals . . . when their base of support 
was concerned about the car manufacturing industry in southern 
Ontario, Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberals exempted the 
Ontario’s car manufacturing industry from Kyoto. And so we 
have to look at what this accord will be doing to Western 
Canada, and Saskatchewan in particular, and the western oil and 
gas industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make a few comments on . . . Actually 
last night I went to the Ducks Unlimited banquet and fundraiser. 
And it was interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that part of the 
Ducks Unlimited presentation that we had before the banquet 
and fundraiser was really an explanation of what they do and 
what their goals and dreams are. And one line really stuck out at 
me, and the line goes like this: “Saskatchewan can grow 
Saskatchewan and preserve our natural heritage.” 
 
And I believe that’s fundamental. The Saskatchewan Party has 
been talking about growing Saskatchewan, the plan to grow 
Saskatchewan that the Saskatchewan Party has — and Ducks 
Unlimited also would agree — that we can grow Saskatchewan 
and preserve our natural heritage. And I think the two things 
must go hand in hand together. 
 
I believe that both the environment and our economic base must 
be sustainable; one cannot proceed with the other. And I believe 
working in partnerships with people like Ducks Unlimited and 
other associations, that we can achieve that end result. And I 
think it’s very important that we have partnerships between 
government, agriculture, industry, and the environment, and 
make this province not only a better place to live but also a 
growing economy where we have a growing tax base so we can 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

grow the province and the economy for our children and our 
grandchildren. 
 
Other areas that are a concern in the Environment department is 
the Department of Fisheries and Oceans’ interference in 
Saskatchewan. And it’s interesting. I was sitting with a 
gentleman at the banquet who is . . . belongs to the Ecotourism 
Society of Saskatchewan, and he said he was going to a meeting 
a week today he was saying, he’s meeting with the Canadian 
Coast Guard. And he was meeting with the Canadian Coast 
Guard because of an issue in Saskatchewan, one of 
Saskatchewan’s lakes. And it’s, I mean it’s laughable to think 
that this gentleman has to negotiate with the Canadian Coast 
Guard in Saskatchewan concerning our water and our 
ecotourism potential that we have in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I received, recently received a letter. I have had a 
lot of correspondence with the . . . with this group, and it’s the 
Redberry Regional Economic Development Authority 
Corporation. And I spoke in length other times and it . . . well 
the authority . . . I’ll just read a bit of the letter: 
 

The Redberry Lake area in West Central Saskatchewan was 
designated as a World Biosphere Reserve in 2000 through 
UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Program. The biosphere 
area spans portions of four rural municipalities, one urban 
municipality, and one First Nations reserve. All have 
representation on the Board of Directors of the Biosphere 
Committee. 
 

And the letter goes on about all the good things they’ve been 
doing and the history of the biosphere. And it’s . . . They’ve 
been holding meetings for a number of years and doing a lot of 
work. And they invited out the director of the Sask Ag and 
Food and Rural Revitalization. And this person said that the 
committee has to sell ourselves and our business plan to 
agencies and organizations related to the biosphere reserve. 
 
And all the proposed groups currently have invested in the 
biosphere reserve area and undertaken projects that would 
contribute towards a common goal. They cite Ducks Unlimited, 
natural conservatory of Canada, the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), have put . . . committed funds in that area. 
 
And it’s also interesting that: 
 

The only school located in the biosphere reserve has very 
recently achieved the long-term goal of being accepted to 
participate in the UNESCO Associated Schools Project 
Network (ASPNet). This has been another example of lack 
of support from the provincial government; participation in 
the UNESCO . . . program requires the designation of a 
Provincial Coordinator from the Provincial Department of 
Education, which has not been forthcoming. Letters were 
written to the . . . (then minister and also the current 
minister, and the letter goes on.) We felt that this would 
absolutely meet with their approval and consequently the 
designation of a Provincial Coordinator to oversee the 
program in Saskatchewan would be appointed. Somehow 
they failed to see the merit in this and chose not to appoint 
anybody. Through our continued communications with the 
Canadian Commission for UNESCO’s ASPNet National 
Coordinator, our immense desire to offer this initiative to 

our students was recognized and currently we have begun 
participation in the program under the direction of the 
National Coordinator himself. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, what the group wants is a commitment of 
some long-term funding. They’ve had bits and pieces given to 
them but not enough to . . . First thing they wanted to do was 
open or re-open the interpretive centre which was closed 
because of the provincial government cutting its funding. And 
they’ve had some help there but not enough to do a proper job. 
 
And what they would like to do is have the funds available to 
hire a coordinator to work in the whole area for the economic 
development in the whole area, not just necessarily at Redberry 
Lake but the Redberry Lake would be one piece of the 
economic development ecotourism that has such a huge 
potential in that area. 
 
We think of the Canadian Light Source; we have many people 
coming to Saskatchewan and Saskatoon, both Canadians and 
people from around the world, to work at the Canadian Light 
Source. And it would make a lot of sense to have possibly a 
tourist package or a tour package set up to go out to the 
biosphere at Redberry Lake, possibly could include the First 
Nations people, and have a tour and a tourism package that 
would fit nicely with what’s going on in Saskatoon at the 
Canadian Light Source. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. One other item that today came up 
in question period concerning SaskTel and cellphone service 
and the Internet service. And I’ve questioned the minister and 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) many 
times about that. And again they talk about having a business 
plan for the services, and it’s part of what we needed in that 
Redberry Lake area, in the Hafford, Blaine Lake area, Leask 
area, is proper cellphone service and Internet service. And again 
the government and the Crown corporation is not willing to 
provide that service. 
 
And that area needs those services in order to build their 
economy in that area, and one must follow the other and I 
believe the government’s very delinquent in how they are 
approaching services in that area. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will . . . would like to continue asking the 
Minister of Environment a number of other questions in the 
upcoming weeks once we get into committee. But at this time 
I’d like to just say that I will not be supporting the budget but I 
will be supporting the amendment to the budget. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is a real pleasure 
to be able to rise and respond to this budget speech to reflect on 
the many good things that are in this budget and the impact that 
they may have on this province in the year ahead and in fact in 
the decades ahead. 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

 

But before I get into talking about the budget in detail, what I 
would like to do is say some thank yous because there are a lot 
of people that work together to enable us to work in this 
legislature. 
 
And first of all I would like to say thank you to my family — 
Gail, Alaina, and Daniel — for all the support that they give me 
to enable me to come here to spend the long hours that I do 
working on behalf of the government with the cabinet, with the 
Department of Highways and Transportation. They have been 
just tremendous. 
 
I would also like to say thank you to my constituency assistant, 
Donna From, who has done a tremendous job since I was 
elected in ’99. Donna is very capable, works very hard, and is a 
creative and compassionate person. So I’m thankful to have her 
support as well. 
 
I have a tremendous staff in my ministerial office and I also 
want to say thank you to Dave, Florence, Gina, Michelle, and 
Perry. They give me tremendous support and backing. They 
have the information that I need. They do that by working with 
a department that I would say is second to none, who do 
tremendous work not only for me but for this whole 
government and for this province. 
 
And I think at a time like this where we’re facing heavy snows 
and difficult times out on our highways, I think there has been a 
lot of planning that has gone in to try and deal with days like 
this. The highways hotline has been very busy and I would 
encourage all those who are listening to remind friends and 
remind family that if they’re going out on the roads in these 
days to please call the highways hotline first so that they can 
find out what the conditions are before they venture out. We 
hope that all who are travelling have a safe journey on our 
province’s highways and roads. 
 
So with those thank yous, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move on 
to talk about this budget. And one of the pieces of this budget 
that I think has raised a lot of questions for people has been the 
projection about what kind of growth we’ll have, a 6.8 per cent 
growth. And some people have said, well that’s preposterous. 
But we have had people who have done analysis on budgets for 
many, many years look at this budget, look at these projections 
and say no, that’s absolutely doable. Established firms like 
Nesbitt Burns have taken a look at this budget and said, of 
course that’s doable. We’ve seen that from a number of other 
fronts. 
 
But I think the one person who maybe got it right was the 
cartoonist in The StarPhoenix, Mr. Johnsrude, in his cartoon 
where he did a picture — and it was being flashed here the 
other day — of “Jimmy and His Amazing 
Dreaming-in-Technicolor Coat.” Now I don’t know whether 
Mr. Johnsrude realized how accurately he did get this. But with 
his reference to the multicoloured coat, of course he was 
referencing the story of Joseph in the Bible. And that story, I 
think the theology of that story has a lot to do with who we are 
as an NDP government and who we are as a people in this 
province who dream big, plan well, and work hard. 
 
So let me bring this story back to light for those who may not 
be familiar with it and those who haven’t looked at it for a 

while — the story of Joseph and his many multicoloured coat. It 
was a gift from his father. He was a special young man. His 
coat was given to him and he used to dream a lot and think 
about how things should be. And his brothers didn’t particularly 
like the way that he did things and they threw him into a well. 
He was picked up by travellers later, taken to another land 
where he started off not in the best of graces, but he was 
elevated as his wisdom and his knowledge became more 
apparent. I’m not saying that there’s a direct parallel to the 
Minister of Finance, but certainly we can see some parallels in 
this story. 
 
But as Joseph became more familiar with the people of the land 
and they became more familiar with him, they realized that he 
was beginning to understand them in a new way and that he 
listened so carefully to what they were saying and he could 
interpret their dreams. He could see what their dreams meant 
and he began to explain to them what those dreams meant. And 
he finally caught the attention of the Pharaoh, the leader of the 
day. He caught the attention of the Pharaoh and the Pharaoh had 
had dreams and he wanted these dreams interpreted as well. 
And so Joseph came forward and told the meaning for these 
dreams. 
 
Now let me talk about the first, the major dream that was 
interpreted. This dream was about seven cows, fat cows, and 
there was also a second part of the dream about seven 
starved-looking, difficult cows. Well there’s more detail but 
Joseph interpreted this dream for them to say that there were 
going to be seven very good years and that they should plan 
well around those seven good years because there were going to 
be seven years of great difficulty and drought. 
 
They did plan well. Joseph planned for the Pharaoh, because the 
Pharaoh, in hearing this interpretation of dreams, realized the 
wisdom. And I’d like to quote from the Bible, from the book of 
Genesis, chapter 41, verse 37 and following, where the Pharaoh 
is just so pleased with the work that Joseph has done. So he 
says . . . the Bible says: 
 

So the advice was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the 
eyes of all his servants. And Pharaoh said to his servants, 
“Can we find such a one as this man in whom is the spirit 
of God?” Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Inasmuch as God 
has shown you all this, there is no one as discerning and 
wise as you. You shall be over my house, and my people 
shall be ruled according to your word. Only in regard to the 
throne will I be greater than you.” 
 

And so Pharaoh made Joseph his adviser. And in that they took 
that dream, they planned well around it. They prepared for 
those seven good years. They built around those seven good 
years, prepared for the seven difficult years. Not only did the 
people of Egypt survive, but people from all around the world 
who were in need were able to come there and draw from the 
tremendous assets that they had built up during those seven 
good years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at what we have done in this 
budget, and when I look at the planning and the hard work that 
have gone into this last decade, and I look at the hard work and 
the planning that is going into preparing for the next decade, I 
see parallels. 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

And when I look at this 6.8 per cent figure for growth, and I 
look at what that is based on — it is based on only a normal 
year in agriculture — I say we have dreamed well, we have 
planned well, and we will work well to make this province 
thrive and prosper for all people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — So I would like to commend Mr. 
Johnsrude on his good theological insight, and I would like to 
commend our Minister of Finance on interpreting the dreams of 
the people well and of putting those together in a budget that is 
sound and practical. And we will see how it impacts positively 
on the growth and the prosperity of this province. 
 
Well at the same time that we have these wonderful dreams for 
this province, we are also faced with a group of people who sit 
opposite us, the Sask Party, who are so full of negativity, doom 
and gloom, that they can’t see, they cannot see the good that is 
happening in this province. 
 
They somehow seem to be able to twist every situation, every 
fact that comes out that looks at the good of this province, they 
twist it so badly and then they start shouting about it — the 
world is coming to deep trouble in this province. The sky is 
falling; it’s terror for everybody, because of this NDP 
government, they say. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that Sask Party doom and gloom view 
where they twist the facts and shout about it is the only problem 
or the biggest problem that this province has right now. 
 
The attitude, as I spoke about in my Throne Speech, as the 
people who are in the chamber of commerce have spoken about, 
that negative attitude is probably one of the worst things that we 
have to deal with in this province. 
 
So we paint the dream positive, we invest money in this 
province, we invest it in the key areas that people have said they 
need to have money invested in. And we hear back from many 
of the stakeholders that they are pleased, very pleased with the 
way that we have invested in this budget. 
 
We have invested heavily in health in this budget and we will 
see our health care get better and better as a result of the policy 
developments and as a result of the budget. 
 
We have invested heavily in education in this budget with new 
increases. And we will see the teachers, their new agreement 
being fully funded from what the increases are in education. We 
will see our education system get better and better as we build a 
wonderful future for the young people of this province and we 
enable them to get the best education possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have invested in the infrastructure of this 
province. This year again almost $300 million of provincial 
dollars, of federal dollars, of Centenary Fund money — all of 
that going into building the highways infrastructure in this 
province. 
 
We worked long and hard to get some federal funding to help 
pay for the twinning in this province. And I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, the twinning in this province is going to make a big 

difference to the whole province. Why? Because people who 
come into the province see these good roadways; they want to 
see more of this province; they tour around; they see the beauty 
of this province and they are moved. They love this land of 
living skies. And people who love this land of living skies, and 
come to love the people, want to be here. 
 
For these good highways that we’re building are going to make 
a difference. People are going to be moved to come to this 
province, a province of beauty, a province of prosperity, and a 
province with a tremendous future. 
 
We are looking at funding going into helping building our rural 
highway network as well. We are working with the prairie grain 
roads program, partial funding from the federal government to 
upgrade some of our main economic corridor roads in a rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, people say, well why aren’t you 
putting more into urban Saskatchewan? Why don’t you put it all 
into the cities? That’s where all of the votes are for the NDP, 
why don’t you just support the cities? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are here representing the province. The 
NDP government is not interested in pork-barrelling just for the 
vote. What we are about is trying to provide the best 
infrastructure that we can for all the people of Saskatchewan. 
And so we will build the roads in northern Saskatchewan, we 
will build the roads in rural Saskatchewan, and we will make 
sure that we bring those up to a standard that will help our 
economy to continue to grow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We will partner with the 
municipalities, we will partner with the federal government, and 
we will build this infrastructure in this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will not ignore the cities. We know that 
the cities are of such value to the whole province. They are 
economic generators and I tell you, the working people in these 
cities, through the taxes that they pay, help support the life in 
rural Saskatchewan as well. And that’s important for us to 
remember, how the distribution happens in this province. And 
so it is essential that we also support the people of the cities. 
 
And when I look at the money that has gone into the cities in 
this new budget, I see a $5 million increase for cities, $5 million 
for rural municipalities. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, a 15 per 
cent increase has got to mean something to the mayors and the 
councillors of our cities. 
 
I could not believe it. I could not believe it when I heard them 
— some of them — talking about how poor it was that they 
didn’t get a full $15 million. 
 
We struggled around that table to try and make sure that we 
would give enough to every place of need in this province. We 
were not pork-barrelling in the decisions around this. We were 
looking at the priorities and we were saying, where can we put 
the funds of this province to have the best impact for all of the 
people of this province. That’s what we planned; that’s what we 
did, Mr. Speaker. 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

 

And I believe that the mayors and the councillors of our cities 
and our towns should be thankful — should be thankful — for 
the 15 per cent increase that they got: $10 million last year, $10 
million this year, and a promise of $10 million next year. Sixty 
million dollars in three years and they were upset? It was an 
insult? I can’t believe it. 
 
(15:15) 
 
We care about these cities. We will work with our mayors, with 
our councillors — not only in grants that go to them, not only in 
that municipal grant — we will work them on the infrastructure 
basis, we will work with them to try and bring jobs into the 
cities, into the towns, and into the rural areas of this province. 
Why? Because we love this province. Because we dream big, 
and those dreams encompass all of this province. We plan well 
and in that planning we make sure that the dollars go to every 
part of this province. 
 
And we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, because we want 
this whole province to prosper. We want every part of this 
province to be a destiny for people who want to come and make 
a life for themselves in a province where the taxes are some of 
the lowest in this country. 
 
You hear that, Mr. Speaker? Some of the lowest in this country. 
Not only the personal income taxes, Mr. Speaker, but the 
business tax is going down again this year. We have shown a 
trend of steady decrease in those taxes. Not only the business 
taxes but the corporate tax threshold going up, Mr. Speaker, so 
that the businesses will get a break before they have to start 
paying their taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has listened to the people 
and we are moving in the directions that we need to move in. 
But we will not move beyond what we can see as sustainable; 
and that word is vital in our planning. When we look at setting a 
budget for this province, when we look at tax cuts, when we 
look at investments, we try and do it in a way — and I think 
that we have shown that we have been successful in this decade 
— we try and do it in a way that will be sustainable. 
 
And we have proven that we have been able to sustain and 
manage the budget of . . . the budgets of this province. And we 
have once again produced a balanced budget. That budget is 
based on long-term planning, where we had surpluses in past 
years, put those into the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, and now we 
have been able to draw from that Fiscal Stabilization Fund at 
times of need. 
 
We thought we would have to draw from it this year. But, Mr. 
Speaker, due to good planning, hard work, good fortune in oil 
and mineral developments which we helped encourage, due to a 
number of industrial growth elements, we have been able to see 
this province prosper to such an extent this past year that we did 
not have to draw from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of the second year of drought that is some 
of the worst drought in this province’s history — despite that, 
we did not have to draw from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Next year we project that we will have to draw from that fund 
but we will not deplete that fund. There will still be money in 
that fund for the following year. 

Sounds something like the dream, the plan — seven years of fat 
cows, seven years of lean cows. Well maybe we’re not looking 
at seven years, but we are doing the kind of planning that is 
necessary. When we get a surplus, we don’t blow it, we don’t 
send it off to our buddies. What we do is we put that into a fund 
for a rainy day or a dry day or a difficult day and then we draw 
on it. And that’s exactly the kind of planning that this province 
needs if it’s going to prosper for the future. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we do more planning than that. We invest 
widely. We invest through our Crown corporations very, very 
heavily in this province, building the kind of infrastructure that 
is necessary so that industry can prosper, so there can be safety, 
so that people can see social and economic growth in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have got second-to-none coverage for high-speed Internet in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because we have SaskTel 
investing millions and millions and millions of dollars in 
building that infrastructure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I worry when I hear the 
member . . . I worry, I worry, Mr. Speaker, when I hear the 
members opposite, when they get out in their local papers and 
their local communities talking about how they’re going to sell 
off the Crowns, because those Crowns have invested in this 
province and can be such a good tool to help build this 
province. The employees there are well paid; they’ve got a good 
future in those Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t want to ever give those folks, the Sask Party opposition, 
the opportunity to have the reins of power, to see the kind of 
misuse that I hear coming from their own papers, their own 
projections. I don’t want to see them take away the foundations 
that have enabled us to build this province and that will enable 
us to continue to build this province for the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a fine budget. It is a budget that projects well. Why? 
Because we dream big, we plan well, we work hard, and we are 
building a future that is wide open for all Saskatchewan. I will 
support this budget, not the amendment, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
appreciative to have the opportunity to respond to the budget, 
but following the Minister of Highways is a hard act to follow. 
But I’ll do my best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing I do agree with that the Minister of Highways said 
today — a number of times in fact — in his speech is that the 
NDP government has dreamed well. Well I agree with that, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m going to respond to that right away. 
 
And I thought rather than give you my opinion, Mr. Speaker, on 
what I think of the budget, let’s go through some of the 
municipal organizations and representatives with municipal 
government and what they think of the budget. And we’ll see 
just how well this NDP government and the NDP Finance 
minister has actually dreamed. 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

Some of the quotes, Mr. Speaker, and this one, CBC TV — 
Budget 2003: 
 

Some wonder if . . . Finance minister is overly optimistic 
by predicting a 6.8 per cent economic growth. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

The province is expecting revenue of $6.2 billion and it’s 
spending $6.6 billion. The difference is made up from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s no money in the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. It doesn’t exist. The public, the opposition, and many 
members from the backbenches understand that this is nothing 
more than a line of credit. So when they use money out of this 
line of credit, the provincial debt increases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this quote from the CBC goes on to say: 
 

The debt is up to $12.2 billion. 
 
That’s up nearly a half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s probably the good news because the Finance 
minister in his dreaming, as the Minister of Highways has said, 
that this province is going to grow at the rate of 6.8 per cent. 
 
What, Mr. Speaker, happens if he’s out by about 3 per cent or 4 
per cent, which is more realistic in every other country in other 
. . . jurisdiction in the world, Mr. Speaker? If that happens, Mr. 
Speaker, possibly this province will go another $1 billion in 
debt if that Finance minister is that far off the mark. So yes, the 
Minister of Highways say they dream well. I believe they do, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the other quotes from the mayors and 
people involved with municipal government — the minister had 
said that he was amazed at some of their comments. I’m going 
to give you some of their comments, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
we would be surprised at some of the people that have made 
these comments. 
 
Saskatoon TV and CKCK TV after the budget — “Province’s 
city mayors not happy with budget.” Trish Cheveldayoff said: 
 

Saskatchewan’s 13 city mayors are not happy with the 
budget. They were looking for $15 million in additional 
revenue sharing from the provincial government. They 
didn’t get it and now they say many municipalities are 
facing a serious budget crunch. 

 
The Minister of Highways made the comment that the cities — 
the cities like Saskatoon, the cities like Regina — are the 
economic generators of the province. But the comment from the 
mayor of Saskatoon, Jim Maddin: 
 

If we are placed in a position of or that of nothing else, I 
think there’s some stuff hitting the fan in this province. 
Certainly in my city, there’s no question about it. 

 
Another reporter talking about SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and their response to the budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 

The government is handing over $10 million to 
municipalities. But break that down between SUMA, 
SARM, and northern communities who are getting 
800,000; rural municipal government, 4.3 million; and 
urban municipalities receive 4.9 million. That will be 
shared between 450 cities, towns, and villages. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you water that down, over that number 
of communities, it’s a very, very small increase considering the 
high tax rate that those communities have to deal with. 
 
Regina mayor, Pat Fiacco: 
 

I’m going to recommend this to every taxpayer in this 
province. When your respective candidate comes knocking 
on your door, you must ask the question, what is their 
urban agenda. What will you do for me as a property 
taxpayer? 

 
Mayor Fiacco was very unhappy with this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another comment from the Saskatoon mayor, Jim Maddin: 
 

We cannot go back to our municipal taxpayers year after 
year and demand they pay more taxes. 

 
North Battleford mayor, Wayne Ray, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I just cannot buy it and I am really insulted. So to say that 
we’re angry or disappointed, there’s probably other words 
we could use but it probably couldn’t be publicized. 

 
Mike Badham, Mr. Speaker, and I’m surprised at this. Mike 
Badham’s comments are this: this is insulting to the property 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mike Badham, president of SUMA, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another one of the quotes from after the budget, Mr. Speaker. It 
goes on talking about that SUMA disappointing. Mike Badham 
had another comment: 
 

My colleagues and I have had a chance to briefly analyze 
. . . (the budget). And two words come to mind. One I think 
it is insulting and the other one is unfair. Insulting to 
property taxpayers that have been taking the hit. Through 
all of the downloading in the 90’s, we thought aha, it’s time 
for us to receive some recognition of that and see the 
infusion of some funding from (the) provincial sources. 

 
It didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Wayne Ray, another comment from the North Battleford 
mayor: 
 

We’ll be telling taxpayers when they phone my office (and 
I quote) here’s Mr. Osika’s phone number. 

 
Comments like that, Mr. Speaker, go on continuously from 
municipal representatives. And, Mr. Speaker, that was from the 
city representatives. 
 
We also have to look at what the town responses are and what 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

 

the villages’ are. And it was really a replica of what the city 
mayors said. They feel they’ve been left out, Mr. Speaker, and 
they feel that they’ve been totally ignored by this government, 
not only in this year’s budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but for the 
last dozen years of this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cities, the towns, and villages are being asked 
to share $5 million after continual downloading for the last 12 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, for an example, the snowstorm 
that we’re seeing in Saskatchewan today will eat up a good 
portion of that $5 million that the government saw fit to give 
the urban municipalities. And then they still have to find a way 
to balance their books because they’re not allowed to run a 
deficit like the NDP government seems to find that they can run 
a deficit for the last three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about RMs (rural 
municipality) because they’re also affected by this budget. And 
SARM was also not happy with this budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And, you know, they’ve been taking hits out in rural 
Saskatchewan for the last 12 years, but in the last few years it’s 
been a lot larger than it normally was. 
 
Remember back last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a $25 
million education tax rebate. And it was appreciated. It didn’t 
solve the problem out there, but was appreciated. But the 
government saw fit, once again, to cut that program. And we’ve 
saw, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the province of Saskatchewan 
with the new assessments and the shift in education tax on to 
the rural taxpayer, and the higher assessments for farm land in 
this province, the load that farmers are being asked to pick up 
has got higher, and higher, and higher. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the same time, we have less kids 
in rural Saskatchewan because the population is dropping 
because . . . and one of the main reasons is because of this NDP 
government, and we’re being asked at the same time to pick up 
more of the education tax. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time that this NDP government 
stepped up to the plate and started helping municipalities of all 
kinds in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to also talk in this budget on 
agriculture, how this budget affected agriculture because it’s so 
closely tied to what SARM has thought of this budget, and what 
rural municipalities thought of this budget. And education tax 
crosses over to both sides of that. 
 
And let’s listen to some quotes on agriculture, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Because no one in agriculture was any happier than 
the representatives from municipal government. 
 
CBC TV after the budget and they’re talking, there’s no new 
money for farmers in today’s budget. Art Martin reports that 
some are wondering where the government’s priorities are. 

 
Art Martin reports on a gentleman called Doyle Weibe, who 
was ready to take notes on the budget but there was little in it 
for farmers for him to take note of. The same farmer said, well 
they finally brought up agriculture in the last two minutes and 

simply reconfirmed what they’d already announced in the past 
— nothing new for agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Art Martin, same reporter: the lack of money for agriculture has 
some people wondering about the NDP government’s 
commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again we see that this 
government has no commitment to rural Saskatchewan — never 
has had. And again this year they’re showing absolutely no 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, quote from Terry Hildebrandt, president 
of APAS (Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan), and Mr. Hildebrandt goes on to say: 
 

I’m past mad and frustrated. I was expecting at least to 
bring the budget back to where we were last year, not to 
lose . . . (I’m) very concerned. 

 
And what he’s talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the cut of 
another $40 million from the agriculture budget. 
 
Here’s a budget that in 1990, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was $1.1 
billion in the province of Saskatchewan for agriculture. Where 
are we now? Well maybe down around 200 to $240 million, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But as the farmers in this province are 
becoming used to, this government has no commitment to 
agriculture and has no commitment to farm families all over 
this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another quote from Terry Hildebrandt. 
And I quote: 
 

They pulled away from the rural again with the support in 
the budget and sooner or later some administration, and I 
don’t care who it is, will have to start making economic 
decisions for the betterment of the province and not 
political decisions as this government seems to make. 

 
Art Martin again, and he talks about that same farmer I talked 
about before. And I quote: 
 

Doyle said the irony in the provincial budget is the fact that 
the province has more money from increased oil and gas 
revenues but those increased revenues mean energy and 
fertilizer costs are making it more difficult for him to keep 
farming. 

 
And he’s dead on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. His input costs are 
going up. Fuel, fertilizer, education tax continues to rise, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. As I said, the $25 million rebate cut last year 
was dumped right back on the local taxpayer in rural 
Saskatchewan and they have to pick that up at a time when even 
the Minister of Highways said . . . seems to realize there was a 
drought in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Finance minister today is counting on this year’s crop, 
which isn’t even seeded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be a normal 
crop. Well I would say with a 6.8 per cent growth, it better be a 
bumper, bumper, bumper crop because it’s not going to happen 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

with anything less, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we could go on but as the Minister of 
Highways said, they dream well — well they do. They dreamt 
this whole budget up. We know there’s a 400 to $500 million 
deficit now according to what the Finance minister has said. If 
his projections do not hold true this province could be going 
into debt to the tune of maybe $1 billion this year, Mr. Speaker. 
If we happen to get a drought again this year and this growth 
doesn’t come anywheres close, this province is going to be in 
worse shape than it’s ever been before. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be supporting the amendment 
and not the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise in the debate today in support of the budget and in 
opposition to the opposition member’s amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure to be able to follow the 
member for Saltcoats because the last person that followed the 
member for Saltcoats speaking got more votes. So I’m quite 
pleased that in the next election, hopefully, I’ll have more votes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I begin my remarks I would like to 
just say thank you to the people of Saskatoon Sutherland. This 
is my first term. I’ve been very honoured to be able to serve 
them in this legislature and I take that honour very seriously. I 
wouldn’t be able to do that unless I had the support and love of 
my family — my wife Karen and my three boys. So I just 
appreciate their support for us to be able to be here. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, being able to be here from a Saskatoon 
constituency . . . and I know other members from their other 
constituencies outside of Regina, they are here and they are left 
their constituency offices back home and we’re not able to serve 
our constituents without the support of our constituency 
assistants. So I’d like to publicly thank Connie Lepard for all 
the hard work and support that she provides the constituents of 
Saskatoon Sutherland. Now Connie worked for three terms for 
the previous MLA and did an excellent job and I’m hopeful that 
she’ll be able to serve me for three more terms if all goes well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one thing about budgeting, it is your 
blueprint for the future for the upcoming year. We’re able to 
look back on the past year to see how we did there and look 
forward to the future year and see what we’re going to do. 
 
It’s almost like a family, Mr. Speaker. People get together, they 
have children. And how does the budget help people in that 
respect, Mr. Deputy Chair? 
 
If you’re a pregnant woman and you go . . . you want to have a 
hospital that is able to give you the prenatal care that you need, 
you want to make sure that the water that comes out of the tap 
and the sewer is looked after, our budget deals with those needs 
and builds on that, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Secondly, when the baby is born they want to make sure that all 
of the specialization in the medical field is there. In this budget 

we show a new Health Sciences Building being built in 
Saskatoon. More money into capital, more money . . . the 
largest increase in health care in the history of Saskatchewan, 
with $184 million. And 80 million of that comes from the 
federal government and the good work that Mr. Romanow did 
as the commissioner in that area. So that family is getting some 
benefit from this budget in the health care area. 
 
When they take the child home they want to be able to live in a 
home that is affordable and in this province we have one of the 
most affordable provinces in all of Canada. They are able to 
purchase a home, that family. They are able to drive to work in 
a meaningful safe place, with short commutes. In many cases 
that family is able to come home for lunch as well. That’s a 
quality of life that many people across Canada are not able to 
share. 
 
Now that child, when he or she is getting older and the mother 
or the father, whoever has been the primary caregiver, will want 
to return to return to the workplace. Well this budget provides 
more support for that family with subsidized child care. And 
that is something that is very important in this budget that 
hasn’t been getting a lot of headlines, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Now when that child wants to go to school . . . now maybe he 
or she doesn’t want to go to school but the parents want to have 
a good education for that child, so they want to make sure that 
there’s good elementary schools and good high schools. This 
budget gives a dramatic increase in Learning, both in the 
education with K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) and in the 
university, in the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) area. There’s going to be new schools 
built, renovated, more money put into the university. 
 
For example, the College Building has been announced by the 
President MacKinnon that in 2005, for Saskatchewan’s 
birthday, they hope to have the College Building open in time 
for that. Now I’ve suggested that perhaps we could have a 
special sitting of the legislature in the College Building for 
2005, perhaps a Throne Speech and a day or two of debate in 
that College Building. 
 
Now that College Building was started in 1910. It has served 
the university for decades, 70 years or so. It was closed 10 or 15 
years ago because of not being structurally sound. But there 
have been premiers that have been receiving degrees, honorary 
degrees; important politicians from all across Canada have 
spoken there. 
 
In fact, I myself was able to be there when Prime Minister 
Trudeau spoke, and it was a very impressive speech. He went 
into a very hostile crowd and didn’t back down one little bit. 
And a lot of things have encouraged me to go into politics but 
that issue, that day there, helped me to want to go into politics 
someday. 
 
So universities are very important to the education system of 
our youth, and this budget provides more money for that. 
 
Now with seniors, they want to be able to have a quality of life 
that is sustainable, that is beneficial. And the tax reform 
package, while it does benefit affluent people in my 
constituency, it also benefits less well-off people even more. 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

 

And with regards to seniors, the flat tax is removed, the . . . it is 
indexed to inflation. And never again will seniors have to 
scrounge for money to pay for taxes, especially less-affluent 
seniors. And so there’s . . . this budget supports seniors as well, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Chair, the opposition doesn’t like to talk 
about this budget as helping people. They like to throw numbers 
out of the air, that this is somehow a deficit budget, that 
somehow they don’t understand budgeting. I think that they do 
understand, Mr. Deputy Chair. I think that they are wanting the 
people to believe something that isn’t true. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Chair, what happens with the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund is that they take . . . we take the money in. In 
a good year we put it into this fund, and then we spend it over 
the other years. 
 
Now where the opposition is quite critical — and in fairness to 
them, they are quite right that we don’t take that money and put 
it in a drawer somewhere; we don’t put it into a savings account 
somewhere getting very little interest — what they’re being 
critical of is the cash management. 
 
But because we are following good cash management, we’re 
opening ourselves up to criticism by the Saskatchewan Party. If 
we had taken that Fiscal Stabilization Fund and put it into . . . 
The member for Rosthern is chirping from his chair, and it’s 
quite ironic that he does that. If we had taken that Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund and put it in a bank in Martensville, perhaps 
even a lock box in Martensville, and not spent it, they wouldn’t 
have a criticism because we could go to that, we . . . Now the 
member for Rosthern continues to chirp from his chair. But if 
we had put that money in that savings deposit box three years 
ago, we could go to that safety deposit box, take it out and 
plunk it down. It would be real money. 
 
But we haven’t done that, Mr. Deputy Chair, because there’s no 
money to be made by putting it in there. We’re opening 
ourselves up to risk. What we’ve done instead, Mr. Deputy 
Chair . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Order. Order. 
 
If the member from Moose Jaw North and the member from 
Canora-Pelly wish to have a conversation, they may do so 
behind the bar. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I just want 
to say this about the member from Moose Jaw North. When I 
first came here three and a half years, I aspired to be just like 
him. And as the years go by I’m more and more like him . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from Canora-Pelly 
says he’s getting more and more like him as well. 
 
But getting back to my point about the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, is that if we had done that, if we had taken that money 
and put it in a safety deposit box in Martensville, they wouldn’t 
have a criticism because we could actually go to the bank, take 
the money, and plunk it down. It would not increase to the debt. 
 
But instead what we did is we took that money and put it into 
short-term debt, pay off short-term debt. Now we did not on the 

books show that the debt had decreased by that amount. 
Members aren’t criticizing that, they know that that’s true 
because when we went back to need that money it was still 
there, Mr. Deputy Chair. So their criticism — they know that 
it’s not true, they know that it’s not true. They’ve tried to pull 
one over for the member . . . for the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s ironic that we’re having the 
biggest snowstorm in the long while here because it reminds me 
. . . It’s either NDP precipitation or it’s a paraphrase of their 
Grow Saskatchewan — it’s more like snow Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hear time and again from the opposition 
that the problem with this government is we’re letting the 
province flounder, that the province is not growing. Well I ask 
the members opposite, how many of their seats are growing? 
Most of the seats on this side of the House are growing. Our 
population is growing under the NDP plan. It’s the impediments 
on the opposition side that is standing in the way of the growth 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this province is growing, Mr. Speaker. We 
are managing the debt. The debt has gone down however you 
want to measure it, Mr. Speaker, either by debt-to-GDP (gross 
domestic product) ratio or by debt per population. 
 
(15:45) 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did you know that Saskatchewan 
has the second lowest or the third lowest debt load per person 
depending on how you measure it, whether it’s per cent of GDP 
or percentage per population — second lowest. We’ve gone 
from one of the worst provinces in Canada to one of the best 
under our sound management plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The opposition doesn’t like to hear that. They like to pull out 
the whole numbers and create this negative attitude in this 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition also likes to criticize our 
Crown corporations. Now why is that, Mr. Speaker? Do they 
honestly think that by selling SaskTel, STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company), SaskPower, SaskEnergy, that this 
somehow is going to release the pent up demand in this 
province. I see some members opposite nodding their head. 
 
Now I grew up in the 1980s. And I remember a plan by the 
government that most of these people on the opposition side 
voted for. And that is called Fair Share Saskatchewan. Now just 
to remind members, what Fair Share Saskatchewan was, was to 
rip, rip families out of the urban centres and . . . (inaudible) . . . 
them out throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’m born and raised in rural Saskatchewan. It’s a 
wonderful place. I go back all the time. I know what rural 
Saskatchewan’s all about. It’s a very good place. But you know, 
Mr. Speaker, to rip families up and throw them into places — 
sometimes spouses 400 miles apart from each other — that was 
the plan of the government that they supported, Mr. Speaker, 
and they voted for. 
 
Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that they know that that 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

plan won’t work. I know why they were doing that. They 
wanted the tax dollars in the rural communities. They wanted to 
be able to say to the rural folks, look we’re doing this; we’ve 
brought economic development; we’ve moved civil servants 
into your town. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, they know that that plan will not 
work this time. So you know what they’ve come up with? 
They’ve come up with fair share Saskatchewan by stealth. Their 
going to sell off the Crown corporations, sell all that, take that 
money and spend it like drunken sailors in their constituencies. 
That’s what they’re doing. It’s fair share Saskatchewan by 
stealth. This government won’t stand for it. I won’t stand for it. 
And the people of Saskatchewan won’t stand for it, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Chair, one of the things that they don’t like to 
hear about is that Saskatoon is one of the fastest growing cities 
in all of Canada. It is also one of the most competitive cities in 
all of Canada. 
 
When you look at the surveys based on education, it is one of 
the most supportive of education right from kindergarten to 
grade 12 and into post-secondary and SIAST. That is a situation 
that the members opposite don’t want hear, they don’t want to 
talk about, and they don’t believe in because their budget that 
they would be introducing would be along the lines of Ernie 
Eaves and Gordon Campbell. 
 
Now what does the Gordon Campbell budget do? They’ve 
racked up debt in the billions of dollars. But what do we hear 
from the opposition? They say, you know, I think Gordon 
Campbell has it right; I think in the first six months, if elected 
as a Sask Party government, we’re going to do to Saskatchewan 
what Gordon Campbell did to British Columbia. 
 
Let me give you an illustrated example of what happens under 
the Gordon Campbell government. Now a family that grew up 
from my hometown moved to British Columbia. Now they have 
a child who’s in his 50s now who has Down’s syndrome, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. And this young man, now in his 50s, in British 
Columbia under an NDP government was able to get married, 
live in the same complex as his mother. And that couple would 
get up in the morning in their apartment — they would be 
assisted living —they would take the bus down to a place of 
employment, do meaningful work, receive a paycheque, take 
the bus home, visit his mother. And they had a very nice quality 
of life, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
What did Gordon Campbell do to that family? He cancelled the 
program. He cancelled the bus passes for these people. He made 
these people go on to welfare. And then he cancelled the work 
program for these people. So instead of being able to get on the 
bus and go to work, they now have to sit in the apartment. 
They’re now going to be moved out of that apartment because 
they can’t afford that. That’s the plan that Gordon Campbell 
brought to British Columbia. 
 
That’s not the plan that people of Saskatchewan want to have 
and that’s not the plan that this government will have, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Now the member opposite loves to talk about Tommy Douglas. 

Now I’m going to tell a story about Tommy Douglas that I just 
made up. Now the member for Rosthern knows his history, Mr. 
Speaker, but he also knows selective history. I know what he’s 
talking about. That’s the same time period that Time Man of the 
Year was Adolf Hitler. Time Man of the Year was Adolf Hitler 
of that same period. Now I know the members are shocked and 
appalled. 
 
It’s also . . . They’re in support of the Iraq war, Mr. Speaker. 
Donald Rumsfeld was supporting the . . . Saddam Hussein in 
Iraq. Saddam Hussein has the keys to Detroit, Michigan, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Those members like to read selective history. The members of 
the public don’t buy that. They can read beyond that and they 
know that the members from the opposition are not to be 
credible and not to be listened to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I would suggest that the member for Rosthern read all of 
his history and get past the third chapter and into what really 
happened because Tommy Douglas was one of the few people 
that after visiting Germany said, we’ve got to go in and we’ve 
got to support the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now the 
member for Humboldt is now speaking from her seat. I would 
suggest that she go back and read her history as well, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Chair, unfortunately my time is running out 
and . . . Although I should say that the member for Moose Jaw 
North and the member for Canora-Pelly kind of took some of 
my time, so perhaps I’ll be able to get some of the extra time 
back. 
 
But I guess to conclude, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the numbers 
here. It has been supported by different audit firms. It’s been 
supported by raising the standard credit rating . . . Pardon me, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Nesbitt Burns has said, “Balanced Budgets — No Drought 
About It.” It has passed muster, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
The last 10 years, Mr. Deputy Chair, the provincial government, 
the . . . And this goes largely to the Department of Finance, to 
their support. They have been prudent. They have been 
cautious. They have been bang on the number way more times 
than they’ve missed. And when they’ve missed, they’ve been 
very close, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
And so for the members opposite to denigrate — for their own 
political gain — some sensible, prudent people in the 
Department of Finance, I think is shameful. And I think they 
should apologize to those people in the . . . because they’re 
misleading the facts. 
 
Now the member, now the member reminds me of turkey 
thanking . . . or wanting Thanksgiving to come early. That’s 
what that member seems to be talking for. Now we’ll find out 
. . . And we know where he will be after the next election, Mr. 
Speaker. It won’t be on this side of the House. And I will be, I 
will be one of the happiest people to have Mr. Lorne Scott back 
in this legislature on the front benches, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
where that will be. 
 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

 

Now the other thing, Mr. Speaker, since the members of the 
opposition are gracious in giving me more time, is that . . . let’s 
look at what it means in the member for . . . the member for 
Weyburn or the member for Estevan. 
 
They come to this legislature — all of them in fact, Mr. Speaker 
— and they present petitions. They want cell service. They 
want high-speed Internet. They want less spending in this area, 
more spending in that area. No debt. 
 
You know, when you add up their plan, Mr. Speaker, the deficit 
in this province will be skyward. And the only way . . . And I 
was going to talk about the Ernie Eves situation. There’s $2.2 
billion that the Premier of Ontario has to sell to make his debt 
balance and nobody knows how he’s going to do that. 
 
Well the members opposite know where they’re going to get the 
money. It’s short-term money — it’s selling the Crowns, it’s 
selling SaskTel, it’s selling SaskPower, it’s selling SaskEnergy. 
And the province . . . the people in Saskatchewan will not buy 
that and I don’t buy that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Chair, just to conclude, our 
future is wide open. The plan that we’ve laid in place in the last 
eleven years, the last two years since the current Premier has 
become Premier, we’ve reinvested in the environment, we’ve 
reinvested in highways, we’ve reinvested in health care and 
education. 
 
The Irish model that the opposition likes to talk about, they only 
talk about the tax cuts. But before the tax cuts, there was 
investment heavily in education. 
 
This government is investing in education. We are providing 
tax cuts, sustainable, long-term tax cuts that is going to provide 
prosperity to this province. And I’m very proud to be part of a 
government that is being able to do that for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the members opposite — I will not be supporting their 
amendment. I will be supporting this budget and this motion 
because this is the way to a future that is wide open for our 
children and for their children, for our parents, for our 
grandparents, and I’m very pleased to stand in this House in 
support of this budget. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
take this opportunity I guess just to express that I’ve had some 
interesting times I guess in the last 12 days that I’ve been in this 
Assembly. First of all I’d like to thank the members for 
welcoming me to the Assembly. And listening to the debate of 
the Throne Speech as well as the presentation of the budget has 
given me some opportunity to appreciate the discussion that 
goes on in the House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank my wife Hazel, my two sons, Christopher and Jonathan, 
for the support that they have given me through my municipal 
time that I’ve spent, the time that I’ve spent away from my 

community and the time that I’ve spent also away from my 
family as well. And also the support that they have given me in 
taking the venture of the political opportunity for representing 
the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency. 
 
Family, I feel, is very important in the sense of support, as well 
as being I guess with you at times of need. And I’d just like to 
go back to I guess speaking a little bit of my relationship with 
my family and I guess the little bit of background where my 
family comes from. 
 
My mother came to this country in 1948 and she came from a 
socialistic environment, realizing that the opportunities in that 
type of a system really weren’t the opportunities that she felt 
that she could really advance on. And coming into this 
province, she really felt there was some real opportunity to be 
able to move and advance her life and marry and have a family 
in this great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But she always compared, I guess, that experience where she 
came from to the experiences that she was having in this 
province as well. And she likened the East and West Germany 
to the east and west of Lloydminster, of what is happening in 
the situation of this province to what she had experienced and 
the times that she had left in Germany at that time as well. 
 
So it’s kind of ironic that we can see that people that have left 
that type of a situation, looking for better opportunity in a 
province of Saskatchewan, have come back into realizing that 
maybe the opportunity isn’t here because of the structure of the 
way the government is working in this province as well. 
 
Talking about the budget and talking about the opportunity 
within the budget, I guess it’s a good news and a bad news 
budget all at the same time. Thomas Jefferson made a statement 
saying that a: 
 

Government (can) . . . only do for the people what the 
people cannot do for themselves. 

 
And I guess when you take a look at the budget, the budget is 
working in areas that you feel that the people can really look for 
opportunity for themselves and are needed for the need of the 
government to be providing, I guess that competition that 
happens in a structure of the Crowns and the expenditures that 
are going in the Crowns as well. 
 
One of the big winners in the budget is education. Education 
has received some $82 million which is very vital and it’s an 
opportunity that’s needed in this province for educating our 
people in that respect. And I guess we can appreciate that that’s 
a need in this province. 
 
But I guess property, education property, on property tax is a 
huge problem that we’ve got in this province and it’s been some 
of that downloading and subsidizing that’s been going on for 
the municipalities back to the provincial government. At one 
time we had a 60/40 split. That was in support of the 
municipalities. And now it’s a 40/60 split that the municipalities 
have picked up that cost of education. 
 
(16:00) 
 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

The system of providing that cost of education is through the 
assessment system. And the assessment system seems to be 
quite unfair in the sense of how that assessment of property is 
being assessed, as well as how the foundation grant within that 
education formula recognizes where the dollars are spent in 
education. 
 
And I have a number of municipalities in the Battleford-Cut 
Knife constituency that are zero-funded boards at this time as 
well. And the new dollars that have come into education right 
now are not going to be recognizing that whole area of need for 
education. The foundation grant is going to spread those dollars 
in other parts of the province. 
 
So there is a subsidy that’s really being picked up and a 
subsidization that’s being picked up from the municipalities. 
They’re looking after the costs of education that are being 
provided for the people on the west side of the province as well. 
 
We need a sense of fairness. And if there’s a sense of fairness 
being built in, there’s equal opportunity for all people in this 
province. We need to take a look at the way the education 
system is structured and the way the education system is funded 
as well. And I think that is a huge area and a great concern for 
the Saskatchewan Party which needs to be addressed and 
changes need to be made. 
 
The other area that the budget spoke to was highways in the 
sense of the extra dollars going into highways and being spent 
on highways as well. And highways is a real disaster in this 
province. It has been something that has been neglected over 
the last few years. And we’ve got into a situation where it’s 
been very costly to look after the roadways that we have in this 
province. 
 
And I could relate to some of the experiences that we have in 
our constituency. I just had a phone call the other day from a 
young lady that needs to travel from Macklin to Kerrobert for 
health care. And she is almost threatened, on a daily basis, 
needing to travel down Highway 31 in the condition that that 
highway is in. 
 
The highway was repaired just two or three years in the past but 
that whole condition of road is all deteriorated already. So you 
need to question in the fact as to what extent the repair and the 
maintenance and the upkeep of the roads are really . . . if dollars 
are really spent wisely there as well. 
 
We have Highway 14 and Highway 29 — that lots of people are 
referring to those highways as wagon trails. There’s ruts and 
potholes in those highways that already . . . are to the extent that 
there’s only four-wheel drive vehicles that are daring to travel 
the parts of those roads as well. So highways is a huge concern 
in the sense of how they’re needing to be looked after. And the 
money needs to be spent in, I guess, a more frugal way to make 
sure that those roads are dealt with and brought to the condition 
that needs to be done. 
 
I guess with highways there is also the question if highways . . . 
if the money is well spent in highways, if we get the federal 
dollars that come down from highways, how come our highway 
budget’s only increased by $3 million, when there’s $16 million 
that’s actually gone into that budget from the federal 

government? 
 
Health care’s another issue that we need to address, and I guess 
health care becomes a winner in the sense of what’s happened 
with the budget instilling $175 million into that budget. 
 
But health care comes with federal dollars, and health care 
comes also with dollars that are being put into that whole area 
of need without any accountability, without any measurability 
of the services that are being provided as well. And I guess I 
can go back to the experience that we’ve had in our area with 
the regionalization of our hospital . . . union hospitals as well. 
 
When we took the Wilkie Union Hospital and put it into the 
district, it was the only hospital in that district that had a 
three-year accreditation. And it also was the only hospital in 
that region that was . . . was the facility that had the best 
accreditation within the building structure as well. 
 
That whole structure of the union district hospital also had a 
board that was made up of people that were local people, people 
from the municipality. They were able to secure something in 
the order of $1.6 million in surplus, through the . . . I guess their 
frugal way of running business and operation within that 
service. 
 
When that whole amalgamation process went through, there 
was about $600,000 that was negotiated away from the whole 
amalgamation process, so there was $1 million given up from, I 
guess, the efficiency of running that facility over the years as 
well. That whole accreditation for that hospital wasn’t 
recognized in the sense that that hospital was turned into a . . . it 
was lost . . . it had lost its acute care services so it was turned 
into a health centre as well. 
 
So the accountability, the measurability of efficiency really 
doesn’t seem to be in the system, just this one example. And we 
spent 42 per cent of the budget for the province which . . . We 
have a system that doesn’t account for the way we spend those 
dollars and we don’t measure if those dollars are spent in an 
efficient manner as well. 
 
Moving on to agriculture, and I guess agriculture is one of the 
mainstays in the Battleford-Cut Knife region that we like to 
take a look at and see what opportunities we have in that entire 
area. And when we take a look at agriculture — and the budget 
says that agriculture needs to produce an average crop and that 
we have a 6.8 per cent GDP that is going to be predicted — and 
the hat is hung on agriculture and if agriculture doesn’t produce, 
then it’s going to be I guess at the demise of agriculture that the 
budget really doesn’t fulfill its fullest needs. 
 
Now we have a sector in agriculture that really has no control 
over the expenditures and has no control over its income as 
well. We have the cost of fertilizer that’s tripled since last fall, 
which the producers have absolutely no control on the input 
costs of their operation. And in the same form, they do not have 
the control of the income that comes from the crops that they’ve 
derived at the end of the year as well. 
 
So if you take $40 million out of agriculture and then ask 
agriculture that it’s going to give you the strength of being able 
to produce the 6.8 GDP in your economy, it makes it a pretty 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

 

difficult request from a sector that really doesn’t have control of 
how they’re going to provide that end result for them as well. 
 
So not supporting agriculture in the sense of having a very 
strong crop insurance system in place, having a strong 
stabilization system in place that supports that whole sector, it’s 
very difficult and very unfair for the budget to be looking at 
agriculture for the one that’s going to pull them through the bog 
at the end of the day. 
 
The Throne Speech spoke about having strong, viable 
communities and municipalities. It also spoke about 
communities and municipalities with good infrastructure are the 
economic drivers of the economy. And I guess when we look at 
the communities within our province, without having strong 
communities and not having strong infrastructure within those 
communities, it becomes very difficult to understand how the 
economy in the province can really be driven and can be 
advanced as well. 
 
And I guess when we hear statements like, to be a mayor in the 
province of Saskatchewan, it’s saying that there’s never enough 
— I guess you need to realize what the mayors and the councils 
of this province have had to have gone through over the last few 
years with revenue sharing. 
 
When revenue sharing was put into place in 1978, we had $35.4 
million in place at that time. Through those years, that revenue 
sharing was advanced to $67 million through ’88 to 1990. 1991, 
revenue sharing was cut to $62.5 million. At that time the 
economy of the province was shrinking and things were more 
difficult in the sense of looking after the costs of operating the 
municipalities as well as the province. And the premier at that 
time, Mr. Romanow, had come to the municipalities, asking 
them to partner up with him, tighten their belts, and asked us to 
support him in the sense of reducing revenue sharing and 
finding a way that we could support the economy in the 
province. 
 
1992, the revenue sharing was decreased to $53.2 million, 
something that led to $50.6 million in 1993 and 45.4 in 1994. 
All of this through that period of time we had growth within the 
province. In 1995 and ’96, we seen revenue sharing at 46.5 with 
a surplus of $574 million in the provincial budget. 1997, they 
dropped revenue sharing to $26.9 million, with a surplus of 
$557 million. 
 
And the question I guess needs to be asked at that time is if 
there was partnering and if there was belt tightening being done 
up through the early ’90s, why we weren’t sharing some of the 
gains that were coming through into the later ’90s. 
 
I guess when we have statements from SUMA stating that it’s 
unfair and it’s unacceptable in respect to not receiving the $15 
million that they’d requested and had sought for, I guess we 
need to take a look back at some of the advancements that 
SUMA had made with the government, and some of the 
discussions that went on at that time as well to see if there was 
some opportunity for this budget to provide some funding for 
the municipalities. 
 
There was talk about sharing some of the fuel tax opportunity 
that might be out there at that time as well. Through that whole 

discussion, through that whole discussion it was decided that 
we needed to take a look if there was any federal monies 
coming down, if we could not share the 15 cents on fuel tax 
without any federal money coming through. And the 
understanding at that time was if there was federal money 
coming that the fuel tax wasn’t an option, that we did need to 
go there. 
 
And as the federal money came down through this budget, the 
municipalities didn’t realize the $15 million that was discussed 
through the many meetings that went on with the mayors and 
the executive at the SUMA level. 
 
The creation of SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) is another downloading and off-loading 
that’s been done with the provincial government in that respect 
as well. There has been no increase in the budget this year to 
the SAMA costs, which their costs are escalating on a 
year-by-year basis as well. 
 
There was a commitment of 200 officers in 1999 election — 
promises. There’s still a shortfall of 119 of those officers in that 
respect as well. 
 
Also with the provincial properties that are held within the 
municipalities, payments in lieu of taxes haven’t changed as 
well. In this budget, that number has stayed the same. So any 
escalating costs for services provided to provincial properties is 
again being downloaded and offset to the municipalities in that 
same respect. 
 
The provincial taxpayers are required to pick up the offsetting 
of costs and the offsetting of services that are being provided to 
the needs of the provincial government with properties within 
those communities as well. 
 
So can we not imagine why the mayors and councils of this 
community are somewhat upset and somewhat distraught in the 
sense of not having the opportunity of receiving the dollars that 
they were somewhat understanding that they should be coming 
through? 
 
I guess I stand here today stating that I will support the 
amendment to the budget and also cannot support the budget. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
indeed very pleased this afternoon to have the opportunity to 
rise in the House and to support the budget speech, Mr. 
Speaker, and not, at the end of the day, support the amendment. 
 
I want, Mr. Speaker, to begin my comments this afternoon by 
first of all — being that this is my first occasion to speak in the 
House outside of question period and not have an opportunity to 
have spoken on the Throne Speech — but to extend my 
congratulations again to you, sir, for the way in which you 
conducted the House during the past session and look forward 
to this session again being a very fruitful exercise for all of us in 
the Legislative Assembly, sir. 
 
(16:15) 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

And to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to recognize the members 
who have been elected, the new members who have been 
elected to the Legislative Assembly. The member from 
Saskatoon Fairview, Mr. Speaker, who not only was very 
successful in winning his . . . the seat, but will also make in this 
Legislative Assembly a tremendous contribution, Mr. Speaker, 
to the future of Saskatoon and certainly to this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And also to the member from Battleford-Cut Knife for his 
successful victory in that riding. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife had the opportunity to 
spend some time working in that riding. And I know that I’ve 
heard the Saskatchewan Party on a number of occasions 
indicate by the large landslide of victory that he won by, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to say that as I worked in the constituency, 
there’s something to be said, Mr. Speaker, for the individual. 
Because there should not be a large solace here by the 
Saskatchewan Party about their wonderful success there 
because that had anything to do with the fact that he was a 
Saskatchewan Party member. Because on many, many of the 
occasions that I visited the riding, people said, we’re voting for 
the individual; we’re voting for the man, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can say to you, Mr. Speaker, unequivocally, that the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife won a very large number of 
votes in that riding because of his tremendous work that he’s 
done there. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that should be not 
translated in what will happen in the province come the next 
provincial election because the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker, on many, many ridings in this province, will find 
themselves in a great deal of trouble — including the member 
who’s chirping from Arm River, Mr. Speaker, of what we’ll 
have . . . whose seat we’ll have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I also want to give some 
recognition, Mr. Speaker, to my constituency because, Mr. 
Speaker, I have had the opportunity of serving the constituency 
for the better part of now 11 years, going on 12. And we have a 
wonderful group of men and women in our constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, of whom we work with on a regular basis in not only 
building our community of Yorkton but also building the region 
of Saskatchewan on the eastern side of the province of which I 
represent. 
 
And I want to say that I’ve been at a number of events just in 
the last couple of weeks here in the constituency. We just 
opened, Mr. Speaker, the brand new Catholic high school in our 
constituency of which we had about 250 people attend. And 
they recognize the important and the valued contributions that 
this government has made to education as our budget does 
again, Mr. Speaker, making a huge investment in the education 
of our children in Saskatchewan. And I can tell you that my 
constituency has been the recipient of much of that investment 
over the last number of years. 
 
And a couple of days ago we were there, opening yet another 
high school of which people in Saskatchewan and in my 
constituency are most grateful for the tremendous work that 
we’re doing and investing in children and education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a couple of days, or a couple of weeks ago, we 

were in our constituency recognizing a number of people who 
came to Saskatchewan on the fact that a number of individuals 
went outside the province to encourage people to come and visit 
us. 
 
And a delegation of people from the REDA and from my 
Department of Agriculture and Food in that area of the 
province, and the city, went to Alberta and talked about the 
advantage of coming to Saskatchewan. 
 
And they visited two communities in that area in Alberta, in 
Barrhead and in Westlock. And what happened, Mr. Speaker, is 
through the visit they were able to attract about 20 farm families 
who were interested in coming and doing business in our 
community. 
 
And so what they thought they’d do is they’d hold an evening 
recognizing all the people who have moved to our area of the 
province in the last 10 . . . or in the last three and a half years, 
and have an appreciation night for the fact that they’ve come 
and settled and invested in our part of the world. 
 
But, you know, Mr. Speaker, there were better than 300 people 
in that room that night — better than 300, of which 44 families 
have come to an area — if you were to take Yorkton and draw a 
circle around the city of about 80 miles, or 90 miles — who 
have come to Saskatchewan from Alberta, and have come to 
Saskatchewan from Europe. 
 
And what are they doing, Mr. Speaker? They’ve invested in 
agriculture; they’ve bought farm land; they’ve brought their 
livestock across. They brought their families into Saskatchewan 
today, and they’re making a successful, decent living in our 
province and in our side of the province and in our community 
of which I serve today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what a tremendous tribute that was that evening to those 
individuals. But you know, Mr. Speaker, individual after 
individual came to the microphone and talked a little bit about 
the advantage that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
And they talked about the importance of the environment. And 
they talked about the fact that they could have access, Mr. 
Speaker, to pasture land where they could bring livestock and 
have good forage, Mr. Speaker, and in fact that they had 
tremendous services — where they said we have good health 
care services and good education services, good access to our 
highway systems, and a good water supply system, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And individual after individual talked about the advantages that 
we have in Saskatchewan and how privileged they were to be 
there. 
 
And it was interesting that night because Mr. Paul Martin was 
our guest speaker and Mr. Martin got up and he talked about the 
Saskatchewan advantage, which often we don’t hear on that 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact we rarely hear on that side of the House about all the 
wonderful things that are happening in our province because 
when they have an opportunity to speak, Mr. Speaker, they talk 
about all of the things that they think aren’t working in the 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

 

province, Mr. Speaker, and never balance it with all of the 
wonderful kinds of success stories that we’ve had in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Paul Martin said, and I quote; he 
said, “This part of the province is the tiger of the East,” Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s growing and it’s developing and it’s building. 
Why? Because of the partnership that exists today between 
government and the community of Yorkton and the REDAs of 
the area and of the producers, Mr. Speaker, who are working in 
that area of Saskatchewan. That’s why it’s working, Mr. 
Speaker. Because we have a wonderful partnership today with 
our province and with those of us who want to do business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I talk a little bit about my own 
constituency, I want to add that a couple of . . . about a week 
and a half ago we had a press conference in our city where there 
has been now the Downtown Business Association and the city 
said what we need to have in Yorkton is we need to have a 
brand new liquor facility, a new liquor store led by, Mr. 
Speaker, the constituents, led by the business community, and 
led by the chamber of commerce. And they said, we want you 
to invest in our city. The business community says, Mr. 
Speaker, we want you to invest in our Saskatchewan. We want 
you to invest in our community. We want you to invest in 
making a difference in our province. 
 
And what does the Saskatchewan Party say, Mr. Speaker? They 
don’t want to see investment in Saskatchewan by the provincial 
government, Mr. Speaker. They do not want to see investment 
in our communities. 
 
And as one of the members from behind me says, Mr. Speaker, 
if they had an opportunity, they would be selling off 
Saskatchewan asset. They’d be selling it off, Mr. Speaker. They 
would not be investing in Saskatchewan on a regular basis as 
this government does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to take some time to talk a little bit about, Mr. Speaker, 
the agricultural file, because I’ve been listening intently over 
the last couple of days here to a number of speeches that were 
made, and again were made today by the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
And I make reference to the speech yesterday that was delivered 
by the member from Indian Head-Milestone, where he said, you 
know, here we are 25 strong . . . or 25 strong and he goes on to 
say that they represent the constituencies that are fully impacted 
by agriculture. And that he sorely disagrees, Mr. Speaker, with 
my often comments that they are absolutely and completely out 
of touch with what is happening with agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to point out a number of examples of how that’s 
happened in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and how it really is 
that the Saskatchewan Party has very little knowledge about 
what’s happening in this particular part of the industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to take a moment to talk a little bit about the 
member from Watrous who took a lot of personal attack 
yesterday on the Minister of Agriculture. And I want to say to 

the member from Watrous today that I know that you represent 
your entire caucus, you represent your leader, you represent the 
Saskatchewan Party’s view on agriculture, and that you’re 
getting your policy decisions and your recommendations and 
your positions from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member for Yorkton to make 
his remarks through the Speaker about whoever it is he wants to 
talk about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to you that as I read the 
member from Watrous’ notes, Mr. Speaker, I mean she says 
that in fact she is not a weak member, Mr. Speaker. She said, 
you know that I’ve been very preoccupied lately by your . . . 
that you know, by being able to stand up and say what I do or 
do not know about agriculture. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not, I’m not for a minute attacking the 
member from Watrous about what she knows about agriculture 
because in fact, Mr. Speaker, she’s representing her leader. And 
she’s speaking the words of the Saskatchewan Party in terms of 
what is known about agriculture on that side of the House. I’m 
not attacking the member from, the member from Watrous. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m supporting the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone who says we’re 25 strong, and here we 
have the member who’s speaking on our behalf, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I agree with that. She 
is speaking, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite all right, on 
a regular basis. And what does she say, Mr. Speaker? Well she 
says in her speech, and I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, and she 
says this, she said that: 
 

The agricultural policy framework, Mr. Speaker, has been 
shrouded now for some time . . . (where there’s lots) of 
mystery . . . 
 

There’s lots of mystery to the agricultural policy framework. 
Then she goes on and says, there’s a lot of misinformation and 
there are many, many unanswered questions. And then she goes 
on to say, the minister told the producers that there’s a blank 
cheque. And then she goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that there 
has not been any designation of money on the agricultural 
policy framework. 
 
Now that’s coming on her behalf, Mr. Speaker, from her leader. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, for the better part now, Mr. Speaker, for the 
better part now of eight months, in this province of 
Saskatchewan on the Internet, on public information, we have 
provided what the funding under the new agricultural policy 
framework has been. 
 
And what does the members opposite say? Well we don’t know. 
This has been a mysterious . . . this has been a mystery to us. 
We have no idea about what the funding is. 
 
The funding has been clearly articulated about what the new 
policy framework has in it, Mr. Speaker. We know what 
Saskatchewan’s share is. Everybody in Canada knows what 
Saskatchewan’s share is. They know what Alberta’s share and 
they know what British Columbia’s share is and they know 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

what the Northwest Territories’ share is. And that’s been public 
today, Mr. Speaker, for everybody to know for the better part of 
the last nine months . . . or eight months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know that it’s $300 million, Mr. Speaker, is the federal 
share. And we know that our share is $200 million to match 
that. And we made a commitment in this budget speech, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’ll spend $1 billion a year for five years and 
we’ve made our full commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the members opposite say, well we have no idea of what 
the funding is, Mr. Speaker, which is yet another example about 
25 men and women who are building agricultural policy, as the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone says. And he says, we 
should know all that it is to know. And the member from 
Watrous stands up and says, you know what, there’s some kind 
of misconception here; we don’t know what’s going on here. 
 
And that’s absolutely right — they don’t know what’s going on, 
Mr. Speaker. They have no idea what’s going on because even 
when it’s made public, they don’t know what the information is, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then the member opposite gets up and says in her speech, 
Mr. Speaker, and she says this, she says: so why does the 
Saskatchewan Party support signing the agreement today? We 
should sign the agreement, Mr. Speaker, is what she said, and 
why haven’t they signed the agreement way back in June and 
been in the package way back then? 
 
Well we didn’t sign the agreement, Mr. Speaker, way back then 
because we did not want to lose our benefit on the formula, Mr. 
Speaker. We were negotiating the 60/40 formula and the 
Fredericton; we were negotiating it out. Had we signed the 
Fredericton formula, signed the agreement, Mr. Speaker, way 
back in July, we would have probably lost the Fredericton 
formula. 
 
And the member says, you should have signed. And 25 men and 
women over there said, you know what, you should be signing 
this agreement. You should be signing this agreement and you 
should have signed it, Mr. Speaker, because what’s happened is 
you haven’t been at the table. 
 
Well we’ve been at the table the whole time, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve been working with the federal government and the other 
conservative governments across the country and we have today 
an agricultural policy framework, Mr. Speaker, of which they 
say, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t like today and they don’t want 
us to sign the interim agreement. 
 
Why don’t they want us to sign the interim agreement, Mr. 
Speaker? Why don’t they want us to sign the interim 
agreement? Well the member from Watrous says, because 
Ontario doesn’t like it. So we shouldn’t sign the agreement 
because Ontario doesn’t like it. And I say, Mr. Speaker, Ontario 
has their own agenda. Not only does she say we shouldn’t sign 
the agreement because Ontario doesn’t like it, she says we 
shouldn’t sign the agreement because Mr. Hilstrom doesn’t like 
the agreement. 
 
Now who is Mr. Hilstrom? Well Mr. Hilstrom, Mr. Speaker, 
and this is what she says about our good friend, Mr. Hilstrom. 

And Mr. Hilstrom is the national party I think for the Leader of 
the Opposition. This is . . . Mr. Hilstrom is the agricultural critic 
for the Canadian Alliance, Mr. Speaker, and that’s who this Mr. 
Hilstrom is and that’s who’s providing the agricultural policy I 
think for the Saskatchewan Party through the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
And this is what the member from Watrous says on behalf of 
her party. Now this isn’t her, Mr. Speaker. We should not for a 
minute suspect that this is her. This is her representing her 
leader, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not attacking the member from 
Watrous. And she goes on to say this, Mr. Speaker: Mr. 
Hilstrom made a motion in the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture on March 20 and the motion stated: 
 

That this committee formally request that the Minister of 
Agriculture delay the implementation of the business risk 
management pillar of the agriculture policy framework for 
one year. 

 
(16:30) 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, would she say that? Well she would say 
that, Mr. Speaker . . . She would say that, Mr. Speaker, because, 
because the Canadian Alliance still believes that they’re going 
to make some inroads into Ontario, Mr. Speaker. And they say 
if we support the Ontario farmer and we support the Ontario 
government, you know what, we’re going to win some seats out 
there in Eastern Canada and one day we’re going to be the 
Canadian . . . we’re going to be the national party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have about as much opportunity to form a 
government in Ottawa as the Saskatchewan Party does to form 
government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — They have no opportunity to form 
government in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I say to the members opposite on the agricultural policy. 
I’ve been meeting for 18 or 19 months with farm groups in 
Saskatchewan every five or six weeks, with political leaders, 
Mr. Speaker, in our province. And they’ve said to me . . . And 
I’ve been meeting with the Farm Support Review Committee 
for all that period of time and you know what, there has been 
. . . And we met with the other western provinces from Alberta 
and Manitoba of which our Premier lead that delegation way 
back in June. And you know what? Everybody said to us, in 
June and July, do not sign the agricultural policy framework, 
except who? The Canadian Alliance, Mr. Speaker, and the 
members right there. They say you should sign the agreement, 
so that you in fact could disadvantage Saskatchewan producers 
and you could disadvantage the amount of dollars of which we 
get to our province, and so we should sign the agreement. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, every time, every time in this province 
that the Saskatchewan Party gets involved in agricultural policy, 
it costs the farmers money. On every occasion that it happens, 
Mr. Speaker, they take money right out of the pockets of 
farmers, and directly, Mr. Speaker, lose the money. 
 
And I hear the member from Saltcoats chirping and I like when 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

 

he chirps, Mr. Speaker, because when he chirps I can go and 
talk a little bit about him. Because when we were in Ottawa a 
year and a half ago, Mr. Speaker, or two years ago, the member 
said you know what, we don’t like this AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) CFIP (Canada Farm Income 
Program) program. We don’t like this program, Mr. Speaker, 
and what we need to do is we need to get out of this program. 
 
Well you know what? We weren’t home, Mr. Speaker, for 20 
minutes and the member from Saltcoats had his face on the 
television set. And he said you know what, we should be taking 
that money, Mr. Speaker, and we should be running with it. 
And they took the money, Mr. Speaker. They took the money. 
And what happened? Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers saw 
it come out of their jeans, over a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
over that period of time. And that’s what that party supports, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what that party supports. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, in this 
government, we’ve been developing a policy with our 
provincial friends and with, Mr. Speaker, our national 
counterpart, the federal government. And every political party 
in Canada sits at the table that’s been developing the policy 
framework. There are Conservative governments, there are 
Liberal governments, there are New Democratic governments, 
and you know what? They have a position. 
 
They have a position, Mr. Speaker, and their position is the 
agricultural policy framework, as a concept, works. And they 
all have said it should be funded to a larger degree. Except 
who? APAS has just sent a letter, Mr. Speaker, to the Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture, or collectively have sent a letter, and 
said you know what, this is not about the money, this is about 
the model. And that’s exactly what the member from Watrous 
says on behalf of her party. This is not about the money; this is 
about the way in which the money is going to get paid out to 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is about the money. This is about the money. Because you 
can’t build a brand new national program, Mr. Speaker, on $1.1 
billion has been the position of this government and this 
minister and this Premier, collectively, for the better part of two 
years. We say you should put more dollars into the framework. 
That party over there says, Mr. Speaker, this ain’t about the 
money, this is about the model. And I say, Mr. Speaker, as long 
as that party continues to espouse that kind of language, 
Saskatchewan farmers will be at a disadvantage on every 
occasion that they stand up to speak. And I say, do not get 
involved in agricultural policy, Mr. Speaker, because every time 
you do it costs Saskatchewan, it costs Saskatchewan producers 
money. It costs them money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Today, Mr. Speaker, we have, on an 
ongoing basis, members standing up on that side of the House 
and say, you know what, there’s less money in the budget for 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. They say there’s less money in the 
budget for farmers. And I say to the members opposite, farmers 
in Saskatchewan today are going to get as much and more 
money than they got last year, Mr. Speaker, in our budget this 
year. And the Saskatchewan Party shouldn’t be going across the 
country saying you know what, farmers are going to be 

disadvantaged this year by this budget because they are not. 
 
The CFIP program, Mr. Speaker, is over. There is no more 
CFIP program, so the budget reflects that there is no more 
money in the CFIP program, Mr. Speaker. The budget reflects 
that we have an indexed, funded crop insurance program in 
Saskatchewan; that we met all of our commitments to the crop 
insurance; we’ve put additional money into the agricultural 
policy framework, Mr. Speaker. We put money into crop, into 
the crop forage program, Mr. Speaker. We’ve put additional 
money into renewal. 
 
Our budget is fully funded to match every dollar of federal 
money and more. We’re in with more money, Mr. Speaker, than 
what the federal government has today. And if we do not sign, 
if we do not sign — and I have not signed and not committed to 
sign the implementation agreement today, on behalf of this 
government — but if we do not sign it, you will not have the 
privilege of the $25 million, Mr. Speaker, and nor will you have 
the benefits, Mr. Speaker, today of the enhancements that go 
with the national branding of the Canadian food structure of 
which all of the provinces have agreed to sign. 
 
And I say to the members opposite when they say that no other 
province has signed the implementation agreement, I can tell 
you that I just came off the phone not more than a half an hour 
ago with Mr. Vanclief and all of my colleagues, and you know 
what, 50 per cent of them are already committed to sign the 
agreement, 50 per cent of them already agreed to sign the 
agreement. 
 
And I say to the members opposite over there, you need to stop 
telling people in Saskatchewan today, you need to quit telling 
people . . . They need to quit telling people in Saskatchewan 
today, Mr. Speaker, that there is nobody in Saskatchewanland 
or in Canadaland that’s prepared to sign the agreement, because 
they are. 
 
Before I conclude my comments, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a 
little bit about the investment peaks. Because we have a very 
important differential, and this budget describes it nicely, Mr. 
Speaker, as to how we invest in Saskatchewan. 
 
That party over there, when it’s convenient to them, say you 
know what, we don’t believe in investment, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t believe in investment and so you should not be investing 
in a number of industries in Saskatchewan. But you know what, 
when it’s in their backyard you never hear from them. 
 
The member from Canora-Pelly, I never seen him on one 
occasion, stand up on his feet and say we shouldn’t be investing 
in hog barns in the Rama area, never heard him say it. And you 
know what, this government has invested in the hog industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve never heard the member from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, 
stand up on any occasion and say, you know what, we shouldn’t 
be investing in hogs in the Humboldt area. And we’re investing 
with one of the largest hog producers in Saskatchewan in Big 
Sky. Never heard anybody stand up and do that. 
 
The member from Saltcoats — where they want to build a hog 
barn in his area and they’ve have had all kinds of dissention out 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

there — you know what, you can hardly find him. And I know 
why you can’t find him because Grant Schmidt’s got him, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why you can’t find him. And so that’s why he’s 
not around anywhere. And I’ve never heard a word from him on 
it. 
 
And what did we hear, Mr. Speaker, from the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife? The member from Battleford-Cut Knife 
visited this city, Mr. Speaker, and he had a conversation with 
our Crown corporate members, Mr. Speaker, and he said, you 
know what, I need a new swimming pool, Mr. Speaker, in my 
backyard. I need a new . . . I need a new spa in Wilkie, 
Saskatchewan, and will the provincial government come and 
support us, Mr. Speaker? And we said, you know what, we’ll 
take a look at that. 
 
And he said this is a good thing. And he gets elected, Mr. 
Speaker, in that riding, by saying that I want provincial money 
and we’re going to get provincial money to build a spa in this 
area. You know what, Mr. Speaker, he got elected on that. 
 
And did they overturn his nomination, Mr. Speaker? Not for a 
minute they didn’t overturn his nomination. They said he could 
stay as elected member on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
He could support that constituency, unlike what happened to 
our friend, my friend and my neighbour, Mr. Schmidt. 
 
What happened to him, Mr. Speaker? What happened to Mr. 
Schmidt? Well what happened to Mr. Schmidt when he has a 
democratic elected process and he runs there, Mr. Speaker, and 
says, you know what, I’m going to bring investment to this side 
of the province and I’m going to participate with the member 
from Yorkton in building an ethanol plant, of which, Mr. 
Speaker, by the way, the member from Saltcoats doesn’t 
support. 
 
He doesn’t support building an ethanol plant outside of 
Yorkton. He is on record with his leader and the member from 
Indian Head — and the member from Indian Head — saying 
that you know what, we’re not interested in putting public 
money into building ethanol plants in Saskatchewan. 
 
But you know what? Mr. Schmidt’s prepared to put money into, 
into the economy because Mr. Schmidt brought things into 
Melville when he was in government, Mr. Speaker. And he 
brought the crop insurance and he brought Babcock & Wilcox 
to that community. And that’s why people support him. 
 
But it’s only good to be a Saskatchewan Party member when 
it’s convenient to you, Mr. Speaker. Only when it’s convenient 
to you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so when the member from Battleford-Cut Knife says, you 
know what, it’s okay for us to get money from the public. It’s 
okay for us to build a swimming pool. That’s okay, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But when we want to build an ethanol plant on the outside, on 
the outside of Yorkton where you have — and in the Melville 
constituency, Mr. Speaker — where you can in fact build the 
economy, where you can grow the economy, where you have 
more jobs, and you can grow the agricultural industry, Mr. 
Speaker, what does the Saskatchewan Party say? They say, Mr. 

Speaker, that in fact, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not prepared to let 
the nomination stand. 
 
And I say that we’ve had, in this province in the last couple of 
months, Mr. Speaker, a very sad occasion. And the sad occasion 
. . . the sad occasion, Mr. Speaker, in this . . . in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a sad occasion, Mr. Speaker. And that 
is that when we prepare to build an industry and when we’re 
prepared, Mr. Speaker, to build a community in Saskatchewan, 
we say on this side of the House in our budget, Mr. Speaker, 
unequivocally, that we’re prepared to invest in our economy, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why we’re investing, that’s why we’re investing, Mr. 
Speaker, in health care. That’s why we’re investing today the 
biggest budget in Saskatchewan — $2.5 billion across the 
province for Saskatchewan people because we’re interested in 
making sure that we have sound and solid communities, that we 
have a good health care system, that we could provide the kind 
of medical services that we need across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and that we can have a system today that will grow 
over time and attract the people who come here, as I made my 
comments earlier about why people are moving to my part of 
the community, or my part of the province because they have 
good health care. 
 
And we’re prepared on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, to 
invest in Saskatchewan and we’re doing it in the health care 
side. 
 
We’re prepared to say and we say on many occasions, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re prepared to invest in education by building 
schools — by building schools not only in the larger, urban 
centres, Mr. Speaker, but making investments all over in rural 
Saskatchewan today, ensuring that’s . . . (inaudible) . . . easier 
access today for young people so that they can get their 
education closest to home. 
 
This government is about investing in infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker, and making investment in communities. 
 
And I heard the member from Battleford-Cut Knife, Mr. 
Speaker, talk at length about how it is that municipalities are 
experiencing some hardship today because they haven’t 
received sufficient financing. I don’t think there’s any question, 
Mr. Speaker, that there has . . . needs to be a greater need over 
time in terms of serving municipalities and funding 
municipalities in a greater way. Nobody disputes that, Mr. 
Speaker. But last year we made a $10 million investment to 
municipalities — not enough. 
 
And I can argue that I won’t have enough money in 
Agriculture, and the Minister of Health will argue that we 
should have more money in Health, and somebody will . . . and 
the minister of Education will argue that we should have more 
money in Education. We all need to have and would like to 
have some additional funding over time in each of these files, 
Mr. Speaker, which is certainly not in our purview today. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House there is a very 
definitive difference between who we are and who they are in 
terms of making investment. And we’re going to continue to 
invest, Mr. Speaker, in growing the economy in spite of the 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

 

political differences of which we exercise our privileges today. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, today I’m going to be supporting this 
budget speech because it’s about building Saskatchewan. It’s 
about building Saskatchewan, it’s about building communities, 
and it also differentiates very clearly about who we are and who 
they are. 
 
And Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, when the day comes 
for us to go to the polls — which will come, Mr. Speaker — 
they will also make the decision about who should be 
government for the future. And when the next election is 
completed, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be standing right here on this 
side of the House governing Saskatchewan people and they’ll 
be sitting right over there, Mr. Speaker, in the chairs that 
they’re in right now. 
 
I’ll be supporting the budget, Mr. Speaker, and will not be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
certainly a pleasure this afternoon to get up and end today 
saying a few words in regards to the budget. 
 
Certainly I won’t be given the . . . won’t have the opportunity 
— 5 o’clock is coming upon us very soon, Mr. Speaker, and I 
certainly won’t have the opportunity for a half-hour diatribe as 
we’ve just heard from the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon we heard statements from the 
Minister of Agriculture, we’ve heard the member from 
Yorkton; we’ve heard statements from the Minister of 
Highways, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle; and 
statements from the Deputy Speaker, the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
What I found amazing, Mr. Speaker, in their comments is not 
one of those three gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, defended the 
budget. It’s their budget. It’s their government’s budget and not 
one of those three gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, could get up and 
defend it. Instead what they did in their allotted time this 
afternoon in the debate on the budget is they got up and 
attacked the Saskatchewan Party because we won’t tell them 
how to run the province. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re the government. Let them make the 
decisions on how to run the government. Don’t sit over there 
and ask questions in debate on the budget speech on how the 
province should be run. 
 
If those three gentlemen are unable to participate in caucus in a 
meaningful way on how to run this province, maybe what they 
should be telling, Mr. Speaker, to their Premier, to their leader 
— the man who has not been elected by the people of this 
province to be the Premier — they should be telling him it’s 
time to go to the polls because we have run dry of ideas, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s time for the Saskatchewan Party to be the 
government in this province. And that’s what’s going to 
happen, Mr. Speaker, after the next general election. 

Mr. Speaker, over the last couple of days I’ve heard comments 
by some members on the government side of the House, 
specifically the member from Cumberland and the member 
from Athabasca, talk about all the good things that could be 
going on in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think for the benefit of the House — 
certainly for the benefit of the New Democratic Party, the 
governing party in Saskatchewan — there’s a statement that I 
would like to read into the record. I think it is very relevant to 
this debate. And, Mr. Speaker, this statement is the northern 
strategy vision statement, obviously a vision statement put 
together by the Department of Northern Affairs sometime in the 
past after its creation in 1996. A vision that when you look at it, 
superficially appears to be a very good vision statement. 
 
But I think when we read the vision statement, Mr. Speaker, it 
will give us an opportunity to be able to dissect it and take a 
look at how the government has done so far in being able to use 
this vision statement to create a strategy, Mr. Speaker. And the 
vision statement goes as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The people of northern Saskatchewan will possess the 
means to address the goals and aspirations they have for 
their communities, their families and themselves. With 
respect for northern people, their cultures and traditions, 
Government will work as an active partner with 
communities, Aboriginal authorities, business and industry 
to promote the social and economic development of the 
north. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems like a very good vision statement. 
No one on this side of the House has any qualms about having a 
very good vision statement. Every organization needs a vision 
statement to have a starting point; you’ve got to have that 
starting point. And from that starting point you’ve got to put a 
plan in place. And this is where things start to come apart in a 
hurry for the government, Mr. Speaker, because there is no 
plan. 
 
Part of the budget speech leads further to that, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to read, as I look back through the budget speech, I 
want to read a statement that was in there that I think needs to 
be reiterated again and again: 
 

The 2003-04 action plan was shaped, in part, by the 
Northern Dialogue Tour led by Premier Calvert in 
September 2002. 
 

Now we’re going to get to the crux of the issue, Mr. Speaker, 
now we’re going to get to the crux. And this leads me back to 
something that I was very, very disconcerted about when I 
listened to the member from Athabasca in his speech yesterday 
talking about northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a northern dialogue tour. We’re going to talk. We’re 
going to have meetings and we’re going to talk. Nowhere did it 
say we’re going to have a northern action tour. It didn’t say 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It says they’re going to have a northern dialogue tour after . . . 
This is their 12th year of government, Mr. Speaker, and they 
still want to talk to the people of northern Saskatchewan to find 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2003 

 

out what their hopes and dreams are for themselves, for their 
children, and their children’s children, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
going to talk. 
 
The member from Athabasca reiterated that again yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker. And it is very disconcerting, I say again, when he 
said they’re going to talk about health care, they’re going to talk 
about education, they want to talk about infrastructure, they 
want to talk about economic development. Nowhere did he say 
in his speech, Mr. Speaker, that they’re going to allow anything 
to happen. They just want to talk about it. They just want to talk 
— we’re going to have a study and talk about stuff. 
 
The people of northern Saskatchewan don’t want to talk about 
stuff, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to have dialogues any 
more. There are studies galore, adequate studies that are sitting 
on shelves in this building, in different department — 
specifically Northern Affairs, Mr. Speaker — that outline very 
clearly the hopes and dreams of the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what has this government done with them? They’re sitting 
on shelves — those studies, Mr. Speaker — gathering dust. And 
then what else do they do? They do one more thing. They’re 
going back up North again to have a dialogue. They want to talk 
about this issue some more. 
 
This is the 12th year, Mr. Speaker, and they still want to talk 
about it. After 12 years, if the member from Cumberland still 
doesn’t know, still doesn’t know, Mr. Speaker, what the 
constituents of Cumberland want to have, then I think it’s about 
time that the Premier called an election so that we can get real 
representation in northern Saskatchewan, who will come to 
Regina, who know exactly what the people of northern 
Saskatchewan want, and not need to talk about it any further, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about health care, a few more seats for 
nursing, Mr. Speaker, for northerners to be able to participate in 
a nursing program in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, with 30 
more seats for nursing for northern Saskatchewan residents and 
getting to a total of 300 for the province — 300 nursing seats 
for the province when we’re losing nurses at the rate of 500 per 
year — we’re going to be falling a little short. 
 
That is going to put extreme stress, Mr. Speaker, on the people 
of northern Saskatchewan in trying to provide adequate and 
quality, quality health care for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. How can you have quality health care in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and specifically in northern 
Saskatchewan when you’re not keeping up with the nursing 
seats in this province? 
 
The people of northern Saskatchewan want to participate in 
these programs, Mr. Speaker. They want to participate. 
 
This government, this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, is 
restricting the amount of people in northern Saskatchewan who 
can get into those nursing seats. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
unacceptable. That is the type of colonial government that this 
province is imposing upon northern Saskatchewan that needs to 
be ended. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that social government will get its 
comeuppance in the next general election. And the people of 
northern Saskatchewan will be able to have the quality health 
care that they are demanding and so rightfully deserve under 
Saskatchewan’s medicare plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about education. Talk, I reiterate — talk, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of the great downfalls, Mr. 
Speaker, in trying to provide quality economic opportunities 
anywhere, anywhere in this province, is that you got to have, 
you got to have, Mr. Speaker, high-quality educational 
opportunities in every community in this province. 
 
Now I imagine, Mr. Speaker . . . let’s take a look at . . . I’ll pick 
out a single community and then . . . in deference to time here 
because we’re running a little short on time. Let’s take the 
community of La Loche, 90 per cent unemployment, Mr. 
Speaker — 90 per cent. One of the most dismal unemployment 
rates in this province, 90 per cent unemployment. The member 
from Cumberland knows that full well, Mr. Speaker — 90 per 
cent unemployment in Cumberland House. 
 
So you try to provide quality education for the young people 
there, but you got to give them hope, Mr. Speaker. You got to 
give them a reason. You got to give the young people a reason 
to want to stay in school and to improve their lot in life. 
 
So what is the NDP doing for that, Mr. Speaker? Well, 
absolutely nothing. They’re going to have . . . They’re going to 
talk. We’re going to have meetings. 
 
We can look at the budget for Northern Affairs, and what’s it 
going to be? What’s the biggest, largest increase in the Northern 
Affairs budget? Policy development. More policy development. 
The department has been in place since 1996. There was an Act 
to create the Department of Northern Affairs and they’re still 
developing policy. They still don’t know what they want to do 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of northern Saskatchewan know what needs to 
happen, Mr. Speaker. The studies have been done. They’re 
sitting on shelves gathering dust, and this province is still . . . 
wants to have more dialogue and more studies for northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You can have quality education but you’ve got to have hope 
that goes with it, Mr. Speaker, and this NDP government is not 
providing that hope that is so desperately needed in a town like 
La Loche with 90 per cent unemployment. 
 
Let’s stay on this topic just for another few minutes, Mr. 
Speaker, of the topic of hopelessness — the topic of 
hopelessness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the members got up and said today, they talked about 
the spending that the department of community services is 
going to do in the area of social housing — social housing, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s where the government builds houses for people 
rather than let people build houses for themselves. Of course 
it’s almost impossible to build a house in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You’re not allowed to own the 
land, the property that it sits on. So the government builds them 
houses. 



April 3, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

 

So the government announced that yes, there’s going to be 
spending, there’s going to be spending for social housing in 
northern Saskatchewan. So we look at the budget. You take a 
look at the budget, and I did that, Mr. Speaker. I looked at the 
budget under community services. And lo and behold, the 
municipal housing portion has been cut. It’s been cut in a time 
of rising prices — rising prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year, every year the cost of building a house 
creeps up marginally. In Saskatchewan it creeps up marginally. 
So how can you have a cut in a budget for social housing and 
then announce to the public in Saskatchewan that we’re going 
to build more housing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is it that the minister of community services 
is going to be able to defend himself in this House any further 
when the minister says we’re going to improve, we’re going to 
improve social housing in this province by cutting the budget 
— we’re going to cut the budget? 
 
Well I’ll tell you . . . Actually, Mr. Speaker, if these people in 
northern Saskatchewan had quality jobs, we wouldn’t need 
social housing. And not anywhere in this budget, not anywhere 
in the Northern Affairs budget, not anywhere in the community 
services budget is there any, any indication, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’re going to improve the economic conditions of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s getting to be that time of the day. A little 
more time is going to be needed for me to finish my remarks, 
and so it’d be probably more appropriate at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, that I adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................355 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................355 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................355 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................355 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................355 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................355 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................355 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................356 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................357 
 Wireless Access to Internet 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................358 
 Amendment to Order of Reference for the Special Committee on Regulations 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................358 
 Redirection of Committee Business 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................358 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................358 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................359 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................359 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................359 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................359 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................359 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sexual Harassment in the Workplace 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................359 
 Province Fulfills Commitment to Fix Roads 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................359 
 Provincial 2A Champions Watrous Wildcats 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................360 
 Regional Economic Development Authorities in Saskatchewan 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................360 
 Kindersley Students Advance to Canada-Wide Science Fair 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................360 
 Investing in Northern Saskatchewan 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................361 
 Regina Public Library Definition Derby 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................361 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Government Reaction to Harassment Allegations 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................361 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................361 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................362 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................363 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................363 
 SaskTel Investments 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................364 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................364 
 Closure of North Battleford Residential Facility 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................365 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................365 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................365 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................366 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 



 

 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................366 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................368 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................374 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................377 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................379 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................385 
 


	SaskTel Investments
	SaskTel Investments

