















































Hansard: June 02, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1345 
 June 2, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
present petitions several pages long on behalf of producers from 
the community of Cabri. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg, Lafleche, Assiniboia, and Moose 
Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today with a petition of citizens concerned about the deplorable 
state of Highway No. 20. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Govan, Duval, 
Lanigan, Guernsey, Nokomis; Riding Mountain, Manitoba and 
Neepawa, Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people very 
concerned about the condition of Highway 47. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, Moose Jaw, 
Bienfait, and Macoun. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the state of health care in the 
area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
for fairness to Crown leaseholders. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens and their concern 
with Highway 14. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair this highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and Plenty. 
 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 36, 41, and 120. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
shall give notice on day no. 54 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many applications 
have been received by the department under the farm 
family opportunities initiative program announced on 
March 27, 2002; and how many of these applications have 
been approved? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce 26 grade 11 and 12 students seated in your gallery 
from Sedley High School, about 30 miles southeast of Regina 
here. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Sandi Robertson and 
Alison Deters. I was talking to Sandi before we came into the 
Assembly and she said her students were going to work on 
some real tough questions because I’ll be meeting with them 
after. So hopefully I have a better chance at answering those 
questions than the government seems to when we ask them the 
tough questions. 
 
Anyway, I’d like the Assembly to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, some students in the east gallery that have come 
from an opposite direction from the students from Sedley. 
These are 20 grade 8 students from the school at Turtleford, 
Saskatchewan. They have taken the six-hour, or more, drive to 
come here and I commend them for the interest that they have 
taken in coming here, seeing the procedures, and touring the 
Assembly. 
 
I’d like to extend a welcome to the teacher, Carmela McNinch, 
and also their six chaperones. Would all welcome them . . . 
these people to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and to all the members of the House, a 
former member of this House, Mr. Dale Flavel, who’s sitting at 
the back of the chambers here. 
 
Dale has served this House very well as the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood for two terms. And as many of his extra 
duties of this House, I believe he served for a while as the 
Deputy Speaker of this House. So I’d ask all the members to 
offer Dale a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Canadian Environment Week 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly to tell you 
and my colleagues about Canadian Environment Week. 
According to Environment Canada this is a week devoted to 
environmental issues and activities which focus on the 
preservation, protection, and restoration of the environment. 
 
There’s also a couple of days this week that coincide with 
Environment Week. Wednesday, June 4, is Clean Air Day. It 
has been proclaimed by Ottawa to increase awareness on action 
on both clean air and climate change. Mr. Speaker, June 5, this 
Thursday, is World Environment Day. It was proclaimed by the 
United Nations 31 years ago. The theme of this day is Give 
Earth A Chance. 
 
There are a number of ways to take part in Environment Week. 
The Environment Canada Web site states getting involved is the 
first step. Other ways include telling your children about 
Environment Week and ways to conserve energy. The Web site 
also suggests adopting a park, visiting a park, or maybe 
subscribing to an environmental magazine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many ways to observe National 
Environment Week not only for this specific week, but for 52 
weeks a year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
draw to the attention of the House the fact that June 1 to 7 is 
Environment Week. Some of the information may seem a little 
recycled but that’s entirely in keeping with the theme, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a time for us to contemplate the gains that we’ve 
made to achieve a healthy and sustainable environment and a 
time to assess what more needs to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one activity taking place across the country as part 
of Environment Week is the Commuter Challenge. This will be 
going on from Monday to Friday to encourage the use of 
transport that will reduce air pollution and greenhouse gas 
emissions associated with climate change. So instead of one 
person in one car, people are asked to use greener methods such 
as carpooling, taking the bus, walking, jogging, biking, or 
in-line skating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just one of the many activities that one can 
get involved in during Environment Week. I encourage 
everyone to participate in these activities and ask all my 
colleagues to join with me in renewing our commitment to 
achieving environmental health and sustainability. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Inductee to University of Saskatchewan 
Sport Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
congratulations are in order for Shannon Kekula-Kristiansen, 
originally from Marsden, now living in Saskatoon. She was 
inducted into the University of Saskatchewan Sport Hall of 
Fame on Saturday, April 5. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shannon has been involved in the sports world for 
quite a few years. She has won a various number of awards 
including Saskatchewan Female Athlete of the Year, the first 
gold medal for Canada in the winter games, recognized as the 
number one Canadian shot putter in track and field for many 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shannon has outstanding academic and sports 
abilities. She is currently coaching and managing track and field 
sports for Sask Sport. Shannon is a very worthwhile recipient of 
this award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, join me in congratulating Shannon on her 
induction into the University of Saskatchewan Sport Hall of 
Fame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increasing Interest in Saskatchewan Tourism 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan it’s Tourism 
Week. In addition to generating increased interest in 
Saskatchewan as a travel destination, Saskatchewan’s tourism 
industry is helping to create a more positive perception about 
our Saskatchewan. 
 
A survey following a recent short-haul marketing campaign 
targeted at residents in Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba 
shows that the number of people who were impressed by 
Saskatchewan rose from 69 per cent before the campaign all the 
way up to 81 per cent after. Apparently, Mr. Speaker, there 
were a few members of the Sask Party that were polled in that 
campaign. 
 
As well, when asked the first province or territory that came to 
mind when planning a Canadian vacation, those who named 
Saskatchewan more than doubled from 13 to 27 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to all join me in 
congratulating Tourism Saskatchewan, the local tourism 
branches, and the many tourism businesses that are located 
throughout Saskatchewan, ask that we congratulate them for the 
great job they’re doing in promoting our wonderful province 
and in inviting people from other places to celebrate 
Saskatchewan with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Seager Wheeler Seeding Demonstration 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week was the Seager Wheeler seeding demonstration and that’s 

a demonstration that’s unique to this particular province. 
 
Seager Wheeler, as we all know, was an award-winning seed 
grower and won many national and world awards in that area as 
well. The part that we’re probably more aware of, with the last 
couple of years of drought, is that he was a great soil 
conservationist as well. 
 
The late Larry Janzen, past president of the Seager Wheeler 
Society used to talk about the fact that on Seager Wheeler’s 
land when you did a soil profile, even in today’s times, you 
would see that the soil profile was much better than the area 
around there where they hadn’t used his practices. 
 
This year the seeding demonstration was in memory of Larry 
Janzen. And it’s always interesting to watch the seeding 
demonstration, Mr. Speaker, for those people who haven’t done 
it. You have all the big new equipment is lined up and they all 
take off at the same time to go across the field. There’s 100 to 
1,000 farmers standing behind there and as soon as the 
equipment starts to move, Mr. Speaker, they just converge on 
the soil behind. They get down on all fours scratching the 
ground. Must look strange to people who don’t understand what 
they’re doing. They’re checking the seed placement, the 
fertilizer placement, and the depth, and it’s a very valuable 
demonstration. 
 
Took place again last week, Mr. Speaker. Well attended and 
very worthwhile effort on behalf of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 

Fourth Annual SGI CANADA Charity Road Race 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday morning hundreds of 
people participated in the fourth annual SGI CANADA Charity 
Road Race, and I’m pleased to say that I was among them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the road race is a part of the Timex Road Race 
series and features a 5 and 10 kilometre race as well as a 2 
kilometre family fun walk. This year the event raised funds for 
the Kids Help Phone. 
 
The Kids Help Phone line has been committed to being there 
for kids in Saskatchewan since 1989. It’s Canada’s only 
24-hour, toll-free, bilingual and anonymous phone and Internet 
counselling and referral service for troubled and abused 
children and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all 
the volunteers from the Kids Phone Line and the SGI for 
putting on this great fundraising event, raising some $7,645 in 
support of this very worthy cause. I ask all the members of this 
Assembly to join with me in the commitments to the efforts of 
these fine folks. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The public 
announcement regarding the discovery of a BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) infected cow in an Alberta herd is 
now two weeks old. 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

The Saskatchewan Party has worked with our provincial 
government to develop and maintain a united front on behalf of 
the beef industry. There’s been too much at stake to take 
partisan stances on this matter, especially when reopening the 
American border to our exports ought to the be number one 
priority of all provincial governments. 
 
On Thursday last week the Saskatchewan Party moved a motion 
which received unanimous support in this legislature 
condemning the Prime Minister’s deliberately provocative 
musings at a most sensitive time in the BSE border-closing 
saga. 
 
(13:45) 
 
But that’s where the unanimity ended. That same day the whole 
country learned that Ontario’s Ag minister was floating the idea 
of closing their provincial borders to Western Canadian beef. 
So too were others in the Quebec area and the Maritimes. 
 
And what was the response of our Ag minister? Well rather 
than contacting his Ontario counterpart for confirmation or 
clarification, our NDP (New Democratic Party) minister came 
to her defence, all the while attacking the opposition for having 
our facts wrong. Rather than defend Saskatchewan cattle 
producers, our minister chose to put his faith in the Ontario Ag 
minister. 
 
Now it must have been quite a surprise, Mr. Speaker, to our 
provincial government when on national TV last Friday night, 
the Ontario Premier, Ernie Eves, was publicly apologizing to 
the province of Alberta for the misguided musings of his own 
Ag minister, while here in Saskatchewan our minister still 
didn’t know what she had said. 
 
The cattle producers of Saskatchewan deserve much better 
performance from the NDP government than they saw last 
week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cory Cogeneration Project 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this past Thursday we 
were all pleased but not surprised to read in our esteemed daily 
newspapers the statement by Ms. Nancy Southern, CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the ATCO Group. She said of Our Future 
is Wide Open campaign, and I quote: 
 

I think the marketing campaign Saskatchewan has 
undertaken is first class. It’s terrific, and it’s going to be 
terrific for the economy here . . . It should be highly 
commended for the new opportunities being developed. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Ms. Southern was here for the official 
opening of the Cory cogeneration station in my constituency. 
The Cory project is a solid example of what she was talking 
about — a significant accomplishment that shows 
Saskatchewan merits as a place to attract investment and do 
business. 
 
The Cory project is a world-class, 228-megawatt facility that is 
a 50/50 joint venture between SaskPower International and 

ATCO. And it is only fitting, Mr. Speaker, that during 
Environment Week we recognize this partnership as an 
environmentally progressive station which will provide 
additional safe and reliable electricity at competitive rates. The 
greenhouse gases are about one-third of more traditional 
coal-fired power stations. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the construction phase alone provided 
about 460 person-years of employment for Saskatchewan 
tradespeople and resulted in purchases of $69 million of 
Saskatchewan goods and services. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, Ms. Southern of ATCO, other 
smart business people from across the country, and members on 
this side of the Assembly know that projects like the Cory 
cogeneration station are proof that we are on the move and that 
our future is indeed wide open. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Response to Distress in Beef Industry 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Despite the fact that the discovery of BSE in an 
Alberta cow two weeks ago has driven the beef industry in 
Western Canada to a standstill, the federal government is still 
refusing calls to waive the two-week waiting period for 
Unemployment Insurance applications for workers affected by 
the case. 
 
It is my understanding that the Minister of Labour had a 
discussion with the federal Minister of Human Resources on 
Friday and could not convince the minister to reverse her 
decision. But this weekend two members of the federal Liberal 
government were in Regina, and both Ralph Goodale and Paul 
Martin indicated their government was missing the boat on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of this new-found support within the 
federal Liberal government, what steps is the Premier taking to 
press this issue further with the Prime Minister and to achieve 
this concession for workers who have lost work due to the BSE 
case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see that 
our efforts of last week, the Minister of Labour’s effort, the 
efforts of this government, efforts of the opposition, and efforts 
of other provincial governments and premiers, seems to have 
moved some of the thinking in the federal cabinet. Clearly the 
minister from Saskatchewan now is sharing the view that we 
have, that the two-week period should be waived, and I am 
pleased to see that the next prime minister of Canada shares this 
same view. 
 
Today, Mr. Minister, building on this, I have been in contact — 
and will be throughout the rest of the day — with my 
colleagues, the four Western premiers, particularly as we 
prepare to meet in Kelowna next week. And I have this day sent 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

 

yet another message, another letter, to the Prime Minister of 
Canada — who we know is not in the country but I am 
confident will get the message — that given the statements 
made now by the minister of Saskatchewan and the next prime 
minister, that he should instruct his minister to reverse her 
decision on the two-week period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And Paul 
Martin may be the next prime minister, but that’s going to be 
well into next year and these people have just been laid off their 
jobs now, so we need action a little quicker from the Premier. 
 
Because even today during question period in the House of 
Commons, the Deputy Prime Minister who’s here in the 
country, and the federal minister, Finance, John Manley, 
suggested waiving the two-week waiting period on UI 
(Unemployment Insurance) claims for workers in the beef 
industry would be irresponsible. He once again suggested that 
the seriousness of the BSE impact on workers was not as 
significant as the impact on people unable to work because of 
the SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) outbreak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly a stronger message is needed to get 
through to the federal government. What does the Premier plan 
to do before Paul Martin becomes prime minister to impress 
that this help is immediately needed for workers affected by the 
beef industry slowdown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I need to repeat. 
Perhaps the Leader of the Opposition was not listening. The fact 
of the matter is, today I am speaking with my colleagues in 
Western Canada. Today I have again communicated with the 
Prime Minister, the Prime Minister of Canada today, 
encouraging him to have his minister reverse this mistaken, this 
mistaken opinion. 
 
I am confident of course, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 
Opposition today has written to the federal government and to 
the Prime Minister and to his colleagues in the House of 
Commons. I’m confident that’s happened as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of 
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
has been widely hoped that the trade bans on Canadian beef 
would be lifted quickly. The CFIA (Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency) is progressing in their search for the source of the BSE 
outbreak and their testing of related herds and animals. In fact it 
is hoped that the testing might be completed and confirmed by 
this weekend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture was involved in a 
conference call with his counterparts from across the country 
this morning. What, if any, new timelines for the possible 
removal of trading bans on Canadian beef are now being stated 
as realistic by the federal Minister of Agriculture? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what I said to the press over 
the lunch hour, Mr. Speaker, is that in our conversation with the 
Agriculture ministers across Canada, Mr. Vanclief . . . It’s Mr. 
Vanclief’s view that as we approach the conclusion of our 
scientific work — which should reach a very significant point 
in the next 36 hours — once we reach that point, Mr. Speaker, 
and it continues to appear that we do not have any other 
positive findings other than that one individual cow, it’s our 
view that then we should be in a position to be able to convince 
the US (United States) government that we should be lifting the 
ban on all of the export into the US. And that’s the position that 
Mr. Vanclief shared with us today. 
 
It’s the next 36 hours that will be the significant pieces as the 
tests come in from the farms in which all those animals were 
put down over the weekend. We’re getting a bit of trickle in 
from some of those farms, Mr. Speaker, and they’re all testing 
negative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we of 
course are encouraged that the discovery of only one animal 
remains the only one testing positive to BSE. 
 
Mr. Speaker, late last week Canadian and American 
government officials discussed the possibility of a partial lifting 
of the US ban on Canadian beef. Now we agree with the Ag 
minister that we would like to see a total ban so perhaps he 
could comment on this. Federal Minister Lyle Vanclief said the 
two sides discussed possibly opening the border for specific 
cuts of beef or for younger beef animals although it is desirable, 
as I said, that the ban be lifted entirely. Some movement would 
be an encouraging sign and might serve to relieve some of the 
pressure on our industry. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, what can the Minister of Agriculture tell us 
about this situation? Are there federal discussions for a partial 
ban either by allowing young beef animals or particular cuts of 
beef to cross the border and will the minister support and 
encourage this development or is he opposed to it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we would be very much in 
favour of starting to see the movement of younger animals into 
the US. Our greatest pressure today is in the feedlot industry. 
Any animal that’s between the ages of 18 or 21 months right 
now would nicely fit into that time frame where we began our 
identification and tracking process of 2001. 
 
If there are no other animals that are found to be positive in the 
next 36 hours, it’s our view that this would be an excellent 
strategy to start to move those animals out of the feedlots into 
the US. This would hugely, hugely reduce the kinds of 
pressures that the feedlots are experiencing today and would 
start to signal that the industry is regaining its confidence again 
and moving back on its feet. Because not only would the 
livestock out of the feedlots start to move, the trucking industry 
would start to move, the packing industry would start to move, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s clearly the position that Minister 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

Vanclief has put to Secretary Veneman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we 
certainly also agree that we hope that the borders begin to open 
to Canadian beef again going south. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the cattle industry enters its third week of 
dealing with the BSE case, there is now talk of an industry-wide 
compensation package to help the industry weather the ban on 
beef imports by the US and other international trading partners. 
 
The Alberta beef industry alone estimates it’s losing $6 million 
a day while the slowdown continues and we would anticipate 
that the losses in Saskatchewan are also very significant. And, 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta cattle producers intend to present their 
recommendations for compensation to their minister today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister received any recommendations 
from Saskatchewan’s industry advisory committee, which he 
created, regarding compensation for farms or businesses 
affected by the BSE case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as many will know, because 
I reported on Friday that I’m meeting with the industry 
committee today, the industry committee has been meeting 
through the course of the last two weeks. I’m meeting with the 
industry committee this afternoon. Compensation is one of the 
issues that they have been working on. 
 
I also have had work done within my own department. There 
has been dialogue between departments across the country as to 
what compensation packages should look like. 
 
We’ve always recognized that the most significant piece that 
needs addressed initially will be the feedlots and it’s there 
where we’ve spent much of our time. Those discussions are 
going on, not only in Saskatchewan with my industry 
committee, but they’re also going on at the national table. 
 
I met this morning with the Chair of the Canadian Cattlemen’s 
Association while attending the stock growers’ meeting in 
Yorkton. Mr. Yahnke continues to take the position that this 
needs to be a national strategy. 
 
I’ll have somebody attending my meeting today, here in Regina, 
who will have all of the detail that came out of the national 
meetings so that we can nicely coordinate the work that’s going 
on at the national table and what’s happening at the provincial 
level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in FarmGro Organic Foods 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
It was announced today that the assets of FarmGro Organic 

Foods Inc. have been sold for $3.4 million. FarmGro was an 
organic flour operation located just outside of Regina and went 
bankrupt last December. And, Mr. Speaker, you can add 
FarmGro to the long list of NDP, multi-million-dollar-losing 
businesses that we’ve been seeing that this government has 
invested in over the last couple of years. 
 
But that’s because since 1999 the NDP has spent $1.75 million, 
of taxpayers’ dollars, to buy 27 per cent of FarmGro. And that’s 
not all, Mr. Speaker. Between 1999 and 2001, the NDP also 
loaned FarmGro $3.7 million. 
 
Now that FarmGro’s assets have been sold, will the minister tell 
the legislature how many millions of dollars of taxpayers’ 
money has this NDP government lost in its failed investment in 
FarmGro Organics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members 
are probably aware, on the weekend, I should say more 
specifically on Friday, the deal was struck to sell FarmGro to 
Paterson, a well-known company based out of Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker. And it is the expectation that . . . I should say, first of 
all, let me back up by saying that we’re pleased that the mill 
will be sold as an ongoing and a continuing operation. So for 
that we are appreciative. 
 
In addition to that it will stay functional by operating both as an 
organic mill and also then converting to speciality crops. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total investment by CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) was six and a half million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
question was, FarmGro Organic was sold for $3.4 million. 
That’s money to be distributed through all the investors. The 
government has invested over $6 million. What does the 
government expect to realize out of this 3.4 that it sold the 
FarmGro Organic to Paterson? What does the government 
expect to realize from that? What is the net loss? Is it $5 
million, $4 million? What is the next loss? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ve told 
the member what the investment was by way of equity and 
loans and he’s described for the public what the losses were. I 
think it’s fairly easy to do the math. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, what does the province intend 
to earn from this, Mr. Speaker? We are absolutely thrilled, Mr. 
Speaker, that the operation will be continued as an ongoing 
operation, Mr. Speaker. This will mean jobs, this will mean 
potential, Mr. Speaker. This’ll mean potential for additional 
jobs in that community, Mr. Speaker. It will mean potential and 
a future for organic grain growers. And I think into the future 
there is a strong market as what we’ve seen go on in the world 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

 

for organically grown flours, Mr. Speaker . . . or for flour, I 
should say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
former Chair of FarmGro Board of Directors said the big 
problem with this company was that they built a $12 million 
plant without securing a market for any of their organically 
grown products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the build-it-and-they-will-come approach may 
work in Hollywood, but this NDP government is nowhere close 
to having it work successfully for them. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
government has now gambled over $6 million of taxpayers’ 
money in an organic flour mill that has gone bankrupt in 
December without a business plan, Mr. Speaker, and without 
any due diligence as far as contracting markets for their 
products. What is the . . . Can the minister tell me, how much 
money did FarmGro put back into government for interest 
payments or dividends to the government in 1999 to 2002? Not 
one dime — is that true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that 
question clearly would be a question that should be directed 
specifically for Crown Investments Corporations. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, when I have the specific information I’ll get it for 
him. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me say, and let me add to this, Mr. 
Speaker. We are thrilled that the Paterson group is buying this 
operation and continues to run the mill. I should say it is 
interesting as well that the Sask Party would be critical of this 
investment, Mr. Speaker, and not critical of the private sector 
investors who also, Mr. Speaker, were in the same situation as 
we are, who believed that this was a good investment, who 
believe that there is a great future, and who continue to believe 
that there’s a great future for organically milled flour, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Why is it that he is only critical of Crown Investments 
Corporation? We continue to support, we continue to support 
the communities, Mr. Speaker, across our province. We believe 
that there is a future in organically milled flour, Mr. Speaker, 
and we will continue to support those communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Gaming minister. Many questions remain 
unanswered about the NDP’s $8 million mega bingo scandal. 
Wascana Gaming was paid $1.7 million to supply two things — 
a linked bingo game and electronic cash and paper management 
system. 
 
Last week in Public Accounts Committee, Gaming officials 
confirmed that Wascana Gaming never delivered the cash and 
paper management system, yet they were paid for this work. 
Mr. Speaker, why did Wascana Gaming never deliver this part 

of the contract and why were they paid for work they never 
finished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Well, just for the 
edification of the member from Wood River, and the hon. 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 
how many times I’ve answered the same questions over and 
over. I have submitted, I’ve tabled documents, a complete 
report of expenditures, what it has cost to try and develop this 
mega bingo project to help charities at the request of bingo hall 
operators and charities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to send this report over to the hon. member and if 
she goes through it, it’s all in there, Mr. Speaker. I’ve shared it 
with the media. I’ve shared it with the public. It’s here, Mr. 
Speaker — all the answers are here in this document. I’d like to 
send it over to the hon. member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP’s $8 million mega bingo bust was a disaster from start to 
finish. Eight million taxpayers’ dollars down the drain, and the 
government and bingo hall operators have nothing to show for 
it, not even the new cash and paper management system that 
was part of their original request for proposal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government paid hundreds of thousands of 
dollars for Wascana Gaming to deliver a cash and paper 
management system, but that never happened. To the minister: 
will he answer, why did Wascana Gaming get paid for part of 
their contract that they never, ever fulfilled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess we go 
over all this again. When the SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority) examined what was happening in Alberta 
and the bingo operators said, look, if we make more money, our 
charities will make more money; would you consider going to a 
mega bingo project here in this province — we did, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We asked our Western Canada Lottery Corporation people to 
act as agents. They sought out, on the basis of a request for 
proposals, people that could accommodate the needs of what a 
project would entail here in this province, Mr. Speaker. They 
engaged different people. 
 
You know, that member has continuously maligned — 
maligned — well-known corporations. She’s maligned the 
people that work at SLGA. She’s maligned this minister for not 
supplying information, asking questions about why reports 
weren’t submitted last year when in fact they were, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know what else, how else to help her out. The 
answers are in the document I sent her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues that do not 
make sense. Liquor and Gaming never got a cash and paper 
management system out of this deal but the owners of Wascana 
Gaming did. One of those owners, Vikas Khaladkar, now owns 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

a company called TouchStar Systems. If you go to their Web 
site, one of the main products they are marketing is an 
electronic cash and paper management system for bingo halls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SLGA paid Mr. Khaladkar hundreds of thousands 
of dollars to develop this software, but SLGA never got the 
software and now Mr. Khaladkar is selling it. 
 
How does this work? Why did SLGA pay for a product that was 
never delivered and why did the software not belong to SLGA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, any time software is 
developed on behalf of an organization that pays for it, they 
own the royalties for any of that software if it’s used anywhere 
else. I would hope that that member would understand that. 
 
I mean, when that cash and paper . . . When the mega bingo 
failed, the cash and paper system was not needed to be 
implemented. It was hoped that mega bingo would have in fact 
paid for that cash and paper system, Mr. Speaker. Now that 
software was developed. It exists. And if it’s sold elsewhere, 
SLGA will get royalties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is unbelievable that this 
minister stands up in this House today and says that somehow 
SLGA is getting royalties for a cash and paper management 
system which his officials told us last week at Public Accounts, 
never existed, that they never, ever finished. 
 
This software is in the hands of Wascana Gaming. If you go to 
Mr. Khaladkar’s Web site, it says he obtained patents for the 
cash and paper management system. If he was paid by SLGA to 
develop this technology, why was it never delivered to 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming, and why did Mr. Khaladkar 
end up with the patent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, when the request for 
proposals were issued, and the . . . Wascana Gaming sought out 
people that could contribute towards preparing, in response to 
an RFP (request for proposal), the type of programs that were 
required to try and initiate this cash and paper, along with the 
mega bingo, Mr. Speaker. When that failed, the entire project 
failed and was put on the shelf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And once again, if in fact there is that cash and paper system 
that was paid for, they would then have the responsibility to 
acknowledge the owners of that cash and paper program 
software, Mr. Speaker, and that’s SLGA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, every time the minister of Liquor 
and Gaming stands in this House and answers a question, it just 
opens the door for more and more questions around the whole 
mega bingo issue and about Wascana Gaming. 
 
And who was the person that initiated this? Who gave approval 
for this to go ahead without any business plan, with $8 million 
lost, no cabinet approval, no ministerial approval, and no 

ceiling on the expenditure? And today we find out that not only 
did they spend this money, they do not have any rights to the 
cash and paper management system. It is solely owned and 
patented and used by Wascana Gaming. They are the 
beneficiaries, yet the people of Saskatchewan paid for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the cash and paper management system was part 
of the original request for proposal issued by Liquor and 
Gaming, why was this project never completed for Liquor and 
Gaming? Why was Wascana Gaming paid for a project that was 
never completed? And why did Vikas Khaladkar wind up 
owning the patent on this software instead of Liquor and 
Gaming and the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, once again the member says 
there was no cabinet approval. There was cabinet approval, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think some of the facts and some of the information that 
that member is indicating in this House, and continuing, Mr. 
Speaker, to make accusations and allegations, that I would 
welcome to be made outside of this Chamber. Because it’s 
going a little bit beyond, Mr. Speaker, maligning people, 
maligning our long-term civil servants, people that made an 
honest effort to assist charities through a mega bingo project 
that hotel . . . that the operators were asking . . . Mr. Speaker, 
the information is all documented in the document that I 
released to the media, to the people of this province, and I just 
sent another copy over to that member if she’d care to read it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to read a quote from 
Hansard from 1997 and the quote is: 
 

Could this be another example where it’s simply best for 
government to simply run the province and stay out of 
business? It could very well be, Mr. . . . Speaker. 

 
And guess who made that comment in Hansard in 1997? The 
minister of Liquor and Gaming today, Mr. Ron Osika, made 
that comment. 
 
What this government needs to understand is that they need to 
get out of running business and regulate — that’s what Liquor 
and Gaming is supposed to do — and keep out of running 
private business, as they do in Alberta. 
 
In Alberta we have a satellite system, Mr. Speaker, and it 
works. And it has raised millions of dollars for charity and it 
cost the people of Alberta nothing. And in Saskatchewan we’ve 
got nothing but a disaster and lost millions of dollars and not 
raised one dime for charities. 
 
Will the minister explain to the people of Saskatchewan how he 
can justify losing $8 million and losing money for charities and 
not gaining one dime in return? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Just before the minister speaks . . . 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

 

Order. Before the minister speaks I would remind the member 
about the use of ministers’ and MLAs’ (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) names. It was not clear if it was a quote, 
but I would just remind her at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess it’s 
got to be clearly evident to everybody that the intent of that 
Saskatchewan Party is to sell all the liquor stores and refuse to 
help any charities in any way, shape, or form. That was the 
intent, Mr. Speaker, to help charities that relied on bingo 
revenues. 
 
Alberta was experiencing some successes in that particular area, 
Mr. Speaker, with the linked bingo game, and in fact drawing 
people from this province to Alberta. That’s why the Alberta 
experience was examined to determine if we were able . . . we 
were going to be able to draw as many people to increase the 
funding that would not only go to bingo operators, Mr. Speaker, 
but in that case also go to the charities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, the documents have relayed all the 
costs involved. We’ve been up front. And again, I really take 
exception to that member maligning good, hard-working civil 
servants in this province trying to do good for everybody in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Increase to Licensed Child Care Subsidy Now In Effect 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House today to draw 
attention to the fact that the increase to the monthly licensed 
child care subsidy took effect yesterday, on June 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a province filled with 
opportunity — one of the best places on the earth in which to 
live, work, and raise a family. Our economy is on a roll and all 
signs point to continued strong growth. 
 
We’ve had 12 straight months of job growth with nearly 13,000 
more people working in April of ’03 than April of a year ago. 
The number of full-time jobs increased by 12,000 over April of 
2002. 
 
Now as we have moved ahead with the redesign and delivery of 
our income security programs, our primary focus has been on 
reducing barriers to employment for families with children. 
We’ve done this, Mr. Speaker, because we believe the path 
from poverty and dependence to prosperity is jobs. And, Mr. 
Speaker, through our Building Independence strategy and our 
career and employment services program, we are supporting 
thousands of Saskatchewan people experience the sense of 
pride and self-worth that comes from working and supporting 
their families. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, many of these people have told us that one of 
the barriers they face is finding quality and accessible child care 
that is affordable. The hon. members of this House will know, 

Mr. Speaker, that Child Care Saskatchewan recently announced 
the single largest investment in child care in the history of our 
province. As a result of that investment, we will develop 1,200 
new licensed spaces over the next four years, 500 of them in 
this fiscal year. 
 
Along with that historic investment, Mr. Speaker, we made the 
decision to increase the monthly child care subsidy by an 
average of $20 per child per month effective June 1. It ranges 
from $10 per child per month for school-age children to $30 per 
child per month for infants. We knew this was the right thing to 
do because we listened to parents and the child care community 
when they expressed concerns about the affordability of child 
care. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, not only will families currently 
using licensed child care see an increase to their subsidy. Under 
the new rates, more families will qualify. There is no doubt that 
Saskatchewan families want to work and our economy is 
increasingly making available the jobs they need. 
 
By increasing parent subsidies for licensed child care, Mr. 
Speaker, we are helping more young families move into the 
workforce or enhance their education so that they can take full 
advantage of Saskatchewan’s wide open future. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to respond 
to the ministerial statement that has just been presented to this 
Assembly by the minister regarding child care subsidy and the 
increased subsidies. 
 
No doubt, Mr. Speaker, young families across this province and 
especially families who are facing difficult financial times and 
trying to find gainful employment have discovered that over the 
period of time it’s been difficult to find meaningful 
employment, especially when they’ve had difficulty in being 
able to obtain good, quality child care and didn’t have the 
wherewithal in order to pay for that child care program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we understand where the government’s 
coming from when they talk about increasing child care funding 
because of the needs of Saskatchewan families and the fact that 
while the government talks about the greater opportunities we 
continue to see a need in this province for support programs. 
 
I must add though, Mr. Speaker, looking at the ministerial 
statement, the minister talked about believing the path from 
poverty and dependence to prosperity is jobs. And I’m thinking 
that the minister has been looking very closely at the 
Saskatchewan Party plan to build Saskatchewan and create 
more quality jobs. 
 
And I will agree with the minister that at the end of the day 
what we do need to see in this province is some quality job 
opportunities so that individuals can, in the end — achieving 
these job opportunities, finding the jobs — will find 
meaningful, gainful employment that pays them a salary that 
allows them to provide for the children’s needs in the way that 
they feel would be most beneficial to them. 
 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

So I want to compliment the minister for recognizing at this 
time there’s a need. We trust down the road we will find that 
individuals themselves, through the greater opportunities in the 
future, will not have to rely on governments and other agencies 
to provide for the needs that they themselves would like to 
provide. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 569 and 570. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 569 and 570 have been tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand today on behalf of the government to convert for debates 
returnable, questions 571 through 609 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 571 to 609 inclusive have been 
converted to orders for returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 39 — The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
speaking to Bill 39, amendment to The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act — speaking in particular I guess to the $10 million 
that was put into the revenue-sharing pool for 2003 and 2004 — 
I guess we need to recognize that the contribution of this $10 
million only brings the commitment to about 50 per cent of 
where the revenue-sharing pool was at from ’88 to 1990. 
There’s been an awful lot of, I guess, downloading, awful lot of 
responsibility that the municipalities have, needing to pick up 
on, to look after the infrastructure needs and the needs of 
services within the community as well. And we need to 
recognize the value of the $10 million in the sense of what it’s 
given to the communities in that respect. 
 
I guess we have the communities now starting to look, the 
municipalities in particular, starting to look at alternate revenue 
sources and the need to be looking at alternate revenue sources 
as well. I guess the commitment of the revenue-sharing pool 
just isn’t adequate enough for the sense of providing the 
services and providing the needs of the municipalities. We’re 
seeing the grants in lieu of taxes haven’t changed; we’ve seen 
the assessments going up. So that’s been an offsetting of 
responsibility, an offsetting of costs and values for those 
properties as well. And the municipalities are needing to pick 

those costs and needing to fund those expenditures through the 
property tax base which would seem to be rather unfair to the 
taxpayers as a whole. 
 
There are other programs that are out there as well. We have the 
CSIP (Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) program 
that the municipalities have been applying to from 2001 to 
2004. But when you look at that whole opportunity that that 
money is being made available for, there’s about 80 per cent of 
the dollars that come out of CSIP go into the water system. That 
leaves very little dollars in the sense that need to go into the 
infrastructure program which the revenue-sharing program is 
just falling short of looking after those needs. 
 
In the sense of what’s happened with CSIP, in 2001 and 2002 
there was 535 applications, and of those there’s only 91 of them 
that could be approved that year; 2002 to 2003 there was 
another 452 applications, with only 142 being approved for that 
application period as well; 2003 and 2004 we had another 324 
applicants, with only 52 applicants being approved through that 
period of time. So we’ve had well over 1,000, actually 1,311 
applicants that have come through that program over the last 
three years and only about 285 of those applicants were 
approved. 
 
So about 21, 22 per cent of the actual need out there for 
infrastructure that’s not being looked after. And the majority of 
that infrastructure just is in the water system alone so we’re not 
even addressing the other needs that are required within our 
municipalities where revenue sharing needs to address that area 
of need for those municipalities. 
 
And I guess if you turn that into real dollars, we have an 
average of about $120,000 per application and when you have 
over 1,300 applications that are made with 285 being approved, 
that leaves you well over 1,000 applications short. So there’s 
well into $1 billion worth of need out there for infrastructure 
that’s not being addressed. 
 
And I guess if we’re going to have a wide open future and if 
we’re going to grow the province, we need to have some dollars 
within the municipalities to be able to provide that ability to 
have adequate services being provided within the municipalities 
and having a standard of living within the municipality as well, 
and having businesses look at our province and say that we 
have some real opportunity here and we have some real 
advantages when we come into these communities and come 
into these municipalities to grow our businesses as well. 
 
We see also in the Bill that there were some changes and 
additions made in the sense of the funding of the granting to the 
rural municipalities. And there has been a bit of formula that’s 
been worked out in the sense of how the dollars are going to be 
spent with rural municipalities and it talks about spending about 
85 per cent of that money that goes into the rural roads and into 
their infrastructure. There’s another 15 per cent of that money 
that’s going to be used to be taking a look at special projects 
and it’s going to be used as an equalization formula that can 
take a look at some particular needs, especially heavy-haul 
roads in that regards, which again is a requirement in the sense 
of traffic flow within those municipalities. So that’s very 
important to recognize as well. 
 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

 

There is going to be a regulation that’s going to be set in the 
sense of how that 15 per cent is going to be expenditured. And 
it’s always a little interesting when a regulation comes in how a 
regulation’s actually going to impact the usage of those dollars. 
And we don’t always have the ability to work with setting 
regulation that . . . the 15 per cent actually impacts the area of 
need within those heavy-haul roads as well. 
 
We’ve had quite a change in the environment of economic 
development in rural Saskatchewan and within all the 
municipalities, but in particular rural Saskatchewan. And we 
need to bring that whole road structure up to the need of what’s 
happened out there with the hog barns, with the inland terminals 
that are being built out there, with the feedlots that are being 
proposed as well. 
 
We need to recognize and have some future planning and such. 
And that I think is one area where obviously the government 
has fallen short in the sense of doing some long-term planning 
because you’ve seen some opportunities come up and be 
developed but the infrastructure for the road system isn’t always 
there. 
 
And it’s almost a knee-jerk reaction when the dollars come into 
place, when you’ve got to pull it out of revenue sharing to 
satisfy something that should have been planned over extended 
period of time and that could have been in place as the whole 
structure of economic development starts changing within the 
province as well. 
 
So there is one area that we still need to have a better 
understanding of how that equalization, that 15 per cent, is 
going to work and how that’s actually going to address the 
needs of the agriculture producer and looking after the 
infrastructure of the roads out there. 
 
And I guess the other question is, what happens when you put 
these heavy-haul roads in there, what happens to the highway 
systems? Are they offsetting some of the traffic flow that’s 
coming on the highway systems, the thin membrane highways 
that are out there? Is that starting to become more of the 
responsibility of the rural municipalities as well, that they’re 
starting to carry that cost and that burden? And 15 per cent then 
of the dollars that are allocated in there, if that’s the direction of 
highway traffic flow that is going to take place, it becomes 
questionable if that’s going to be adequate for the future as 
well, if you’ve got those amount of dollars in there, in that 
respect. 
 
But I think in the overall picture, we’re still seeing that we’re 
dollars short. We’re many dollars short in the sense of where 
we were in the late ’80s and early ’90s in the sense of where the 
needs of infrastructure need to be. And if we can recognize that 
those are the kind of dollars that we needed to develop 
infrastructure needs in the municipalities in that period of time, 
why you would not realize that those dollars are required in the 
system today, that we can have an adequate delivery service and 
an adequate infrastructure system that’s out there as well. 
 
(14:30) 
 
So there’s still a lot of dollars that need to be put into the 
system to adequately fund the needs of the municipalities out 

there. And I guess when you hear the comments from the 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
people after the budget when they were terribly disappointed in 
the sense of the way the dollars came out — they were insulted; 
it was unfair; they were angered — you can understand the fact 
that there is frustration there, that there’s needs there. 
 
And you keep going back to the only one source of money 
that’s out there for those municipalities is the property tax base. 
And if you keep wanting to go back to that property tax base 
. . . And we know that needs to be shared with education. And 
that pressure hasn’t come off and it hasn’t alleviated the 
municipalities to allow to be able to use that tax base. Again, 
now they’re starting to look at alternate revenue sources. 
 
And when the question was raised as far as sharing some of the 
15 cents on fuel tax, that was an area there was some 
opportunity to use those dollars and use them in the sense of the 
road system and infrastructure system, which we can justify 
those dollars being used there, but there didn’t seem to be an 
interest at all to provide some of those dollars out of the fuel tax 
base at all to go into the road structure system at this time at all. 
 
So they’re looking at other ways of trying to generate dollars. 
And it becomes I guess very complex and becomes very 
difficult to justify needing to go into other revenue sources to 
try and bring dollars out of that in another taxation form. And 
when you have a tax, a form of taxation from the property tax, 
if the pressure can be taken off of the property tax from 
education and other sources, that you can justify using those 
dollars in the . . . and providing the services that are needed for 
the municipalities as such as well. 
 
And revenue sharing needs to recognize in the sense of the 
dollars that are coming in there that it needs to either put more 
dollars into revenue sharing or it needs to take the pressure off 
of property tax from the other areas that the property is being 
taxed on as well. 
 
There’s also other areas that the municipalities are now starting 
to have pressure in downloading come down as well. You see in 
the health system that any infrastructure needs that are being 
developed there as well, there is a huge pressure that comes 
back to the municipalities that they are required for capital 
expenditures — even capital equipment expenditures. If you’re 
needing to replace equipment and such, it’s the responsibility of 
those communities and those municipalities to generate those 
tax dollars. And where do you go? You always go back to that 
same source, is back into the property tax to try and find those 
dollars as well. So those are other pressures that are out there in 
that respect as well. 
 
The VLT (video lottery terminal) was another system that was 
looked at to saying that there’s dollars available there. And I 
know it went through the different conventions and there never 
was a clear understanding of how that VLT money was going to 
be moved across to the municipalities. 
 
So it was very difficult for SUMA and SARM to identify that 
they could readily accept the fact of either rejecting or accepting 
the VLT dollars that came through. But that was, in a sense, 
initially a way that there was going to be some dollars made 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

available for municipalities that never did materialize as well, 
and that’s just gone back into the general coffers of the 
government as well. 
 
You’re also seeing that there’s development of regional waste 
authorities needing to look after the waste that’s comes from 
household, it also comes from commercial, and it comes from 
industry as well. And there too we see there’s dollars being 
generated through SARCAN and those dollars end up in the 
general coffers as well. There’s probably something in the 
neighbourhood of about 7 or $8 million that is actual recycled 
dollars that are generated from recycled products that should 
come back into the system of paying for the whole recycling 
program as such. 
 
We have the paper stewardship program that really hasn’t got 
off the ground, and it’s very costly to run that system. But you 
have dollars going into the government’s coffers and into the 
government’s other expenditure areas which should come back 
to the municipalities to help them look after the sense of 
developing the whole system of waste management and such. 
 
And you hear the Minister of Environment always talk and 
acknowledge the fact that, I guess, in theory that’s the direction 
where they would like to go. They would like to create the 
regions and they would like to promote the regional concept as 
such in this stewardship program as such. 
 
But when you’ve taken the dollars off the top of the program, 
the real good dollars that you could be working with within that 
system and not using them for the purpose of what they’re there 
for, and downloading that back down onto the municipalities, 
that they’re required to quit burning. They’re required to be 
more environmental friendly in the sense of management within 
the system, but they’re not given the dollars that the system 
generates to really be working with. That becomes a little unfair 
for them to start making those kind of changes and having to go 
back again to the property tax to try and find those dollars to 
make those changes and develop that whole system as well in 
that regards. 
 
So I guess seeing that the dollars aren’t being spent in maybe in 
the wisest way that the government of today is spending those 
dollars, we’re seeing dollars being spent out of the province and 
out of the country and we’re always coming back to the 
property tax base within the province for the municipalities, that 
you can see and you can ask why we can’t use those dollars and 
why those dollars aren’t made available for the municipalities. 
For the municipality just asked for $20 million in 2002 and 
2003. And now they’re asking for $15 million for the urban 
municipality sector in particular and finding that they only 
receive a third of that. The monies are spent elsewhere. 
 
You could see the frustration that comes from these leaders and 
these mayors in particular in the sense of how they have to go 
back to their councils and how they need to go back to their 
taxpayers and ask them for more dollars. And when you’re 
seeing mill rates going up 3, 4, 5, 6 per cent to adjust for the 
expenditures for their current operating year for these 
municipalities, it becomes very difficult for them to justify that 
back to the taxpayers. 
 
And I guess we need to spend some more time getting some 

extra clarification. We have SUMA and SARM still looking at 
the Bill, reviewing it, and identifying where some of their 
concerns are and waiting for some of those comments to come 
back as well. So I guess, with those comments, we look forward 
to having more discussion on this Bill so I’ll adjourn debate at 
this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 30 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 30 — The Pawned 
Property (Recording) Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to stand today and talk about Bill No. 30, The 
Pawned Property (Recording) Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 30 is an Act that will legislate the 
recording of information and subsequent reporting of 
information pertaining to property pawned in the province’s 
pawnshops to police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recording of information by pawnshop 
proprietors is nothing new. Pawnshops in this province have 
been recording information pertaining to items pawned, as well 
as the individuals who are pawning these items, for years. And 
this is done, Mr. Speaker, for a tracking record and also in the 
event there are stolen items involved. 
 
What this legislation proposes to do is that all pawnshops must 
record and report this information. And it’s also assumed in this 
legislation that with the technological age that we’re living in, 
that the recording and reporting will be done through electronic 
means. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe there is some pawnshops in this 
province right now that are not computerized. And what this 
Bill, if enacted, would result in forcing pawnshop operators to 
get into the technological age and have computers and put 
everything on computer storage so that they could transmit this 
information. 
 
According to the press release issued by the Department of 
Justice on this Bill, the legislation will create the framework for 
the implementation of a computerized registration system to be 
used by pawnbrokers to report pawned property directly to the 
police at the time of transaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is also touting the legislation as a 
means to enhance both crime prevention and detection through 
improving the speed, accuracy, and consistency with which 
pawnbrokers provide police services with information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a question about . . . that you have to think 
about it for just a second is if the pawnbrokers, the onus is on 
the pawnbrokers to record all of this information to identify 
stolen goods, who, who is left with the responsibility of 
providing information on stolen goods? Is it actually the 
pawnbrokers or is it the police system? 
 
And also of note, Mr. Speaker, it looks like a huge drive to cure 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

 

the transmittal or the selling of stolen goods is why the big push 
for this Bill; where in fact, according to the pawnbrokers’ 
estimation, there’s less than point five — again I repeat, less 
than point five — of 1 per cent of transactions that pawnbrokers 
deal with goods that actually have been stolen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to this Bill, The Pawned Property 
(Recording) Act, some of the main stakeholders will see a 
significant change in the way they do business in this province. 
It’s extremely important that we are here to express the views of 
these people and we bring it up in front of the House. 
 
Before I discuss the concerns that this organization raises, 
though, there’s some of them that are not . . . that are definitely 
not related to the recording of information or submitting it to 
the police because as I’ve already stated, the pawnbrokers 
already record the information and it’s available for the police. 
And also there’s a lot of them that are on electronic filing 
already so the Saskatchewan pawnbrokers association is not 
opposed to the electronic filing of data and they’re on record as 
saying that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SPA, the Saskatchewan pawnbrokers 
association, their concern more is about more of the software 
system and the company that provides the system that may be 
used to execute these transactions. To date the majority of 
proposals for legislation and bylaws from various police forces 
across Saskatchewan invariably involve a corporation called 
Business Watch International, BWI. And as we know and as 
we’ve heard in this House before, BWI is 93.1 per cent owned 
by SaskTel. 
 
We also know that most police forces are requesting that 
whatever recording system will be used should be compatible 
with CPIC, Canadian Police Information Centre. And I think 
this is only natural that one should be compatible with CPIC. 
But it’s been pointed out that CPIC restricts access to and has 
granted access only to BWI. Thus a monopoly has been created 
and all competitors are excluded. 
 
So just to follow on that, BWI is the only company that has 
access to CPIC. And now when police departments are saying 
that there must be access to CPIC, it thus reads that BWI is in a 
monopoly position. 
 
Now let’s just look a little bit at BWI. In the 2002 report, BWI’s 
technology leverages the Internet to enable pawnshops to 
register their transactions into a database. Prior to 2001 when 
SaskTel purchased most of BWI, BWI and SaskTel jointly 
developed this Internet-based service with trials in Regina. And 
again I reiterate, as at the end of 2002 SaskTel owned 93.1 per 
cent of the corporation. 
 
The next information the report relates is rather interesting. 
According to the annual report, BWI is expected to be cash 
positive, cash flow positive, by 2005. Well if it’s not going to 
be cash flow positive until 2005, that would mean that they’re 
losing money now. And I believe we’ve heard it in SaskTel’s 
testimony and in the House here, that BWI has lost in the 
neighbourhood of $1 million in the last year. 
 
I’d like to put a couple of quotes into record if I could. Randy 
Burton of The StarPhoenix notes in his May 1, 2003, column 

that what this means is that BWI, and I quote: 
 

. . . is losing money too, but SaskTel won’t say how much. 
 
And that’s from The StarPhoenix. 
 
The other interesting piece of information coming out of 
SaskTel’s annual report is the following, and I quote: 
 

Execution of the business plan depends in part on the speed 
of adoption of a legislated environment for the pawn and 
second-hand industry. 

 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has a little bit of an odour to it, I would 
suggest. Here we have a SaskTel subsidiary losing money. It’s a 
Crown corporation and now we have a government legislating 
the fact that pawnbrokers would have to use this company to 
comply with the terms of this Act. There’s something a little bit 
fishy about that. Really when you look at it, it sounds like 
maybe the NDP government has found a way to prop up one of 
its money-losing ventures and that’s through legislating that all 
pawnbrokers have to use this system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, BWI charges up to $1 for every transaction made 
at a pawnshop, no matter how many times an item is pawned or 
how many times a person comes in. And I’ve spoke to people in 
the pawnshop business and they’re quite outraged with this $1 
because basically it’s a $1 tax on the customer. 
 
And in Saskatoon alone there’s in excess of 100,000 pawn 
transactions per year, so that throws another $100,000 into the 
coffers of BWI in a feeble attempt to try and make it a solvent 
company. 
 
Now if you multiply that $1 figure out throughout the rest of the 
province, you’re really looking at millions of dollars that will be 
generated for BWI because of this legislation. So it’s very easy 
to see why the pawnbrokers association is quite upset with it 
because this again is being passed on to the customers. 
 
And if you look at it, no wonder that in SaskTel’s report they 
talk about BWI becoming cash flow positive by 2005. If this 
legislation comes into being and everybody is forced to use this 
BWI software at a buck a head, surely by 2005 they would 
become cash flow positive just because of the direction of this 
Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s basically on the backs of the people 
that are seeking the use of pawnshops and those are the people 
that usually don’t have that extra money to actually pay that $1 
per transaction tax. 
 
The Saskatchewan pawnbrokers association believes that the 
use of BWI necessitates the charging of fees to the customers to 
pay for policing work, generating substantial profits for BWI as 
I mentioned. Most people who use pawnshops, Mr. Speaker, as 
I mentioned, are already financially strapped and they’re going 
in for some quick money by taking an item in to pawn and to 
hold, and they’re the ones that need the money and then this is 
just adding another tax to it. 
 
And I’d like to just put a couple of items in the records. The 
Winnipeg pawnbrokers association as well as a number of 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

anti-poverty spokespeople in the city voiced similar concerns. 
In an article entitled, “New system ‘tax on poor’: pawnshops 
balk at transaction fee,” by Ross Romaniuk in The Winnipeg 
Sun, November 19, 2001, these people stated that, and I quote: 
 

Although the proposed fee is only $1 . . . that surcharge is 
enough to break the financial backs of inner city residents 
who don’t use banks. 

 
The Cash Canada Group out of Alberta says, and I quote: 
 

The fees BWI want to charge for their service are already 
exorbitant . . . our fear is that if BWI gains a legislated 
monopoly, they might begin a series of increases that will 
even more unfairly burden both the pawn store owners and 
their clients. 

 
They go on to note that, and I quote: 
 

BWI have an agenda and are definitely under pressure by 
their shareholders to find somewhere to implement in 
Canada. 

 
There are a number of other alternative software systems, and 
I’ll just use one — it’s called l.e.a.d.s on-line — that provides 
similar service at much less cost to the pawnbroker and the 
client. The British Columbia Pawnbrokers Association notes 
that BWI is only one such company that can provide the service 
as required and that, and I quote, “They are the most 
expensive.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think you can visualize what’s going on here. 
Again we have another one of the investments by this 
government that’s going south, and one way to bring it out of 
the doom and gloom of the financial woes that it’s in is to 
legislate a Bill directing that all pawnbrokers will use this 
system at a rate of $1 per usage, per transaction, which basically 
is a tax on the people that really can’t afford that tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think you can see by my comments that 
there’s a number of questions that need to be raised on this 
issue. We will be speaking again with the pawnbrokers 
association and other stakeholders on this Bill. So at this time 
I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
 

Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate right, I have Kirk McGregor, the assistant deputy 
minister of Finance. To my immediate left is Arun Srinivas, the 
senior tax policy analyst for the department. And behind Arun 
is Brian Smith, the executive director of PEBA (Public 
Employees Benefits Agency). And those are the officials that 
are here with us today to discuss the Acts from the Department 

of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Good 
afternoon to the officials with you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think there are three or four significant areas in 
this Bill, things that require changing regarding the 
post-secondary tax credits. We look at the small-business tax 
changes that you proposed and a couple of areas that, I guess, 
seem to catch up to the federal income tax. And I know in your 
document that was circulated as explanatory notes, you referred 
to a number of things as technical changes required to correct 
references to the federal income tax. 
 
And that’s where I’d like to begin, Mr. Minister, is to actually 
move you to section 5, which is the M&P or manufacturing and 
processing profits. And the explanation there is that this section 
needs to be changed because of a technical change to correct 
references to the federal Income Tax Act. 
 
Could you explain to the House the reason, the technical reason, 
for these changes? Are we moving to move in accordance with 
a federal change or is this a provincial reference to include a 
different definition? Could you give us explanation as to why 
we require section 5? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, as the member opposite 
knows, and from the second reading speech, that certainly the 
purposes of this Act are twofold really. It’s to enshrine the 
small-business tax reductions that were introduced in the 2003 
budget and to provide for several technical amendments to the 
Act. 
 
Now the specific one that he’s referring to with regards to M&P 
profits, this is related to a change in the federal definition which 
was amended in 1996 and in 2001. And what the Act does is 
incorporates the provincial definition as amended to restore 
consistency with the federal legislation. So these are the reasons 
for this technical amendment, and obviously the member 
opposite is right on in terms of the technical issue that was 
highlighted. So thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that explanation, Mr. Minister, 
Mr. Chair. The other area as you’ve highlighted of course is a 
change in the small-business tax. First by way of an 
introduction, Mr. Minister, there have been significant moves in 
the area of defining what is a small business. We’ve seen 
numbers change from 200,000 to 300,000. Could you supply an 
answer to . . . or two-part answer I guess to a two-part question? 
 
First of all, what is the current definition for people in the 
province to have an understanding of what is meant by small 
business? And based on that definition, how many businesses 
actually are completing returns that would indicate that they are 
a small business? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask for 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m going to attempt to use my strongest voice 
today, which isn’t very strong. And I hope the students from 
Prince Albert, W.J. Berezowski School, can hear me. I have a 
bit of a sore throat so I’m going to do my best. 
 
I want to introduce to you and to all members of the House a 
group of 37 grade 3 and 4 students from W.J. Berezowski 
School, and that’s in East Flat in Prince Albert and it’s the best 
school in the whole city, I’m told. 
 
They are accompanied by Mr. Strelioff, Ms. Jaseniuk, and Ms. 
Shewchuk and I see some parents along with them. I’m going to 
be meeting them for drinks in room 255 very shortly, and I’m 
looking forward to all of the questions that are going to come 
from the students at W.J. Berezowski, so look forward to seeing 
you in a couple of minutes. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member, 
the Finance critic for the Sask Party, has put two questions 
forward in two parts, and would like two answers. 
 
The first question was with regard to the current definition of 
what would be called the small business. And what a small 
business in Saskatchewan would mean would be a Canadian 
controlled, private corporation that would be eligible to apply 
the small-business rate up to a threshold of 300,000 of taxable 
income. 
 
So I guess the key feature here is it’s not a public corporation, 
not publicly traded. This would be a Canadian controlled 
private corporation. 
 
And the estimate for Saskatchewan is that roughly 27,000 
businesses, in that ballpark, would fit into that particular 
category within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, your 
government is proposing that on January 1, 2004 the 
small-business tax rate of 6 per cent that is currently in effect 
will be reduced to 5.5 per cent. Mr. Minister, that obviously has 
some financial impact on revenue for the government. 
 
And I note in your department’s forecasting of the various 
components of corporation income tax, you indicate that the 
small-business reduction for last year, and I’m assuming that’s 
those 27,000 eligible businesses that used a 6 per cent rate 
because their threshold was less than 300,000 of taxable 
income, they would have, combined, resulted in an $80.1 
million reduction in revenue of income tax — corporate income 

tax — to the Saskatchewan government. 
 
For this fiscal year 2003-2004, which would include three 
months of a new rate of 5.5 per cent since your government’s 
fiscal year is until March 31, you are forecasting that that 
small-business reduction will be increased to 106.4 million. In 
other words, we’re seeing a change of about $26 million. 
 
Now I’m suspecting that that total isn’t all the fact that we’re 
going to see a huge increase in the number of businesses 
growing in Saskatchewan because of a half a per cent reduction. 
But I’m sure that your officials have done some forecasting, 
Mr. Minister, and when you’ve looked at that reduction of 26 
million, how do you account for such a significant difference in 
what your government actually reduced small-business taxes 
last year in relationship to this year? The numbers don’t seem to 
correspond unless you’re forecasting a huge growth in the 
number of businesses that are actually going to be growing in 
Saskatchewan and taking advantage of that 6 per cent or 5.5 per 
cent tax rate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the simple answer is that 
it’s a calculated number based on federal estimates. So what 
happens is we get our federal forecasts initially, then we get the 
revised forecast, then our share is applied of that revised federal 
forecast to give us the gross number and then within the 
province we assume of that gross number that roughly 35 per 
cent would apply to small business. So that is what that end 
estimate result is. 
 
So it’s really the federal forecast, the adjustments that are then 
applied from CCRA (Canada Customs and Revenue Agency) in 
terms of the revised forecasts, the application of our share in 
terms of the gross corporate income tax system, and then the 35 
per cent assumption with regard to small business is how we 
come up with that number, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
other component in the table that’s included for the components 
of corporation income tax are that there are prior year 
adjustments. Listening to your explanation just now, when you 
look at the forecast that you have put forward or your officials 
have put forward, is that there . . . for last year there was an 
adjustment of 43.3 negative dollars, okay, so . . . and for this 
year there was a proposed positive adjustment of $46.9 million. 
If you look at the two numbers together, that’s a difference of 
about $90 million. 
 
Now is that the same type of adjustment that you’re indicating? 
That this is a federal estimate for what will happen in 
Saskatchewan and as a result . . . I’m assuming that this is not 
just for small business, that this is for all corporations, and that 
the change for Saskatchewan is about 90 million. And could 
you explain why your forecast seems to indicate that we’re 
going to have such a significant impact for prior year 
adjustments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, the answer is that 
all of these estimates related to corporate income tax and how 
they apply into the estimates for ’03-04 are basically catch-up. 
And that would apply also to ’02-03. 
 
So when we look at the weakness of 2001 in the national CIT 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

(corporate income tax), the adjustments related to that weakness 
on that are not made until the subsequent year. 
 
So when we look at the ’02-03 forecast that indicated a prior 
year adjustment of 43.3, this would have been related to the 
weak assessment numbers from the federal government in terms 
of 2001. And the ’03-04 is providing the catch-up related to not 
only recovery but a stronger assessment base and also a higher 
share related to the overall corporate income tax structure. 
 
So it’s a combination of several technical events that would 
indicate that the program or process is that when the federal 
government gets its information and provides that information 
to us, that’s their initial assessment. There’s a subsequent 
assessment and then we get the final estimate . . . or the final 
numbers from the federal government; usually a lag time of at 
least one year and sometimes longer. So that’s why these 
numbers need to be corrected on an ongoing basis, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Thank 
you for that explanation. And while we understand that 2001 
had a . . . there was a negative growth here in Saskatchewan 
there was, according to the Dominion Bond Rating Service with 
numbers published here just a couple weeks ago, we’ve had two 
negative numbers. 
 
So if I’m to use the same analogy then for this year, if they’re 
going to do a prior year adjustment for a 2002 year, which is 
last year, we should still be in a pretty negative position. Yet we 
seem to have jumped to a very positive position. Your 
explanation about why we had a negative number last year is 
based on 2001, and now for this year it doesn’t hold true for 
that same negative number that Dominion Bond Rating Service 
has reported for Saskatchewan. Is there an explanation as to 
why that’s different, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, first off as stated 
before when we’ve been discussing estimates for the 
Department of Finance, there is no direct, one-to-one 
correlation between real GDP (gross domestic product) and the 
revenue forecast for the province of Saskatchewan. And as we 
saw, and as indicated by the member opposite, in last year we 
had a decline in our real GDP of 1.4 per cent, yet our revenue 
growth was significantly higher than we had estimated in the 
budget. 
 
So the simple answer is that we are quite confident today we are 
dealing with 2002 data that is based on actual income tax 
collected. And we recognize that in 2002, and of course even 
today, the amount of oil and gas profits were much higher than 
expected and certainly much higher than we’d seen traditionally 
in the previous five to ten years. And of course that means 
increased revenue for the province of Saskatchewan in terms of 
corporate income tax paid. The main reason is that there is no 
direct correlation between the real GDP estimate in this year for 
6.8 per cent, or the negative 1.4 per cent last year, and the actual 
revenue projections for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, to 
the minister, the largest number of sections in this Act pertain to 
the post-secondary education tax credit, graduating tax credit. 
 

I guess, Mr. Minister, it was my understanding, and I think 
probably the understanding of most people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that there was to be only one post-secondary 
credit per individual over a course of a lifetime. And is it 
correct to state, Mr. Minister, that the changes that you have 
proposed in the various sections in this Act are indeed 
clarifying that? And then secondly to that, Mr. Minister, is this 
clarification required because there have been examples of 
maybe some abuse where there was an attempt to obtain more 
than one credit? 
 
And the following part, Mr. Minister, of course is the estimation 
from your department, I believe, is that the post-secondary 
graduation tax credit results in about $3 million worth of credit 
being given to students. Is that a growing number or is that 
remaining constant since this program has been introduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, first off I think that 
the intent of these amendments are designed mainly to simplify 
compliance with the Act and also to improve filing for students. 
 
(15:15) 
 
There has been no abuse of the graduate tax credit because the 
CCRA has been administrating this since its introduction and 
has been applying the one credit, one graduate rule for some 
time.  
 
So really these technical amendments just improve and simplify 
compliance. It improves the filing requirements for students and 
ensures that we will have one graduate tax credit per student. 
 
In the province of Saskatchewan, we’ve been looking at 
roughly between 9, almost 10,000 — in the neighbourhood of 
9,500 to 10,000 graduates each year. The overall cost related to 
this program is, as indicated, that $3 million range, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Just a quick question there, Mr. Minister. 
When you say there are $9,500 . . . 9,500 graduates, is that 
people who are actually taking advantage of the tax credit and 
are applying for it? Or is that just the total number of graduates 
who might be eligible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — For the first year of the program, and 
the data that we have that is absolutely concrete, is that there 
were 10,000 certificates that were applied for and passed on to 
students. Of those 10,000 certificates, 7,000 certificates were 
actually included with their income tax filing requirements. So 
there’s 10,000 certificates but 7,000 filers. 
 
And the certificates can be carried forward an additional four 
taxation years. So obviously the students who had received 
3,000 of their certificates do not feel it appropriate to apply that 
certificate for that tax year. They can apply in a subsequent year 
up to four years forward. 
 
So we don’t expect that every student who has a certificate 
would wish to apply. Many of them would go on to 
post-graduate training where their income may not warrant 
taking the tax credit at that time, so they can then use that tax 
credit in a subsequent time when it is more appropriate for their 
personal circumstances, Mr. Chair. 
 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, the final section, clause no. 9, 
indicates the various coming into force of various sections. I’d 
just like a quick explanation. Section 7, you’re indicating that 
this Act will be retroactive, or this change will be retroactive to 
July 1 of 1995. What is significant about July 1, 1995, for the 
basis of ensuring that this Act, amendment, is applicable and 
retroactive to that date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, that was the date that the 
new language related to the M&P profits was introduced and 
this requires a change in the wording of the definition in the old 
Act. And that’s why the retroactivity in terms of coming into 
force going back to July 1, 1995, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — Does the minister have new officials? Okay. 
Then I don’t think we need to introduce the officials unless . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I 
have with me the one necessary official for this Act and that is 
Mr. Brian Smith, the executive director of PEBA. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And 
welcome to Mr. Smith. And I know I’ve had many discussions 
with Mr. Smith about pension issues and I want to thank him 
for sharing his knowledge because I do believe that Mr. Smith 
understands a lot about the pension issue. 
 
A couple of quick questions, Mr. Minister. This is a change of 
course that’s going to benefit the family members that are left in 
the case of the passing of a superannuate. Is this a request being 
made across Canada? Is this a specific request to superannuates 
here in Saskatchewan or are we keeping in line with the rest of 
Canada? That’s the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, this is basically catch-up 
as compared to other jurisdictions of Canada. For example, 
Ontario, the Government of Canada, and New Brunswick have 
already moved to correct this provision within their own 
pension plans that they administer. So this is just more or less a 
catch-up, and as indicated in second reading speeches, designed 
to provide coverage for spouses in families where 
circumstances have changed, in a fair and equitable manner, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
your second reading speech on May 7 you made reference to a 
number of defined benefit pension plans that are going to be 
affected. Could you indicate how many workers approximately 
are active? 
 
You indicate that in your speech but I’m wondering what would 

be the financial impact on those active members or plan 
members that will have a benefit change. Has there been any 
forecasting of what this amendment might do in terms of 
financial cost to the pension plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, and as 
indicated, and I think maybe I’ll just briefly go over the Acts 
that this Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act would 
actually pertain to. This would include the Liquor Board 
Superannuation Plan, the Power Corporation Superannuation 
Plan, the Workers’ Compensation Board Superannuation Plan, 
the Public Service Superannuation Plan which also includes the 
Anti-TB (tuberculosis) League Superannuation Plan, and the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company Superannuation Plan. 
 
And as indicated there are roughly, as of December 31, 2002, 
there were 2,772 active members participating in the pension 
plans. 
 
And with regard to the question as to cost to have the new 
spousal provisions included, there is no cost to the plan, there is 
no cost to the GRF (General Revenue Fund) because the . . . 
once that new spouse is added into the program, the pensions 
are adjusted on an individual case basis, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you’ve just stated that there is no individual . . . or increased 
cost, is that what you stated? And secondly, if that’s true then 
are we looking at the same amount of benefit being divided up 
differently because there are changes to the children of a 
surviving spouse, and the . . . sorry, children of the deceased 
superannuate that might be eligible now for increased benefits. 
Would that not increase the costs to the plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, we don’t imagine that 
there will be a lot of differences but there is no direct cost to the 
plan. The value of the plan as itemized on an annual basis or 
that gross number in that global plan is the number. That 
number isn’t going to change. There will be no additional 
dollars going into that; those numbers will be the same. But the 
number of beneficiaries will increase because of adding the new 
spouse. 
 
So what that would mean is that there would be I guess literally 
a little less dollars available because there would be more 
people within the global amount, but the global amount won’t 
change. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I was 
anticipating that indeed that would have to happen. If more 
people are getting money and the pot is staying the same, 
obviously they’re getting a smaller, smaller portion of the pot. 
 
You mentioned the four plans. I think there are four sort of 
major plans of which you indicated that the one plan contains 
two subplans. In those plans — as you’ve indicated in your 
comments, all of the plans were closed to new members in 1997 
— do each of those plans, do they contain an indexing clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — All the so-called old plans were all 
closed in 1977. These were defined benefit plans. The plans at 
that time did not include an indexing clause so . . . But the 
legislation does anticipate that cabinet could actually do an ad 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

hoc adjustment for inflation. And I think over the past 38 years, 
there have been 33 adjustments made by cabinet for these old, 
defined plans, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My final question 
in this, pertaining to this Act, is that as an opposition, and I’m 
sure now as Finance minister, you have been lobbied by 
pensioners across this province to indeed have indexing as part 
of their plan. 
 
And while you make reference to the fact that there have been 
significant number of cabinet changes, those changes don’t 
necessarily always reflect the annual increase in cost of living. 
So therefore the pensioners are indicating that they’re falling 
further and further behind. 
 
And this Act of course adjusts the benefits that are payable to a 
spouse — or in this case now another spouse that can be added, 
as in case of a new spouse — but there’s still 60 per cent of 
benefits. And that has long been something that has been I 
guess advocated especially by the Saskatchewan Government 
Superannuates Association, in that they want to see a couple of 
things. They want to see indexing on a firm and committed 
basis to all pension plans because they believe that they should 
be treated equally. And secondly of course, that the spouse’s 
allowance of 60 per cent — and I think I made those comments 
in my reply to this Act a number of weeks ago — in that 60 per 
cent of a very small pension is in fact a considerably smaller 
amount, and when a superannuate passes on and leaves a spouse 
with most times the same bills, whether we’re talking about 
operation of vehicle or operation of a home or the like. 
 
And I know, Mr. Minister, in the last couple of years we’ve 
seen significant declines in the return on pension plans. And I 
think that has been one of the reasons that the government has 
used, periodically, to state that the pension plan is unable to 
provide an indexing for a particular year or unable to provide a 
significant increase on a given year. 
 
Could you indicate how your government is looking at dealing 
with an unfunded pension liability that seems to be growing in 
other sectors, not just necessarily these. But when we look 
overall at the demand being placed by pensioners in respect to 
adding to the spousal allowance, but also looking at indexing 
because indexing can cause a negative effect on the return to an 
individual? Mr. Minister, I’d ask for your comments on that 
particular clause. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m sure the 
member opposite is aware that there has been a class action suit 
that has been applied for by the superannuates related to this 
plan and the old plan members. 
 
Certainly when we look at the difference between defined 
benefits and defined contribution plans, those old plans are all 
defined benefit plans. And at the time that those plans came into 
existence with the . . . most of them with the provision that it 
would be 80 per cent of the average of their top five years of 
earning forever when they retire, that a lot of the considerations 
. . . We were dealing at a time of low inflation and these were 
seen to be as very generous plans. 

Now with these defined contribution plans that are out there 
where they’re funded pension plans, they’re a contribution from 
the employer, there’s defined contributions from the employee. 
It’s put into a fund that’s managed by professional fund 
managers. Those gross dollars grow and the dollars are assigned 
to the individual plan holder. And at the time of retirement, 
whatever that number is, the pension benefits are allocated 
accordingly. 
 
Well that’s different. And the old plans that we have in 
existence today were based on situations of course in . . . prior 
to 1977. So is there . . . obviously demand. And as indicated by 
the member opposite, that there should be improvements to 
those old plans as they’re compared to the new defined 
contribution plans. We believe, and we’ve always believed, that 
the legal framework for the old plans and how the provincial 
government has handled those is absolutely legally sound. 
 
Certainly I can’t comment any further with regard to the 
circumstances of whether they have a claim for improved 
spousal benefits or improved . . . or to have an indexing clause. 
That’s before the courts. We certainly have believed that we 
have the legal framework that supports the ad hoc payments, for 
example, that we have been providing. 
 
So I think with that, that’s I think all I’d be prepared to 
comment at this time. But it’s certainly, as the member opposite 
indicates, is an issue for many people in the province and it’s an 
issue that we’re aware of. And hopefully at some point it can be 
resolved, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, when . . . A bit of clarification, 
Mr. Minister. You talked about the defined benefit plans and I 
think you said that the plans were designed on the best five 
years and you’ve said 80 per cent. I believe that that’s . . . A full 
pension would occur at 70 per cent with, of course, reductions 
from 70. Is that correct? Could you just clarify it since this is 
Hansard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes, Mr. Chair, the member opposite 
is actually correct. If I said 80 per cent, I meant 70 per cent, and 
thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 
Subvote (SR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With me 
today, sitting to my left is Dr. Laurier Schramm who’s the 
president and CEO of the Saskatchewan Research Council. And 
behind him is Crystal Smudy who is the chief financial officer 
for the SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council). And behind me 
is Mr. Tom Ketterer who is the controller of SRC. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, 
I’d like to welcome your officials here and it’s good to see them 
again. 
 
From the budget book, page 106, there’s about one line and so 
we’re going to have to find some other information. And I was 
able to find some information in the annual report and also in 
the supplementary information that is published on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
And so I would like to ask the first question. Mr. Minister, Dr. 
Schramm in his comments in the annual report 2000 — the last 
one I have by the way is 2001-2002, I don’t think the next one 
has been published yet — but Dr. Schramm talks about a 
restructuring, a refocusing, a business plan, and a reporting 
scorecard. 
 
Could you, Mr. Minister, just give me an outline as to what the 
business plan refers to? Does it refer to an operational plan? 
Does it refer to an economic plan? And the scorecard that Dr. 
Schramm was referring to, does that focus on stating 
accountability against either operational or finance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you very 
much to the member for the question. 
 
I should indicate that the operational and financial plan is an 
internal document that is prepared by management for the 
board, wherein management describes its business plan for the 
year and also the financial framework for that plan. 
 
(15:45) 
 
With respect to the measures, again that is an internal set of 
measures that management prepares, gives to the board, in 
terms of objectives that the SRC would like to meet. And that’s 
presented to the board and then it is part of the accountability 
framework as between management and the board. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I think it’s 

really critical to put business plans in place and to be able to use 
benchmarks to compare it. I mean that’s the recognized 
corporate way of doing business. 
 
So when this is done, can you explain to me how the public 
accountability enters into this factor? You have the business 
plan. You have, as Dr. Schramm calls them, the scorecard. Now 
we need to put some confidence in the public that the 
accountability is in fact there and what the business plan is 
saying is being followed, because the business plan I think is 
important to be shown publicly as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
accountability is of the management to the board, which is a 
public board appointed by the Lieutenant Government in 
Council, and then the accountability is from the board to the 
public through the Legislative Assembly. The board provides 
report to the minister, which the minister then submits to the 
Legislative Assembly and the Lieutenant Government by filing 
here in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. The whole 
idea of public availability and public scrutiny, I think, is really 
quite important. 
 
How do other provinces, Mr. Minister, how do other provinces 
handle the Research Council function? Is Saskatchewan one of 
ten doing similar work or is it in fact unique in Canada? I think 
that’s a question that would be of interest to the watchers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m advised that 
there were originally eight research councils at provincial 
levels. There are only three today: the Saskatchewan Research 
Council; the CRIQ (Centre de recherche industrielle de 
Québec), which is in Quebec; and the ARC which is the Alberta 
Research Council. 
 
The other five I’m told were more or less privatized and 
subsequently ran into financial difficulties, went bankrupt for 
want of a better word, and don’t really exist in that form any 
more or in any substantial form, although there are remnants of 
some of them remaining. 
 
But really there were eight research councils. There are now 
three left, SRC being one of them. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I guess the question that I was 
going to be leading to was, in fact, is there a redundancy with 
other research that is going on in this province — critical 
research that really our future in this province depends on, 
there’s no question about that — but there are other research 
functions. There is the National Research Council; there is other 
research that is done, say, in other provinces like Alberta. 
Maybe Quebec doesn’t have the same application in terms of 
redundancy, but there is research certainly done at universities 
and in research parks where Saskatchewan Research Council is. 
In fact, there’s private and industry research. 
 
Is there a redundancy here? The budget altogether is an $8 
million budget and I’m wondering if there is a redundancy, and 
if research is being done elsewhere and maybe just replicated or 
again in a redundant way, we’re spending dollars that we don’t 
need to? 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — I would say absolutely not, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the sense that . . . I would describe it this way: it is 
not a case of redundancies, it is more a case of synergies. That 
is the Saskatchewan Research Council working with other 
research bodies — whether the University of Saskatchewan, 
perhaps sometimes with the National Research Council, 
perhaps sometimes with the private sector, because . . . not to 
mention individual academics — because there is no limit, no 
limit I would argue, to the amount of money you could spend 
on research. 
 
And if it was the case that we could say that we were spending 
so much on a provincial level plus the money we access from 
Ottawa plus private sector contributions, we were spending so 
much that we were researching everything we should be 
researching, then I’d say you might run into redundancies. But I 
think the reality is that we’re not. There are many, many more 
things that could be researched. So I don’t think you’d get a lot 
of duplication of efforts. There’s a lot that is undone. 
 
Now having said that, I hasten to add that in the last number of 
years, the federal government has provided some leadership in 
terms of more funding for research at the universities and the 
provincial government has done likewise. And the result has 
been that at the University of Saskatchewan they’ve been able 
to attract more research money. I think for the first time they 
went above $100 million. And the University of Regina, they 
went above $20 million for the first time. And both of our 
universities in Saskatchewan have come up in their national 
stature, and I think that’s because they have been able to access 
more research money. 
 
Well the universities, that’s a bit off point from the SRC but my 
point is this, the universe of what could be done in terms of 
where you could do research is very broad. The funding for it, 
even with improved funding, is narrower than that so . . . and 
they seek ways to work with other partners, to leverage money 
to go further. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say, generally speaking, that the 
Saskatchewan Research Council would not see itself as wanting 
to simply duplicate what somebody else is doing. If something 
else was being done adequately, they would want to say well, 
how can we branch out into another area to do more. 
 
So I don’t believe that there are redundancies because of the 
existence of the Saskatchewan Research Council or the work it 
does. I think that there are synergies to be gained with the 
university, with the National Research Council, with the private 
sector, and perhaps with other parties as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, if we’re 
trying to focus and build on the synergies — which I think is 
the logical way to go because success is contagious in a lot of 
areas, research being one of them — who then sets the 
priorities? You talked about a very broad range of research and 
research requirements. Who sets the priorities? 
 
I noticed in the annual report that has been circulated that 
there’s areas that have been recognized as key areas of activity. 
There’s agriculture and biology; there’s energy; there’s 
environment; manufacturing; value-added processing; there’s 
mining minerals; there’s a section on community. Who is the 

one that sets the priority then as to what . . . how the money is 
spent? And is that done by the board, directed by the board? Is 
it directed by the funding agents like yourselves as the 
government, or is it in fact the direction of the president and 
CEO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The broad strategic plan, Mr. Chair, would 
be set by the board of directors and it would be implemented by 
the management. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — If memory serves, Mr. Minister, the board 
of directors was changed very recently in the SRC. And I think 
there was a focus on the divergence of opinion pertaining 
particularly to the PTRC, the Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre, I think is the right acronym. 
 
If the board is the one that sets the priorities for research and the 
board can be changed at the will of the government, is it not the 
government’s priorities that is being put in place then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well generally speaking, Mr. Chair, the 
government would delegate the responsibility to the board. 
However, there may be public policy objectives that the 
government of the day wishes to achieve. Certainly one of them 
was the development of the PTRC in Regina, which we all 
support on this side of the House. 
 
And the board certainly has to be accountable to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. The board receives its funding 
from the Government of Saskatchewan and the board is 
accountable to the Government of Saskatchewan. Normally the 
Government of Saskatchewan would want to leave decisions up 
to the board, albeit its plan would be reviewed by the Treasury 
Board of the government each year. 
 
If indeed the government had an objective that it wished the 
board to proceed with, the board is funded by the public and the 
government has the responsibility to ask the board to pursue 
issues like petroleum research. And if the board does not agree 
with a particular policy objective of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, then it certainly is a prerogative of the 
government to say thank you very much for your service and 
we would like a board that indeed will carry out the public 
policy objectives determined by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the normal course of events, one would expect that the board 
would be in place which would be able to implement the public 
policy research objectives and there would not be a 
disagreement with the government of the day. But in the event 
of a disagreement, the government of the day would prevail and 
change the board, because the government of the day is 
accountable to the taxpayers and funds the Research Council. 
 
(16:00) 
 
The government of the day is democratically elected and has the 
right to say if it feels this should be done, that the Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre will be supported in a particular 
way by the Research Council. And if that is the policy of the 
government and the board of the SRC does not agree with that, 
then it certainly is a prerogative of the government of the day 
on behalf of the taxpayers to thank the board for its service, but 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1365 

 

to indicate that it is appropriate for a board to be put in place 
which will follow important public policy objectives of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And this would not happen very often but sometimes there 
would be an important issue that needed to be pursued. And the 
simple fact of the matter is that in Saskatchewan, of our oil 
reserves that are known, we can recover 15 per cent — that’s 
one-five per cent only — of the oil that is there. And it’s very 
important to the people of the province and to the industry that 
we find ways to recover the other 85 per cent. And when the 
government, in co-operation with the academic community and 
the industry has formulated a policy to try to do that, the 
government will ensure that that policy is carried out. 
 
And I’m very pleased that that is also the objective of the 
current board of the Saskatchewan Research Council, and the 
CEO and the management. And it is certainly only appropriate 
that on an important public policy objective such as that, that 
those who are appointed by the government and funded by the 
government will carry out the wishes of the government in that 
regard. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know it was a 
controversial issue at the time and there was a lot of 
unanswered questions, I think, that were still circulating. But it 
did appear that the board, from my recollection, the previous 
board, were certainly not wanting to diminish the research into 
the petroleum industry and try to achieve the recovery 
objectives that you had referred to. 
 
But it also appeared to me that things like location and how the 
research was going to be carried out became a problem with the 
current government. And therefore the priority that was 
established by the board that you said earlier was the 
determining factor on the priority projects, that came in conflict 
and so the government decided to do what they ultimately did. 
But it was based on, as you say, circumstances that didn’t fit 
with the government’s objectives at the time and so they were 
replaced. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I would say this, Mr. Chair. I would 
say that unfortunately with respect to the PTRC there was really 
a breakdown of communication between the former 
management and the former board and the other partners in the 
PTRC, and there seemed to be an inability to move forward in 
terms of agreeing on a plan. 
 
And generally speaking, the government was more supportive 
of the view of the parties other than the former SRC board and 
management than it was of the view of SRC and management. 
The government asked the board of the SRC and the 
management to co-operate with the other parties in a different 
manner. Basically they really didn’t see eye to eye on it, did not 
wish to do so, and it seemed better to have a board and 
management which would have the same view as the 
government in terms of the need to have better co-operation at 
the PTRC. 
 
And that’s a perfectly legitimate role for government to play — 
to say to a board that government appoints and that is paid for 
by the taxpayers, that we have arrived at this policy 
determination, we want you to carry it out. And if there is a 

reluctance to carry it out, then it’s only appropriate that a board 
that will carry out the views of the democratically elected 
government will be appointed. That is what was done. And I’m 
happy to say that I believe with the current structure of the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre that there is 
co-operation and the matter is proceeding along as it should. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, through the Deputy Chair, 
don’t get me wrong. I’m very supportive of research in a lot of 
different areas and certainly petroleum research is an important 
item for the constituency that I represent. And in discussions 
with Dr. Schramm and others, research in fact is being done 
there. 
 
I just wanted to, for the record, to make it clear that the 
accountability of the Research Council is important and the 
business plan that is put in place is also recognized as an 
accountability function. And if the business plan that’s 
approved by the board of directors puts in place a particular 
priority, then I think that all adds to part of the transparency and 
accountability. 
 
Now having said that, Mr. Minister, I want to change a little bit, 
while we have a few minutes left, to another area. And that is 
the budget numbers that I’ve been able to find in the annual 
report. 
 
The total revenues and expenses this year — no, for the year 
2002 — as reported in the annual report for that year, 
2001-2002, shows a net loss of nearly $200,000. And checking 
the three years previous there was substantive profits in each 
one of those years. Is there a particular reason that you can put 
your finger on to indicate why in 2002 it was a loss, revenue 
over expense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that losses for the 
’01-02 year relate primarily to a downturn in the economy and 
that the matter is much more in hand for the ’02-03 year. And 
while the numbers aren’t fully audited, that it’s expected that on 
the operational side that the SRC will not have a loss for the 
latest fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — If that’s the case . . . And I want to get this 
question in because we’ve agreed to wind this down at a 
particular time. The question that I have is this. The 
restructuring that the president and CEO has talked about and 
the new approach of doing things, it would seem to me that the 
best way to show that would be to show an ongoing, if not an 
increasing profitability. I know you deal with partners and 
contracts; the economy has changed; there’s those variances. 
 
But when I look in the 2002 supplementary information to the 
’01-02 annual report, I noticed that, as an example, 
accommodations is an entity that is listed separately, 
accommodation charges, and I notice that they have increased 
from the year 1999-2000 to this year, over a three-year period, 
the accommodation charges increased over 40 per cent. 
Something tells me that there is a major change somewhere in 
the system that doesn’t add . . . that doesn’t give me any 
confidence that by doing the changes that we’re trying to 
achieve a more stable operation than we had before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The reason for the large increase in 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

accommodation costs actually relates to the PTRC, the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre, which is new. So that 
accommodation is included in that figure. If you took that out 
I’m advised that the increase in accommodation costs would 
just be sort of a gradual, nominal, inflation type of increase. So 
it really is the cost of the accommodation of the PTRC. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And then just one 
quick follow-up to that. Over those three years the cost of 
accommodation has gone up approximately point five to point 
eight million dollars each of those three years. And I’m 
wondering if that is in fact attributable just to that one entity. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And I also noticed that the charges to accommodation that are 
listed here in this supplementary report — and that’s listed to 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) and 
SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation), which is 
natural — but under supplier payments there’s also another half 
a million dollars that is indicated for SOCO and SPMC. I’m 
wondering why there’s a redundancy there. 
 
Those are the questions that have brought this whole 
transparency thing to the forefront. And that would be my last 
question, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, in answer to the question. 
With respect to the increased accommodation costs, I already 
indicated that part of it is the increase in accommodation for the 
PTRC; also it relates to increased costs of property taxes and 
utilities; also a new building for pipe-flow work that the SRC 
does. So again a new building, so more space, not just increased 
accommodation costs for the same space but actually more 
space. 
 
In terms of the second part of the question, that is payments to 
SOCO, it’s true that SOCO would receive money for 
accommodation but SOCO would also receive money that did 
not relate to accommodation. And there are some services that 
SOCO would provide to the SRC that they would be paid for 
including things like equipment repairs and maintenance, some 
consulting, and some architectural services which would not be 
related to rent. And so these other payments to SOCO would 
not be rent payments. They would be payments to other services 
that were provided. 
 
And if the member wishes, I’d be happy to provide a detailed 
listing of the payments to SOCO and what those payments were 
for, and also the payments to SPMC that I haven’t mentioned. 
So I’ll ask the officials to prepare a detailed answer which then 
I will provide subsequently. 
 
And since I understand that that was the member’s last 
question, I’d like to thank the member for his helpful questions 
and also I’d like to thank the officials for coming here and 
assisting us in the way they have and also thank them for the 
very good work they do throughout the year as well. So thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I move that 
we report progress, quite a bit of progress actually on the 
Saskatchewan Research Council, and that we move to the 

Department of Learning until 5 o’clock. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To my left 
is Dr. Craig Dotson, deputy minister of the department. To his 
left is Dr. John Biss, executive director, university services. 
Behind Dr. Biss is Dr. Margaret Lipp, executive director of 
Saskatchewan Learning. Behind Dr. Lipp is Glenda Eden, 
manager of financial planning and corporate services. 
 
In the back row next to Ms. Eden is Kevin Hoyt, director of 
finance and corporate services. In front of Kevin is Wayne 
McElree, assistance deputy minister. And behind me is Brady 
Salloum, executive director of student financial assistance. And 
behind Mr. Salloum is Nelson Wagner, executive director of 
facilities. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. It’s 
been some time since we’ve had an opportunity to discuss some 
very important issues with the minister and her dedicated staff 
and we appreciate their presence here this afternoon. 
 
I notice though that time will probably slip away fairly quickly 
since we only have about 30 minutes. And some of the issues 
that I’d like to address today, I think, are significantly important 
that we need to really get a start on it because in the only other 
time that we talked in any length and any depth on 
post-secondary issues, we pretty much stuck with one area and 
that had to do with the regional colleges and some of the money 
and the programming activities that they undertake. 
 
But what I want to launch into today, Madam Minister, is the 
issue of post-secondary funding and how it has such a 
debilitating effect if it is insufficient on so many different areas. 
 
We’ve got universities of high quality in this province. We’ve 
got good post-secondary opportunities in technical schools and 
regional colleges. But when funding is as limited as it has been 
over the last several years for those institutions, they have to 
make some very critical decisions about what programs they’re 
going to offer, what programs they can no longer offer, what 
cuts they have to make to services and various projects that they 
might want to undertake. So it has a serious impact on the 
institution per se. 
 
But it has an equally devastating impact, I believe, when 
funding levels are insufficient on students in the area of 
accessibility; how they are able to attend university; whether or 
not they’re going to be able to afford the cost of programs; 
whether they’ll actually get the programs that they need or want 
to pursue. So there’s an accessibility issue. 
 
There’s also the limitations on student loans and other financing 
programs that might be available to assist students with the cost 
of their education. 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

 

And fourthly, there is the issue of student debt. 
 
All these areas are basically intrinsically tied to the singular 
issue of the level of funding provided for post-secondary 
institutions by the provincial government. And as a 
consequence of some of the concerns and complaints and 
worries that have been brought to my attention by both 
academic people in various programs, by administrators, and 
certainly by students, I think that that’s the area we need to 
delve into this afternoon. 
 
Now if I recall correctly, Madam Minister, the last time we 
talked you alluded to the government keeping its eye on the big 
picture and referred repeatedly to the $1.2 billion budget for 
education this year. If I recall, you suggest the increase 
amounted to about a 5.2 per cent growth. 
 
That might be true in overall expenditures for the Department 
of Learning, but as it applies to universities and the 
post-secondary sector generally speaking, we’re quite well 
aware that the amount that went to those institutions was 
significantly less. It amounted to no more than 3.3 per cent. 
And as a consequence we’ve had universities and other 
institutions of higher learning scrambling to make adjustments 
to their spending programs, to their budgets, and to their 
program offerings this year. 
 
I’d like to read for the minister a comment that is attributed to 
Peter MacKinnon, president of the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) who has been very outspoken about the need for 
additional funding and how increasing pressures on university 
budgets is creating a situation where universities are rapidly 
becoming institutions of private good, not public good. 
 
And I’d like to just refer to a couple of comments that Mr. 
MacKinnon made for the press shortly after the provincial 
budget was brought down. He talks about the U of S having 
indicated to the government that its forecast operations 
requirements would be about 7 per cent to cover the inflation 
costs brought on by various things such as mandated wage 
increases and the growing cost of operating an expanding 
campus. And he’s quoted as saying in this article: 
 

I’m concerned about the continuation of the pattern in 
which the operating budget increase falls short of operation 
needs. 
 

In another interview he says that the pattern that he has seen, 
that pattern articulates a public policy choice. And I’m quoting 
specifically from the April 3 edition of The StarPhoenix: 
 

“Fifteen years ago, 78 per cent of the university’s 
operating budget was paid for (by the province). Today, 
it’s 63 per cent and going down. 
 
“What happens if we extend that profile out over the next 
10 to 15 years? What . . . (will we have witnessed? It will 
be) an evolution of a system of a public good, if you like, to 
one that’s more readily seen as a private good.” 

 
(16:30) 
 
Now, Madam Minister, in view of the comments of the 

president of the university, I would like your response to the 
concerns that he raises in this particular interview and the issue 
he raises, because I think this is a fundamental issue — one that 
is pivotal in terms of public policy — and I think it speaks very 
clearly to the misplaced priorities of the current government. 
And I’d like you to explain to us how your government can 
justify a 3.3 per cent increase to the universities this year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Our 
discussions — I think when we left off last time we were 
talking about post-secondary education — is we did talk about 
the Sask Party’s platform about increasing funding to education 
and post-secondary and particularly at the cost of inflation. I 
believe you said nothing more, nothing less. 
 
And I think I did read into the record what that impact would 
have had on the various systems throughout the learning sector. 
And it is our government’s policy that we strongly support 
post-secondary education and have done so with our $1.2 
billion budget in education. 
 
The universities and post-secondary institutions have made 
choices on how they balance the quality programming and the 
operational costs. We have significantly increased funding to 
universities over the last few years and have made that a 
definite policy priority, our support of publicly funded 
education. We have faith in our educational system and our 
universities to keep tuition fees as low as possible but we do 
understand they are autonomous organizations and we respect 
that autonomy and we respect the decisions that they make. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, the 
autonomy issue of post-secondary institutions is an important 
one and it’s in a principle that I would strongly adhere to 
myself. And I understand that. But nevertheless, as autonomous 
as those institutions are, they still are largely dependent on the 
support of the provincial government and, in some instances, 
federal dollars for their operating budgets and all the good 
things that they do. 
 
And the reality is that while you might want to keep tuition fees 
increasing as minimally as possible, we’ve had a 4.8 per cent 
increase in tuition fees at the U of S this year and that comes on 
the heels of a fee increase the year previous that was as high as 
20 per cent in some schools. 
 
The University of Regina tuition’s going up 8.5 per cent. The 
University of Regina was very disappointed in this year’s 
budget because they had some real expectations of increased 
funding coming their way with some very special projects that 
they had undertaken. And so here we have a very significant 
increase; 8.5 per cent is not a marginal increase. It’s a very 
significant increase and I think it’s significant enough that it 
would undermine the possibility of some students to go to 
school at all. 
 
If we want to hear from the students, let’s look at what was said 
by one in the on-campus newspaper earlier this year: 
 

. . . tuition hikes, ranging from 0.4 per cent in Veterinary 
Medicine to 10 per cent in Law, were blasted by U of S 
Students’ Union President Robin Mowat, who charged they 
jeopardize accessibility to higher education and “have 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

moved the U of S one step closer to becoming a private 
institution.” 

 
Madam Minister, that is not the kind of situation I’m sure your 
government or the people of this province would want to 
characterize as a legacy of the last 10 years. 
 

Mowat told the news conference (that) tuition fees, which 
in 1990 paid for just 16 per cent of the University’s 
operating budget, now pay for 30 per cent. And a USSU 
survey shows more students are working and nearly 30 per 
cent are taking five years to finish a four-year program. 
 
“U of S students are disappointed with this budget,” Mowat 
(says) . . . 

 
Madam Minister, it’s easy to say that you’re doing the best you 
possibly can. But I think it’s a question of priorities. And 3.3 
per cent — and that’s being generous, I believe — to the 
universities in this latest budget is completely insufficient. 
 
What are we going to tell the students who are finding the issue 
of accessibility increasingly problematic? What are we going to 
tell people like Andrea Bitner who called our office on May 8 
and who said she wants to see student loan maximums 
increased? She says that over the past few years, tuitions have 
had huge increases and now energy costs are going up again, 
and yet there’s not been an increase in the amount available to 
student loans. She wants to know if anybody — she doesn’t 
even mention the government — she wants to know if anybody 
is pushing for a change to student loans? I’ve heard that 
complaint from a number of students over the last little while, 
and I’m wondering what this government is prepared to do 
about the student loan program for students like Andrea Bitner? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. I 
hope that when this student called you, you told her that we 
have the best student loan program in the country, that changes 
under this year’s budget have increased the exemptions in the 
student loan program. I hope you pointed those things out to 
her. 
 
We do have the graduate tax credit. Different things that we 
have done to increase and enhance the student loan program to 
make the student loans easier for the students to access and 
sometimes even pay back, there’s changes have been made. I 
hope you pointed all those things out to her as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. I 
understand there have been some changes, but I’d like to know 
what the level of changes are that have been made to the student 
loan program that would appease the issues that this particular 
individual raises? When’s the last time, when’s the last time the 
student loan provisions were increased so that they take into 
consideration the increases in tuition, the increases in utility 
costs, all the increases that everyday living brings to bear on 
particular individuals, especially students who are often living 
on a minimal budget to begin with? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Our student loan program is integrated 
with the federal government, so it’s a Canada student loan 
program. The improvements from the federal government 
through that loan program were in the middle ’90s, but from our 

point of view we have made improvements in our provincial 
access to student loans through the bursaries, and the exemption 
in particular in this year’s budget . . . raised the exemptions in 
this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, through the Chair, to a 
supplementary question. The changes that were made in the 
budget this year to the exemptions that you alluded to, how do 
they relate to and how are they connected to any exemptions 
that might have been made in the federal budget in the same 
area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The federal budget made the same changes 
as we did with the exemptions. The difference is in their 
program they made the changes with loans, which have to be 
paid back. Our program did it with bursaries, which do not have 
to be paid back. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, through the Chair, with 
another question. I’m referring to the Saskatchewan provincial 
budget document, page 33, and according to this it talks about 
funding to the Student Aid Fund will increase to provide for an 
increase in the in-study earnings exemption from $600 per 
study period to 1,700 per 34-week study period, and the 
scholarship exemptions, $600 per study period to $1,800. 
 
Now I understand that those figures are identical to figures that 
were released as part of the changes in the federal budget, 
changes to the Canada Student Loans Program. So can I assume 
from your remarks that the changes you have made — although 
they might not be identical to the ones that were made by the 
federal government — are they cumulative, do we have a 
cumulative forgiveness, or an accumulation of the amounts that 
are earnable prior to penalty? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m going to try and provide a simple 
answer to a complicated process. The federal government lends 
the money for the exemption to the students. We give them the 
money through the bursary program so they don’t have to pay it 
back, but it is not cumulative. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I think that, Madam Minister, is too simple an 
answer for a complicated question. I don’t understand how that 
works at all. Could you provide more detail, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Okay, I’ll try it again. The feds will loan 
the students say $1,800. So now they have $1,800 more of a 
student loan that they have to pay back. They have more money 
in their pocket, but they still have an increase in their student 
loan. We provide a bursary so they don’t have that $1,800 to 
pay back. They still have the money. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. So 
I’m taking it from what you’re saying, is that those amounts are 
completely distinct and separate. And they are taken into 
consideration when the student borrows whatever money 
they’re going to through the student loan program and tries to 
determine what it is they will have to pay back. There’s no 
overlap. It is completely distinct and separate amounts of 
money. Is that correct? 
 
(16:45) 
 



June 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — It’s an integrated program with the federal 
government. The $1,800 comes to the student, they don’t have 
to . . . from the federal government as a loan that they would 
have to pay back. We provide the bursary so they do not have to 
pay it back, so that $1,800 stays in their pocket. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So, Madam Minister, is the student really any 
better off? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The difference is a loan you have to pay 
back, a bursary you don’t have to pay it back, so of course 
you’re better off. You don’t have to pay back the $1,800. You 
got it but you don’t have to pay it back because we put the 
bursary in place. That’s the benefit students get in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’ll take the member from Moose Jaw’s answer 
on face value. He says the answer is yes. 
 
I guess I would like an opportunity to meet with your officials 
and have that hammered out and clarified for us because there is 
easily an opportunity to misunderstand what is available to a 
student and who gives them what amounts of money because of 
the similarities in values and the method in which it’s paid and 
approved and refunded or forgiven. So if that would be 
possible, I would appreciate that. 
 
For my own sake and for the sake of clarity, would the minister 
provide us a definition of the difference between bursaries and 
grants? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Both bursary and grant . . . both bursaries 
and grants have a common characteristic, they do not have to be 
paid back. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — That’s the common characteristic, Madam 
Minister, but what’s the difference? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — They don’t have a substantive difference 
in our terminology, the way we use it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. 
Then I can assume that the words will be used interchangeably 
through the Department of Learning and through the budget 
document, there’s technically and really no difference in the 
two words? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m going to read you our definitions. 
Grants are non-repayable funding that is considered taxable 
income over and above student loan funding. Bursaries are 
non-repayable funds that are awarded based on each student’s 
needs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I’d like to return to the issue 
of accessibility to university education or other post-secondary 
opportunities that might be desirous on the part of any given 
individual. 
 
You know I think the . . . I’m a child of the ’60s, I suppose. I 
got my university education in the late ’60s and early ’70s, and 
I remember how important public education was at the 
post-secondary level to people who went to school, to 
university because of the love of learning. They wanted to be 

given the opportunity to participate at an advanced level just 
because there was something they could learn, not because they 
were going to pursue a degree program that would lead them to 
a specific job or profession of some sort. In fact, the 
professional schools were probably under-represented in terms 
of attendance and participation by students in that era. 
 
But it appears to me that given the cost of post-secondary 
education now, and given the opportunity to attend a university 
becoming more and more difficult — standards being raised, 
admission levels being higher all the time — that the issue of 
accessibility is increasingly problematic. And I guess I would 
like the minister to address that issue in some depth so we can 
understand where it is her government wants to take 
post-secondary opportunities in the days ahead in the extent of 
the government’s current mandate and on into the future. 
 
Because it seems to me that the issue of accessibility is 
becoming so urgent that as we have more and more demand . . . 
And I think that’s a realistic expectation on the part of many 
people that there will be greater demand for post-secondary 
education in all institutions as we see that demand increase. 
And as we choke off these institutions with increasingly limited 
resources, how are we going to meet the requirement — the 
public requirement, the public good — of easy access to 
post-secondary institutions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Just want to make a couple of general 
comments. Post-secondary enrolments have steadily increased 
since the early . . . since the mid ’90s and post-secondary 
education is now being offered in what you probably in the ’60s 
didn’t envision. There are people learning in their home 
communities that are being offered degree courses in Meadow 
Lake at the college there. And places that are non-traditionally 
thought of as a post-secondary institution or 
university-connected are offering courses so people can learn 
on-line. They’ve got all kinds of access to different ways of 
learning. 
 
So we anticipate lifelong learning for people and different . . . 
and lifelong learning closer to home in many instances. So 
we’re not just talking about institutional learning. We’re talking 
about learning life long through different avenues and different 
aspects of how you can learn. 
 
But the important part I think we need to remember and notice 
is that enrolments have steadily increased. And our tuitions 
have gone up, but so have our student loan assistance. So the 
most, and the most . . . The students with the highest need are 
getting access to student loans. 
 
And it isn’t just tuition costs that drive the decision whether to 
go to university or not. A lot of it is the cost of living and 
Saskatchewan does have a very competitive and actually lower 
cost of living than many other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, I 
understand that enrolments have been steady in their growth 
over the last decade and I appreciate the fact that there are other 
opportunities for post-secondary education in regional colleges 
or on-line or through the various different technological 
benefits that we enjoy today. 
 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 2003 

 

But if I understand the information garnered by some of the 
official organizations representing universities in the country, 
that they’re expecting not just incremental growth, not just sort 
of a small steady growth in demand, that they’re expecting 
some time within the next five to six years and maybe over the 
next 10 to 15 years a dramatic increase in demand for the 
services provided on site at university campuses. And I’m 
wondering if that’s coming into play in the decision making of 
the government and the planning for the future of this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — When we talk about planning for the 
future, all of our post-secondary institutions — the universities, 
the regional colleges, and the technical institutes, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) — 
do strategic planning. They do it internally and they do it for the 
long term and they share those plans with our department. 
 
We also have them . . . They are balancing and we are balancing 
capacity with quality and with accessibility, none of which can 
stand on its own or should be one component paid more 
attention than the other. That is what we have to do as 
government and that’s what they have to do as institutions, is 
balance those three. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — You know, Madam Minister, balancing those 
requirements is a neat trick if you can do it. But nobody would 
have envisioned 12,000 students at the University of Regina in 
1974 either. And I think that in my conversations with people at 
the University of Regina campus, they’re under tremendous 
pressure right now in terms of individuals, students looking to 
come to attend courses that they offer, individuals who are 
offshore that would like to come here, people from out of 
province that are anxious to take advantage of some of the good 
learning opportunities provided by the U of R (University of 
Regina). And if they were to accommodate all the demand, they 
wouldn’t be able to cope with the kind of expenditure increases 
that have been allotted them this year, not only for operational 
expenses but for capital expenses. 
 
And the same is true at the University of Saskatchewan. I mean, 
we’ve got a very dynamic learning institution in the U of S and 
their money allowed for capital expenditures is somewhere in 
the range of $14 million this year. That’s $4 million of hard 
money and $10 million of loan room. I don’t think that’s what I 
would consider to be adequate for an institution of that size and 
that dynamic, and certainly for an institution that has the 
potential that the University of Saskatchewan has. 
 
So you know, saying that they’re going to have to balance their 
priorities is pretty easy to do but when the demand is there, 
when the crunch is on, it’s not so easy to make those particular 
decisions. 
 
And I think that somebody at some point is going to have to 
take the bull by the horns and say we want to provide 
post-secondary educational opportunities fully for the people of 
this province because this province will benefit. This province 
is the one that’s going to suffer if we don’t provide those kind 
of opportunities here. 
 
And I think that I would like to see, you know, a greater effort 
by the Department of Learning to address those new realities 
that the economy of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan 

will be facing in the future. 
 
I notice that our time is about elapsed and I would enjoy an 
opportunity to continue this discussion with the minister at a 
future date. And I will take the minister and her officials at their 
word in terms of getting together to discuss the financing 
provisions we ran over a few times earlier. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I just want to make sure that 
we understand we’re talking about balancing capacity, 
accessibility, and quality; not only the institutions do that, so do 
we. 
 
And I know that I said this last time we had this . . . First of all I 
want to say it’s interesting that you’ve mentioned that 
accessibility will be an issue and will compromise people’s 
ability to have a post-secondary education, and yet you in turn 
say that there’s going to be a huge demand. It’s just a bit of a 
contradiction in terms. 
 
But I also wanted to say what I said last time, is that nothing is 
impossible if you don’t have to do it. So there’s things that we 
are doing that we are as a government addressing, the issues of 
capacity, accessibility, and programming, and balancing what 
the province needs as a whole and what the post-secondary and 
learning sector needs as a sector. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report progress on Learning and proceed to the Committee of 
Finance review of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 

(AG01) 
 
The Chair: — It being past 5 p.m. the committee will recess 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The committee recessed until 19:00. 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1345 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1346 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1359 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Canadian Environment Week 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1346 
 New Inductee to University of Saskatchewan Sport Hall of Fame 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1347 
 Increasing Interest in Saskatchewan Tourism 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1347 
 Seager Wheeler Seeding Demonstration 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1347 
 Fourth Annual SGI CANADA Charity Road Race 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1347 
 Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1347 
 Cory Cogeneration Project 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1348 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Federal Response to Distress in Beef Industry 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1348 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1348 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1349 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1349 
 Investment in FarmGro Organic Foods 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1350 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1350 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1351 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1351 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Increase to Licensed Child Care Subsidy Now In Effect 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1353 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1353 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1354 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1354 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 39 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1354 
 Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1356 



 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1358 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1358 
 Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1361 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1361 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1362 
 Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1362 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Saskatchewan Research Council — Vote 35 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1363 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1363 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1366 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1366 
 


	Consequences of Occurrence of
	Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy
	Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy

