















































Hansard: May 28, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1265 
 May 28, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions on behalf of people from my constituency who 
are really concerned about the condition of Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and 
surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are all from Okla. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and area concerned for the 
lack of dialysis services in their area. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Moose Jaw, and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise again to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of the Cypress Hills 
constituency; it concerns Crown grazing lease renewals. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the 
community of Mendham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals of the 
communities of Gravelbourg, Swift Current, and Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition with citizens concerned about the rapidly 
deteriorating state of Highway No. 20. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Duval, Strasbourg, Humboldt, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to present a petition on behalf of citizens from west 
central Saskatchewan concerned with the state of health care. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current speciality services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Glidden, Brock, Dodsland, Hoosier, and Kindersley, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the fairness for Crown 
leaseholders. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have yet 
another petition to present on behalf of constituents concerned 
with the condition of a portion of Highway 22. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Bulyea, and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
no. 12, 36, and 41. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your committee met 
this morning and they have duly examined the undermentioned 
petition for a private Bill, and find that the provisions of rules 65 
and 68 have been fully complied with: 
 

Of the Radville Christian College, in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend its Act of 
Incorporation. 

 
Now most members would probably know them as the Western 
Christian College and you will see that in some instances behind 
the Bill, but of the Radville Christian College. 
 
In light of the suspension of rule 64 by the Assembly, your 
committee recommends that the private Bill now proceed. 
 
Moved by myself, seconded by the member from Kindersley: 
 

That the report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills now be concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 51 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Public Service Commission: in the year 
2000 how many positions in the public service at level 10 
classification or higher were filled by applicants from 
within the public service? 

 
I have the same question for 2001 and 2002. 
 

To the minister of Public Service Commission: in the year 
2000 how many positions in the public service at level 10 
classification or higher were filled by applicants from 
outside of the public service? 

I have the same question for 2001 and 2002. 
 

To the minister of the Public Service Commission: in the 
year 2000 how many positions in public service at level 10 
classification or higher had degree qualifications removed 
to accommodate employment equity candidates? 

 
2001, 2002 as well. 
 

To the minister of Pubic Service Commission: in the year 
2000 how many applicants with disabilities were hired by the 
public service at level 10 classification or higher from outside 
of and within the public service? 
 

For the year 2001, 2002. And: 
 

To the minister of SGI: is Don Cody still the chairperson of 
the SGI board; if so, what is his salary; if not, is he a 
member of the SGI board; if not, who is the current 
chairperson of SGI board and what is that person’s salary? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 51 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

Following the three-day meeting of the Agriculture 
ministers in June 2001, how often has the Saskatchewan 
Minister of Agriculture met with any or all other 
Agriculture ministers to discuss the designing of the 
agriculture policy framework; where and when did these 
meetings take place; and who travelled with the minister? 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on day 
51 I will ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: during 
the 2002-2003 fiscal year, how many agreements were in 
place between the provincial government and private firms 
under the transportation partnership programs; what private 
companies were involved in these agreements; and how 
much revenue did each agreement bring to the government? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions that cover fiscal year 
’01-02. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day 51 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation: 
when a non-profit corporation submits a proposal to the 
centenary affordable housing program, who reviews the 
proposal and ultimately decides whether or not it will be 
accepted; if it is a board or review panel that reviews these 
proposals, what are the names of the people who sit on the 
board or on the review panel? 

 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 51 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for CIC: is CIC sending a 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

 

representative to the Banff television and film festival in 
June 2003; and if so, for what purpose? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for 
me to introduce to you, and to all my colleagues here in the 
legislature, in the east gallery, 31 students from the Lashburn 
High School. They’re accompanied by two teachers, Tracy 
Doering and Alison Best, and there is several chaperones. And I 
don’t think they need the chaperones, they’re very well behaved 
people. 
 
I’d like to welcome them again because Lashburn has had a 
tradition, Mr. Speaker, of having a class come from a great 
distance to tour the building and to be part of the activity, see 
what we go on here. And I’m looking forward to meeting with 
them again after question period. 
 
Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the House, three very special guests that we have joining us 
on the east side of your gallery. Mr. Bert Royer, Bert is the 
business manager for the international brotherhood of 
ironworkers, Local 771 here in Regina, and with Bert today is 
his wife, Tina, and Tina’s sister, Cheryl Gendron, from 
Kitchener, Ontario. 
 
Cheryl is in Regina and in Saskatchewan visiting friends and 
family, and I hope she enjoys her time here. And they’re all 
down here to tour the legislature, which I think they already 
have, taken some pictures, and they’re going to take in some of 
the happenings of the session here this afternoon. 
 
So I wish all the members would offer them a very warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce 10 students from grades 7, 8, and 9 
who are visiting us from Swanson Christian School. They’re in 
the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had a very enjoyable MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) visit earlier and they asked many interesting 
questions. And please join me in welcoming the students from 
Swanson Christian School to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 56 grade 8 students seated in the west gallery 
from the White City School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also a student who is seated on the floor of 
our Assembly, accompanied by Ms. McFarlane. With them are 
teachers, Kelly Ireland and Chris Beingessner, and chaperone, 

Mrs. Dubois. 
 
White City School, I’m sure you would all know, is a school 
that’s noted for a wonderful kind of celebration called Random 
Acts of Kindness. And I’ve been there to see students handing 
out warm cups of morning coffee and muffins to parents, but 
also known for wonderful random acts of kindness — I think 
something we could all enrich our lives with, following in their 
example. 
 
I’m looking forward to meeting with the students after they’ve 
had a tour and a photo. And I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming the students, teachers, and chaperone 
from White City School. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Convocation at Saskatchewan’s Universities 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a total 
of 4,614 Saskatchewan university students have successfully 
completed their education this year. 
 
Starting today and carrying through to Friday, both of our 
universities will be convocating their graduates for 2003. For 
these students, of course, graduation is not the completion of 
their lifelong education, but it is a major stepping stone, and I 
know we all wish them well as they enter the next phase of their 
lives. 
 
At the University of Saskatchewan, 3,017 degrees, certificates, 
and diplomas will be presented, as well as three honorary 
doctorates. At this morning’s ceremony, graduates were 
privileged to hear the convocation address by Dr. Buffy 
Sainte-Marie, Saskatchewan’s universal songstress. Also 
honoured will be Bernard Michel and Douglas Baldwin. 
 
At the University of Regina, 1,597 students will convocate. 
Three honorary degrees will go to Judge Mary Ellen 
Turpel-Lafond, Dr. Edward Busse, and Dr. Michael Ignatieff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students are from Saskatchewan and from 
several countries from around the world, indicative of the 
reputation of our universities. These young people, and 
not-so-young, are our future. And I congratulate each of them 
on this significant accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Transportation Week 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 28 to 
June 6 is National Transportation Week across Canada, a week 
set aside to recognize the hard work and dedication of the 
thousands of men and women involved in our nation’s 
transportation industry. 
 
It is also an excellent opportunity to look at ways of increasing 
efficiencies within the transportation network, as well as 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

bringing increased focus on such areas as industry safety, 
technology, energy conservation, and environmental impact. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Whether it’s by road, rail, air, or water or pipeline, Mr. Speaker, 
the transportation industry is connected by one main goal: to 
ensure that goods and services are delivered effectively and 
efficiently to destinations across the country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan all levels of 
government and all sectors of the economy are very much 
aware of the importance the transportation industry plays in 
furthering the economic and social development of our 
province. With our immense geographical challenges we all 
know how much we rely on the province’s more than 26,000 
kilometres of road, 800 bridges, and nearly 2 dozen airports and 
12 ferries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s fitting that this Sunday during National 
Transportation Week, the Saskatchewan Party’s 
recommendation to increase speed limits on twinned highways 
will be formerly adopted by this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government. This will allow goods and services to move 
quickly and effectively through the province. And we’re very 
pleased to see the NDP agreeing with yet another Saskatchewan 
Party initiative that will grow the province. 
 
I would ask all members to recognize National Transportation 
Week in Canada and more importantly here in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

La Ronge Receives Insurance Bureau of Canada Award 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the Insurance Bureau of Canada 
recently launched a new national program called Foundation for 
the Future that recognizes the efforts of communities to better 
manage risks associated with natural disasters, extreme weather, 
and weather-related events. 
 
It is my pleasure to report that the town of La Ronge was 
chosen as one of the five communities ever to be recognized by 
the program for improving its capacity to combat forest fires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following a forest fire in 1999 that threatened the 
town, a report from the Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
suggested that La Ronge required a booster station upgrade in 
order to better be prepared for the future. Town council made 
this a priority and with a combination of local, provincial, 
federal funding the project proceeded. The upgrade involves 
construction of a new reservoir and pumping station that will 
markedly improve the ability of firefighters to minimize 
property damage and potentially save lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure all members of the Assembly will join 
me in congratulating the town of La Ronge on being recognized 
by the IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada) for their care and 
their foresight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consul Student Wins Essay Contest 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you well know, 
the constituency of Cypress Hills has long been known for the 
amazing talents of its residents. But this time it’s the writing 
talent of a young constituent from the community of Consul 
that I want to recognize. 
 
Last fall the grade 5 and 6 classes of Consul School, taught by 
Ms. Tami Reynolds, entered a Canada-wide essay contest titled 
Shooting for the Gold sponsored by Esso Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were a total of 85,000 entries and the classes 
from Consul were recently notified that the essay of one of their 
classmates, Cody Reamer, was chosen, placing the Consul 
grade 6 class in the top five in the whole country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cody Reamer’s brief but winning essay is titled 
Red, White and Gold, and I’d like to read it into the record. 
 

I have never been happier to be a Canadian than I was in 
2002! Men and women’s hockey teams both won Gold! I 
love hockey and the Olympics. When Canada won the gold 
I could hear all of Canada cheer. I know for sure that in 
2006 Canada will win the gold again. We may have 
thought there were only two colours in Canada; (but) there 
are three — red, white and gold. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Legislative 
Assembly join with me to offer our congratulations to Cody 
Reamer on his winning essay and to the Consul grade 6 class 
for placing in the top five in Canada. 
 
This is an outstanding achievement for the grade 6 class and a 
credit to Cody’s writing talent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Community Spirit Award 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to rise and tell the Assembly about a young woman who 
exemplifies the volunteer spirit that we are so rightfully proud 
of in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 23, Carrie-Ann Smith of Abbey, 
Saskatchewan was presented with the SaskEnergy Community 
Spirit Award for her outstanding contributions as a volunteer in 
many areas. 
 
Carrie-Ann has won numerous awards for her extracurricular 
activities at school and with the 4-H club. She travels to schools 
in the Southwest talking to children about farm safety and has 
been involved with other community safety projects such as the 
production of educational videos. Carrie-Ann also plays guitar 
and takes her musical skills to church and to seniors homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a recipient of the Community Spirit Award, 
Carrie-Ann receives an engraved plaque and a cheque for $500 
to donate to the charity of her choice. Carrie-Ann has chosen 
Camp Shagabec in Cypress Hills where she has been a 
counsellor for four years. 
 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating Carrie-Ann 
Smith and wishing her much more joy in the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Candidate Nominated 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
initial work here in Regina is complete. Last night the 11th 
candidate for the Saskatchewan Party was nominated here in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a room at the Travelodge where standing room 
only was available, Rob Bresciani was nominated for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the Regina Dewdney constituency. 
 
Rob Bresciani is a well-known resident of the city of Regina. 
For the past nine years he’s served on the separate school board, 
a number of those years as Chair. Not only being involved in 
the community, he owns a number of businesses also and is 
well known in the community circle. 
 
However Rob may be best known for his years with the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders. Rob was a member of the 1989 
Grey Cup winning Saskatchewan Roughriders. Prior to those 
years with the Roughriders he spent a number of years in 
Calgary and Ottawa. And in his speech last night he said one 
thing that was always on his mind was to get back to 
Saskatchewan, to grow up in Saskatchewan and play his 
football career in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the reasons Rob decided to run in this . . . for the 
Saskatchewan Party, because he knew they would form the next 
government. But he wanted to see his parents . . . his children, 
pardon me, grow up in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing that Mr. Bresciani said to me when I was leaving the 
meeting last night, he said, would you ask the Premier to screw 
up the courage and call an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Team Saskatchewan Launched 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to report that the Team Saskatchewan initiative of the 
Our Future is Wide Open campaign was launched in Saskatoon 
today. 
 
Team Saskatchewan brings together leaders from the private 
and public sectors that have the common goal of promoting the 
province as a good place to live, work, and to do business. Mr. 
Speaker, Team Saskatchewan members include business leaders 
in Saskatchewan’s six key economic sectors as well as business 
and cultural association representatives and civic leaders. 
 
Team Saskatchewan members will take part in trade missions to 
major markets in Canada and the United States to promote 
investment and business opportunities in Saskatchewan. They 
will also promote our cultural and tourism industries. 
 
Team Saskatchewan’s first trip will be BIO 2003 in 
Washington, DC (District of Columbia). This is the largest 

biotechnology conference in the world and here Team 
Saskatchewan will have the opportunity to showcase our 
achievements in biotechnology research and make contacts with 
the international biotechnology community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure everyone who believes in the future of 
this province will join me in wishing Team Saskatchewan good 
fortune. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, the 
CFIA (Canadian Food Inspection Agency) announced this 
morning that three herds in British Columbia quarantined in 
relationship to the BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) 
case will be depopulated and as so will two other Alberta herds 
and the Saskatchewan herd of Baldwinton, related to the 
trace-backs of the infected cow’s life. This will bring to a total 
eight cattle herds across three Prairie provinces that have had 
herds totally depopulated as a result of BSE infestation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is to whether or not these producers 
will be able to restock their farms with ruminants following 
depopulation. The producers of Baldwinton have spoken with 
George Luterbach of the CFIA today and was not given 
conclusive answers to this question. 
 
Will the minister contact CFIA to confirm whether or not the 
CFIA will allow these family farms to restock the land and 
facilities and find out in what time frame restocking might be 
allowed to occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in our press conference just 
about half an hour ago, our provincial staff member, Dr. 
Greenberg, indicated that in all likelihood — and we don’t have 
a definitive answer from this from CFIA — that there would be 
no restrictions here at all on any one of those producers 
re-establishing their herds again on exactly the same farm sites 
of which the animals that are currently being destroyed could be 
relocated on again. 
 
And we can confirm that with CFIA, but it’s the view of our 
provincial folks that there not be a cause for concern here about 
repopulating any of those farms again with new stock. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister commented during his media briefing that the federal 
Minister of Agriculture told his provincial counterparts today 
that the US (United States) beef import ban would not be lifted 
until late next week at the earliest. He also said that he did not 
know specifically what would satisfy the American officials 
that Canadian beef would be safe. 
 
The CFIA is also commenting that they have never been able to 
conclusively determine the sources of BSE infection in the 
Alberta cow. This is a concern, giving the number of countries 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

who have banned Canadian beef imports and the significance of 
those sales to our beef industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how will the CFIA and the federal government be 
able to satisfy the Americans that our beef is safe and 
BSE-free? If we don’t know what they are looking for and we 
can’t pinpoint the source of the disease, is the minister 
concerned to these points of concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I did confirm for the media 
this afternoon that — in fact, in a conference call with the 
federal minister — that he is having some difficulty 
ascertaining from the US Secretary of Agriculture what it is that 
would exactly be the criteria that would need to be met. 
 
And I think partly some of the difficulty that the US 
government will experience is that of course today they don’t 
have any criteria within their national system. And so it’ll be 
very difficult for them I expect to set criteria of what they 
would want us to meet when in fact they don’t have any of their 
own. 
 
And so what we’re hoping will happen here, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we’ll be able to show unequivocally in the next few days 
that in fact our system is safe; our system can prove that our 
food system is safe. And at the end of the day the American 
government will then lift the ban. 
 
They have today, working in our province and in our country 
alongside our investigators, a team of their specialists. Their 
specialists I expect are reporting back to the US government. 
And it will be through them I expect that the federal 
government will recognize that our system works and that our 
trace-back system is safe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Call for By-election in Carrot River Valley Constituency 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Carrot River have been without representation 
now for nearly four months. And certainly because of the tragic 
circumstances that led to this vacancy, it was responsible for the 
Premier to hold off on calling an early by-election. 
 
But now that we know that there’s no spring election, it’s time 
for the people of Carrot River to be represented in this 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, this is the last week that the Premier 
has to call a by-election if the election is not to be held in July. 
Will the Premier be calling a by-election for Carrot River? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will be certainly giving 
this matter some attention over the next several days. The 
member is correct that a by-election call that would come 
sometime this week would put that by-election in the month of 
June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in Tisdale last night where the New 
Democratic Party nominated a Mark Pitzel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, putting up 
Mark Pitzel, whose roots are deep in that constituency against a 
candidate named Mr. Allan Kerpan, who represents the 
Saskatchewan Party, who I understand comes from Kenaston, 
who I understand used to sit as a Reform member of the House 
of Commons, I am looking forward to this by-election, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
Premier’s not the only one who’s looking forward to the 
by-election. Our candidate, Allan Kerpan, is more than ready to 
face their Mark Pitzel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Premier seems to be pretty reluctant to face the voters. 
He himself has never yet been elected Premier. He doesn’t want 
to call the election. He doesn’t want to call the by-election. Mr. 
Speaker, what’s he afraid of? 
 
(14:00) 
 
The people of Carrot River deserve to be represented and I 
don’t think that they want to be going to the polls in July or 
August, Mr. Speaker. They want a representative in this House 
to speak on the floor of this Assembly, to bring forward their 
concerns before the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the Premier commit to holding a by-election before the end 
of June? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat to the member and 
all hon. members, I’m going to give this some considerable 
attention over the next several hours and several days, and the 
member should just stand by for an announcement. 
 
I repeat, Mr. Speaker, I’m very much looking forward to this 
by-election because I learned last night, I learned last night, 
believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, believe it or not, members, that 
the candidate for the Saskatchewan Party in this upcoming 
by-election is none other than Mr. Allan Kerpan. 
 
Would this be the same Mr. Allan Kerpan, I ask, the same Mr. 
Allan Kerpan who ran for the Eastview nomination? Would this 
be the same Mr. Allan Kerpan who sat as a Reform member of 
the federal parliament? Would this be the same Reform member 
that won kind of an award from The Hill Times . . . (inaudible) 
. . . Is this the same Mr. Allan Kerpan, I ask, that was involved 
in some movements towards Western alienation and separation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you, when I look at Mr. Mark Pitzel, a man 
whose roots are deep into that constituency, a family man, a 
well-educated man, Mr. Speaker, I am looking forward to the 
contest in Carrot River Valley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
looking forward to that by-election that will pit an experienced 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

 

legislator on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s 
looking forward to pitting our experienced legislator against the 
personal assistant to the minister . . . former minister of 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), Mr. Speaker. That is going to be the campaign up in 
Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning when I pulled up to the legislature, I 
saw a large group of children here on the lawns of the 
legislature and I was a little worried. I was happy to hear that 
they were here for a daycare event because for a while I thought 
the government was making another ethanol announcement 
here in the city of Regina. Because a year ago, Mr. Speaker, or 
rather in last October, the NDP drove busloads of school 
children to Belle Plaine to announce the ethanol plant there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the Crown Corporations Committee, 
Frank Hart, the president of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) confirmed that still today there is 
no ethanol deal to report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is simple: why would 
the NDP government put on such a big show — circus tents, 
busing school children in — to announce a deal that didn’t exist 
then and still doesn’t exist today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all 
before I answer that question I’ll answer the first one. In 
reference to the by-election, Mr. Speaker, in personal 
conversation and quiet conversation with that member from 
Swift Current, I understand he would like us to win that riding, 
Mr. Speaker, because if Mr. Kerpan were to win that he would 
be contested for the leadership of the opposition. And I know 
that causes him some difficulty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the position of the government, Mr. Speaker, is 
exactly the same, as it pertains to ethanol, Mr. Speaker, as it 
was before. We will work with the private sector, Mr. Speaker, 
to develop a responsible ethanol industry here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in 1989 in the Moose Jaw journal 
there was a headline regarding the Belle Plaine announcement 
there by the then Devine government. It says, “New Democrat 
wants all facts on Belle Plaine.” 
 
And here’s a quote from the article. It says: 
 

The opposition New Democrats say the government should 
have released the complete funding details of the project 
when it was originally announced. 
 

And here’s a quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

“It’s very strange the deal would be announced without the 

details in place,” says Lorne Calvert . . . (MLA for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow for the NDP.) 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what he said when he was in opposition — 
why would they announce a deal without there being details in 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we found out that not only are there still 
no details in place for this deal they’ve committed the taxpayers 
to, but we found that they hired Scotia, Mr. Speaker, Scotia 
Capital for $25,000 last year to review the deal that doesn’t 
exist, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question to the minister is this: will the minister commit to 
table whatever deal is out there and will he table Scotia 
Capital’s review of the deal that may or may not exist? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, this is almost laughable. 
Well in fact, it is laughable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that member, for that member to suggest that 
there was some great revelation yesterday, Mr. Speaker, about 
ScotiaMcLeod’s review of the ethanol industry, any particular 
project, is laughable as I said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ScotiaMcLeod reviewed the ethanol project, Mr. 
Speaker, and as I’ve said before many times publicly and in the 
media, Mr. Speaker, they have confirmed that the ethanol 
industry has tremendous potential here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again the position of our government has not changed, Mr. 
Speaker. It has absolutely not changed. We will work with the 
private sector to develop an environmentally friendly, Mr. 
Speaker, form of fuel here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the 
province was wading in on issues like this in 1989 when the 
government of the day announced a deal at Belle Plaine too, 
coincidently enough. And once again, here’s what he said. He 
said, and I quote: 
 

“It’s very strange the deal would be announced without the 
details in place,” says Lorne Calvert (NDP-Moose Jaw 
South). 
 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this year the Premier also said in the wake 
of the SPUDCO scandal that the government would hire third 
parties to review any deals in the future. And now we find out, 
we know that they did a review of this particular Broe deal, Mr. 
Speaker, but we also know that there is no deal to review, by 
the admission of the officials and the minister himself. 
 
So to allay all the concerns that taxpayers would have in the 
wake of SPUDCO, will the minister commit today to lay the 
Scotia Capital review on the table and also make public any 
terms of the deal that he says is now in place for this deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we have 
been very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the concern about the ethanol 
was that we do not have the senior debt in place yet. We’ve 
been very open about that. 
 
In terms of the specifics of the deal, we’ve also been very open 
and accountable about that, Mr. Speaker. And the analysis by 
ScotiaMcLeod, we said, and responsibly have done, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve asked them to review the ethanol industry here 
in Saskatchewan, opportunities . . . some opportunities for 
export, Mr. Speaker, and the structure of the deal which we 
talked about, Mr. Speaker, a 60/40 partnership. 
 
They’ve reviewed that. They’ve confirmed that there is 
absolutely a market here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; that 
there is tremendous potential for ethanol here in Saskatchewan. 
They were supportive. We are supportive, Mr. Speaker, and we 
will work with the private sector to develop that industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Finances 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
According to a report issued by the Dominion Bond Rating 
Service last week, the province of Saskatchewan is on course to 
rack up a massive $450 million deficit this year. And yet the 
Finance minister and his NDP government have been parading 
around Saskatchewan bragging that the budget is balanced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP’s Finance 
minister telling the people of Saskatchewan the budget is 
balanced when the Dominion Bond Rating agency says the 
NDP is on the way to a $450 million deficit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as usual, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
Saskatchewan Party gets up and they tell part of what some 
people say, including the bond rating agencies, but they never 
tell the whole story, which is very interesting. 
 
What the public knows, Mr. Speaker, is that since 1995 the 
credit rating agencies, including the Dominion Bond Rating 
agency, have raised the credit rating of the province of 
Saskatchewan 10 times in a row, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And what most reasonable and thoughtful 
people, as distinct from the opposition, know, Mr. Speaker, is 
that: why does your credit rating go up? It goes up when your 
debt is better than it was before, Mr. Speaker. And what the 
opposition isn’t telling the people is this: this province has gone 
from having the worst debt situation in the country, Mr. 
Speaker, the worst, thanks to them, to the third best per capita 
debt situation in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — So it doesn’t get much better than that. But 
you’ll never hear that from the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, the news from the Dominion Bond Rating agency only 
gets worse for this government. This year’s budget is the third 
— third, Mr. Speaker — provincial budget since the member 
from Moose Jaw was appointed Premier by a few members of 
the NDP. And according to the Dominion Bond Rating Service, 
over those three budgets the NDP will have racked up three 
straight deficit budgets. 
 
They have piled up nearly $900 million, Mr. Speaker, in new 
government debt. Mr. Speaker, that government debt is the 
GRF (General Revenue Fund) debt and unfunded pension 
liability debt. It even excludes Crown corporation debt, and that 
has grown by a massive amount. 
 
The report also notes Saskatchewan has posted two straight 
years of negative economic growth. Mr. Speaker, why is the 
NDP misleading the people of Saskatchewan by grossly 
inflating provincial economic growth estimates and hiding a 
massive deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as has been pointed out in this House 
many times, Mr. Speaker, the reason that the debt of the 
province will increase for the last fiscal year is because we took 
in about $500 million in crop insurance premiums and we will 
pay out more than $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. And that is financed 
over time; that is financed over time. And if those members 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that the crop insurance payments should 
not be made to the farmers, they can say so. So, so much for 
that argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that member gets up, Mr. Speaker, and he talks about the 
economy of this province. I want to tell that member that the 
private sector forecast, the latest one, says that Saskatchewan 
will have the fastest growing economy in this country in 2003, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The economy of this province is poised to grow, according to 
the private sector, by 5.8 per cent; faster than Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, which will grow by about 3 per cent. And all they can 
do is harp and complain instead of celebrating the success of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Three straight deficit budgets tells us that this 
is mismanagement by this NDP government. 
 
Not only, Mr. Speaker, is the government, the NDP 
government, on course to pile up another $513 million in new 
provincial debt in this fiscal year alone, the NDP plans to rack 
up an additional $113 million in new Crown corporation debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after three years under the unelected leadership of 
the current NDP Premier, Saskatchewan debt is not only higher 
than it was when the NDP took office in 1991, the NDP has 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

 

now plunged Saskatchewan deeper into debt than in any other 
time in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP claiming a balanced budget when 
the Dominion Bond Rating Service is saying the NDP is to run 
a $450 million deficit and pile up an additional half a billion 
dollars worth of debt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, really. Will you listen 
to that. We have a straight A credit rating — straight A credit 
rating. The fastest growing economy in the country, Mr. 
Speaker, the fastest growing economy in the country but they 
don’t recognize any good news in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to say to the people of this province, who do they 
believe? Those doom and gloomers over there or the chartered 
accountants of this province, Mr. Speaker? Because according 
to the report of the chartered accountants of the province, 
between 1992 and 2001 the debt of Saskatchewan, the 
taxpayer-supported debt to GDP (gross domestic product) ratio, 
Mr. Speaker, went down by 49.4 per cent. That went down in 
relation to the economy because the economy is growing at a 
good pace, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s only one group of individuals, Mr. Speaker, in this 
province who do not want to celebrate the successes of 
Saskatchewan people because of their lust for power, and that 
negative group is sitting right over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Liquor and 
Gaming keeps telling us one of the reasons that the NDP started 
mega bingo program in Saskatchewan was because of how well 
it was doing in Alberta. 
 
The problem is the NDP did not follow the Alberta model at all. 
Satellite bingo in Alberta was set up at absolutely no cost to the 
Alberta taxpayers. The entire system was financed through the 
sale of partnership units to non-profit organizations. Every one 
of those partners has now seen a significant return on their 
original investment, and it did not cost the government one 
dime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP not follow this model, and 
instead go ahead with their own scheme and lose $8 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m not 
sure that all the facts are being expressly stated by the member 
opposite. I mean this is another particular aspect of not having 
all the details. 
 
And I’ve told this House before, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been 
totally up front. The Western Canada Lottery Corporation, Mr. 
Speaker, the agent for SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority) requested . . . issued a request for proposal 
for software development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure if that well-recognized, well-respected 
organization had received an offer of free sources of facilities 
and services, who would turn that down, Mr. Speaker? I’m not 
sure where the member is getting all that kind of information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just compare these two 
bingo systems. In Alberta, satellite bingo is run privately. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order, order. I 
invite the member to start over. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just compare these two 
bingo systems. In Alberta, satellite bingo is run privately. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just compare these two 
bingo systems. In Alberta, the satellite bingo is run privately at 
zero cost to the taxpayers and they have raised over $120 
million for charities. In Saskatchewan, the NDP decided that 
they had to run their own mega bingo scheme. 
 
And let’s look at their record: no business plan, no cabinet 
approval, no ceiling on expenditures, lost $8 million, bingo 
halls lost money, and absolutely not one dime raised for 
charities in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sadly this is typical of the NDP. They take a 
business that the private sector could run; they decide to run it 
themselves; and they run it into the ground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP give this contract to Wascana 
Gaming? What was the real reason that they awarded this 
contract to Wascana Gaming instead of going with the satellite 
bingo system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you. I guess 
once again the member opposite has indicated that I need to 
speak slower and repeat what I’ve said in this House. 
 
And I’m prepared to repeat over and over: a request for 
proposal was asked for by the Western Canada Lottery 
Corporation — a well-respected agency in Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, who takes care of a lot of business throughout Western 
Canada. WCLC received and evaluated the proposals. The 
WCLC presented SLGA with its evaluations of proposals to 
develop software to meet the RFP (request for proposal) 
specifications, Mr. Speaker. The WCLC identified two potential 
suppliers. The Alberta satellite system was not one of the two 
potential suppliers. 
 
Isn’t that surprising, Mr. Speaker? That member, if she’s going 
to ask questions like that, should know what the answers are 
because they’re there — wide open, Mr. Speaker, and available. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and convert for 
debates returnable questions 484 through 522 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 484 to 522 have been converted to 
orders for return debatable. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 523 through 526 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 523, ’24, ’25, and 526 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 
able to speak on Bill No. 17, The Land Surveys Amendment 
Act. Of course, Mr. Speaker, this Bill brings up really the 
disaster that the government has with ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, this ISC was only supposed to cost 
less than $20 million to implement, and now we know that it’s 
cost over $107 million of taxpayer money, and this is quite a 
tragedy to the people of Saskatchewan. This is money that’s 
been wasted on a system that does not work properly as we 
know. We’ve had many people phone about problems with ISC. 
 
We have many concerns. Examples of the problems that this 
system has brought on people is: people with the same name, 
even the same middle initial, and the government has forced 
these people into applying to get their name off certain titles, 
off caveats, and having those people pay for the cost of doing 
that — really paying for the cost of a government error. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s tragic in many ways because this system 
has cost so much of taxpayers’ money and now the rates for 
transfers has gone up dramatically. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
continues to be a grave concern. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, this amendment is, more specifically 
defines a legal land definition and requires the surveyors to 
re-establish lost monuments in certain situations. Now we hope 
that these amendments will help out with some of the failings of 
the ISC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve — the 
caucus office and the MLAs and the opposition side — has had 

many complaints concerning ISC, and we hope in the future 
that the government will do a better job of trying to straighten 
out this mess. I’m not sure if it’s possible to straighten out ISC, 
at the end of the day. 
 
We certainly know, Mr. Speaker, that the plans of the 
government to sell this system to other jurisdictions has fallen 
flat. Of course no one wants a system that has gone over budget 
by 500 per cent. And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a sad 
situation where the government’s spent that much of taxpayer 
money, having a product that can’t be sold to another 
jurisdiction. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have talked to the Saskatchewan Land 
Surveyors’ Association and these small amendments 
concerning this Act, they find acceptable. 
 
There’s one thing that the Land Surveyors’ Association is 
expecting, is another Act to amend The Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors Act. And we have not seen this come 
forward and that brings up a number of questions why the 
government hasn’t proceeded with that Act that the 
Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association expects to come 
forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe the critic will have many more questions in the 
upcoming days and so we will let this go to Committee of the 
Whole, and where the opposition will ask more questions, the 
critic will ask more questions that have been brought forward 
from people that have concerns over ISC. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 
modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill No. 31, Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a lot of concerns around this 
whole Bill because it is actually giving self-regulation or 
moving towards self-regulation of on-reserve gaming by First 
Nations. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s been an ongoing debate in 
Saskatchewan about the whole idea of a 25-year agreement that 
was signed last year with Saskatchewan Indian Gaming and 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming and FSIN actually 
representing . . . SIGA, representing FSIN. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the time that this was introduced there was 
grave concern expressed by the Saskatchewan Party on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan about the time frame and the length 
of time of this gaming agreement. And at that time the issue 
surrounding the Dutch Lerat scandal was still not settled. It was 
still in . . . at the Department of Justice. There are several 
outstanding concerns that had been raised by the auditor; 
recommendations that he had made that had not been met. And 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

 

yet the government, the NDP, felt it necessary to move ahead 
and to sign a 25-year agreement in light of the fact that these 
issues had not been addressed. And it certainly is of grave 
concern to many people. 
 
At the same time as Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming decided 
to move ahead with the 25-year agreement, Mr. Speaker, there 
was still concern that was raised as recently as December 2002 
by the Provincial Auditor that there was still improper use of 
funds — in specific, Mr. Speaker, $400,000 that went to the 
FSIN in order to help them negotiate the framework agreement. 
 
So when we look at this, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan paid for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming to 
negotiate the agreement and they also paid for the FSIN to 
negotiate the agreement. It seems like a very strange deal and 
certainly is not something that would be common in the real 
business world today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also the government determined that they would give $150,000 
to Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing in order to help 
them towards reaching status of being able to license on-reserve 
gaming. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, under the framework agreement and under 
the Casino Operating Agreement signed in 1995, according to 
the Provincial Auditor, both of these are using public funds 
improperly. 
 
And under the Criminal Code of Canada, they have the 
authority to license gaming in the country of Canada. And by 
leave they allow the province to administer gaming in their own 
province. The only way SIGA can operate gaming in the 
province of Saskatchewan is by agreement with the provincial 
government. And the only expenses that SIGA is allowed to 
charge back to the province of Saskatchewan are actually the 
fees that it cost, the expenses that it costs them to operate the 
slot machines in their casinos. 
 
(14:30) 
 
SIGA also, at their casinos, runs table games. They have food 
and beverage outlets and they also have gift shops. All of the 
three that I just mentioned, Mr. Speaker, lose money. 
 
So the only profitable part of a SIGA casino are the slot 
machines which they can only operate under the Casino 
Operating Agreement signed with the provincial government. 
So they are losing money and they are deducting those losses 
off of the profit from the slot machines. 
 
So as this occurs, Mr. Speaker, at the same time those are the 
only expenses that are supposed to be deducted, the expenses 
that are actually directly related to slot machines. But we see 
that the expenses that are incurred by the table games, the food 
and beverage, and the gift shops are also being deducted, 
therefore less revenue coming back to the provincial 
government to then in turn give to First Nations, to community 
development corporations, and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming went 
ahead and deducted the $550,000, allowed these expenses to be 
incurred, and according to the Provincial Auditor they were not 

proper expenditures because they were not directly related to an 
expenditure that was necessary in order to operate the slot 
machines at SIGA casinos. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is very concerning to the Saskatchewan 
Party opposition, as well as I’m sure to many people across 
Saskatchewan, that now the NDP government is moving ahead 
and planning to give more regulation in the hands of First 
Nations on-reserve when in fact there has not been compliance 
with all of the recommendations given by the minister . . . or by 
the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. 
 
And it is, I guess, alarming that they are going to move forward 
and give them further authority when they have not met the 
recommendations so far. 
 
At the time of the . . . the 25-year agreement was reached, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a clause in the agreement that talks about full 
jurisdiction. And at that time we repeatedly questioned the 
minister about what does full jurisdiction mean. 
 
And at that time the minister said that it meant they would get a 
second opinion, I believe; I’m paraphrasing but essentially a 
second opinion from the federal government. But Mr. Perry 
Bellegarde, who is the chief of the FSIN, made the statement 
that full jurisdiction to him and to First Nations meant the jewel 
in the crown. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, we have yet to hear a full explanation 
from the government about what full jurisdiction means and 
what they actually envision at the end of the day should First 
Nations in this province receive full jurisdiction and what the 
implications will be to all people in Saskatchewan. Because 
under the Casino Operating Agreement and the framework 
agreement, 37.5 per cent of the revenue generated from SIGA 
casinos goes to First Nations, 37.5 per cent comes back to the 
General Revenue Fund and therefore for all taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan, and 25 per cent goes to the community 
development corporations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is very, very important that all people in 
Saskatchewan have a full accounting of the dollars that are 
generated at the casino level, and also to ensure that undue 
expenditures are not being incurred and that those funds 
actually that are owed to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
First Nations actually do flow to them. And to date, Mr. 
Speaker, this has been something that has not been adhered to 
in its entirety by Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. 
 
There are many unanswered questions as to how the dollars are 
generated at the casino level, if the expenditures are 
appropriate, and also the expenditure of those dollars once they 
are into the General Revenue and passed on to the First Nations, 
to the FSIN, and to the First Nations trust fund. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have had the opportunity to speak with 
several First Nations people over the years. And there is a great 
concern about the dollars that are to go to First Nations and to 
whether they are actually receiving the dollars at the reserve 
level and off-reserve level that they are entitled to because of 
the dollars generated through gaming at the SIGA casinos. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe . . . Until the Saskatchewan 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

Liquor and Gaming comes to terms with the accountability that 
they are entrusted with today, why would they be now moving 
to give away the regulation portion and to be returning the 
regulation of Liquor and Gaming on SIGA on reserve land to 
another entity? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to look at it from an economic 
point of view, what is the rationale for having two separate 
licensing bodies in the province of Saskatchewan? We already 
have people that work in Liquor and Gaming that do this very 
job, and there is the whole administrative level set-up. What we 
are looking at here is duplicating what is already in place. 
 
And I know if you go back to 1992-93 when gaming was first 
started in Saskatchewan, at that time the proposal was to 
operate Indian gaming out of the same offices and under the 
same administration as Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming was 
operated. And now we see that the government is moving to 
separate these two entities, and it causes great concern of what 
the real purposes of doing this, and where will the dollars be 
saved. 
 
And for every dollar that is not expended properly in the 
province, where the expenses are out of control, where there is 
not accountability — that translates into less dollars for the 
general taxpayers of the province, for First Nations, and for 
community development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen this government continue to fail the 
charities of this province because of the mega bingo scheme. 
Mr. Speaker, I questioned this morning in Public Accounts and 
asked the CEO (chief executive officer) of Liquor and Gaming: 
what was the purpose of mega bingo? And she answered by 
saying it was to generate more revenue for charities in the 
province, when in fact it did everything but. The charities were 
the big losers. They did not receive any additional funds and on 
top of that, it cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan $8 million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we now see the NDP failing the First 
Nations in this province because they are willing to turn a blind 
eye and not to hold accountable those in authority that have the 
dollars at their disposal, and they are not ensuring that these 
dollars actually flow to where they’re intended to end up, Mr. 
Speaker, which by and large is to the benefit . . . they are to 
benefit the First Nations in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of an article that was in the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix last year, written by Randy Burton. And 
I would just like to quote a few of his comments because I think 
he clearly describes what the majority of the people in 
Saskatchewan feel about the whole issue of the 25-year gaming 
agreement and the lack of accountability for gaming in 
Saskatchewan. And I quote: 
 

All of which raises the question: if jurisdiction doesn’t 
mean anything, why is it in the agreement? 
 
From the FSIN’s point of view, the answer is plain. 
 
It wants complete control of casinos on reserve, wherever it 
should choose to put them. 
 
The government’s motivations are less clear, but it’s pretty 

obvious the NDP would like to benefit on both ends of the 
equation. 
 
Facing the growing probability of defeat in the next 
election, one of the NDP’s emerging electoral strategies is 
to court the Native vote at every opportunity. 
 
Anyone looking for proof of the government’s strategy 
need look no further than the debate in the legislature over 
the past few days, where (Minister) Osika has equated any 
opposition to a 25-year . . . (gaming) agreement with 
anti-Indian sentiment. 
 
(Minister) Osika’s use of racial . . . (policies) and murky 
definitions constitutes a new low-water mark in the 
government’s handling of the gaming file. 
 
Based on this performance, it’s easy to believe that 
jurisdiction is just another word for giving away the farm. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like it to go on record that the 
Saskatchewan Party and their opposition to some of the issues 
that are being put forth in Liquor and Gaming, and in particular 
the 25-year agreement, the lack of accountability, now moving 
away from scrutiny of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming over 
gambling and gaming on-reserve. We are opposing this because 
we believe that there should be accountability — not only for 
the taxpayers of this province, but especially for the First 
Nations people who are dependent on this revenue, and who 
time and time again have tried at the band level to receive 
accountability to have an understanding of where these dollars 
are going. They are wanting answers. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party is committed to accountability at 
the casino level and at the level where the dollars are distributed 
— whether it be First Nations, community development, or the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we will have many more questions on this 
Bill, and I move to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 35 — The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
this Bill is moving the First Nations Fund to the First Nations 
trust. And, Mr. Speaker, again we have concerns about this Bill 
because of the whole issue of accountability. 
 
The minister in his . . . When he was speaking to this Bill, when 
it was originally introduced, indicated that it will improve 
accountability. And, Mr. Speaker, I fail to see in the Bill how 
that is going to occur, and so we will be asking the minister to 
give us details of how accountability will be improved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for several years the First Nations Fund has been 
under criticism by the Provincial Auditor because of the lack of 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

 

scrutiny and the lack of identifying where the dollars flow from 
the First Nations trust and . . . or Fund, sorry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if this new trust fund is indeed to ensure further 
accountability then it is a good thing. And when we question 
the minister about this when we have the opportunity in 
Committee of the Whole, I’ll be very interested to see if indeed 
this is where the government is moving because First Nations 
people have been asking for a long time for more accountability 
so that they have an understanding of where the dollars from 
gaming actually are going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only on-reserve First Nations that are 
concerned about this, it is also off-reserve First Nations who are 
entitled to a share of the gaming profit and who, by and large, 
are not seeing any of the dollars flowing to them. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have serious, serious social issues 
on-reserve — we have people living in poverty, we have serious 
concerns around drug and alcohol, we have the fetal alcohol 
syndrome issue. There are countless ways that the dollars from 
gaming could be used to enrich the lives of First Nations 
people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the whole purpose of the First Nations Fund 
is to improve the lives of First Nations people. And it’s the 
Saskatchewan Party’s position that we want to ensure that in 
fact the dollars are flowing to the people on-reserve and that 
they are being used for the said purposes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is not only what the Saskatchewan Party 
believes we should do, it is the duty as legislators to ensure that 
all dollars that are public funds are spent wisely and are spent 
where they are supposed to be spent. And so, Mr. Speaker, it is 
very alarming that over the course of years that the NDP has 
chosen to turn a blind eye and not to insist on proper accounting 
of the First Nations Fund. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that is very concerning for all 
residents of Saskatchewan, but it certainly is something that the 
First Nations people themselves are very concerned about and 
are looking to a government that will be accountable and so that 
they can be assured that the dollars that are rightfully supposed 
to be for their use on-reserve and off-reserve are indeed flowing 
to them. And, Mr. Speaker, we have watched how the NDP has 
made the decision in the past to drag their feet, to not enforce 
the accountability standards that the First Nations people 
deserve. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will have many more questions for the 
minister when we go to Committee of the Whole to ask him 
how this Bill, how the changing from a fund to a trust is indeed 
going to make the dollars that flow to this fund more 
accountable. And so, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 34 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
into the second reading debate on Bill 34, An Act to amend The 
Film Employment Tax Credit Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this House will know that the original 
tax credit was passed into law in this province in 1998. It 
provided a 35 per cent tax credit on eligible Saskatchewan 
labour costs for film and television. The amendment . . . The 
legislation we’re dealing with today is an amendment that 
would indeed extend the deadline, the original deadline to apply 
for the tax credit which was December 31, 2003, this would 
expand it to December 31, 2004. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a number of my colleagues have had the 
chance to speak to this Bill prior to my own intervention today 
— and not only in this session but in previous sessions when 
similar pieces of legislation have been introduced — and I think 
we made it pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, again in the interests of 
being as constructive as we possibly can, we’ve been making it 
pretty clear that this sort of targeted tax incentive is precisely 
what our own Saskatchewan Party plan for growth is all about 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The member for Kindersley, I believe, spoke to this piece of 
legislation most recently and did a very eloquent, fine job of 
outlining for members of this House exactly the reasons why 
the tax credit idea that’s embodied in this Bill is the right thing 
to do. Conversely I think he also demonstrated, as have other 
speakers, that while the tax credit is an excellent tool to try to 
ensure economic development in the province of Saskatchewan, 
that direct government intervention — especially as regards this 
government’s record in direct government intervention — can 
be simply an unmitigated disaster both for the industry itself 
and for taxpayers. 
 
And the film industry in Saskatchewan affords us a chance to 
test the theory put forward by the member for Kindersley, by 
several others who spoke to this Bill, and as you will see, by my 
own intervention here today. The theory being again that while 
targeted tax cuts, tax credits if you will, can in fact lever 
economic growth and investment in the province, direct 
government intervention has done two things historically in 
Saskatchewan. One, it has driven away private sector venture 
capitalists. It’s created an environment not conducive to 
investment into growth in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
puts at risk millions of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
How is the theory then tested by this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker? Well the theory is tested because we can see that for 
most of the film industry in our province that aren’t the 
benefactor of government funding, direct investment — most of 
them — they have been able to use the tax credit to their benefit 
and to the benefit of the economy and to the benefit of the 
industry. 
 
Conversely, the 4.5 million taxpayers’ dollars that have been 
put into this, into one particular company, Minds Eye, is now 
valued, Mr. Speaker, if you can believe it, short years later, 
valued at half a million dollars. Taxpayers have lost $4 million. 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

So on one hand the tax credit that this Bill speaks to helps grow 
the industry. On the other hand the $4.5 million invested in 
Minds Eye has now been reduced to a half a million dollars; the 
money is lost, and you have a situation where even those in the 
industry are concerned again that the government has picked 
winners and losers to the detriment of the film industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we believe in the potential of this industry in 
Saskatchewan, there’s no question about it. I can recall in my 
previous life as an economic development officer for the city of 
Swift Current, I recall having conversations with SaskFILM. 
 
And one in particular conversation I remember. I believe it was 
Universal was looking for a place to cast . . . I beg your pardon, 
to shoot The Mummy, which most of us will remember, and its 
sequels, especially if we happen to tune in from time to time on 
Monday nights and see The Rock in action. You’ll know that he 
was a star in those series, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we had a chance, apparently we had a slim chance of 
getting The Rock to come here to Saskatchewan, and the rest of 
the cast of that movie and that huge production because they 
were looking for a location in Canada. They were particularly 
interested in some of the sand dune environments that we have 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I recall as the economic development officer for Swift 
Current dealing with SaskFILM officials who were very 
professional and indeed very aggressive and interested in trying 
to attract films to the province of Saskatchewan. They talked a 
little bit about different options for Saskatchewan in terms of 
attracting the movie, this movie, The Mummy, needing a sand 
environment. 
 
Now for good reason, environmental concerns and others, it 
didn’t happen in the Southwest. And there may have been other 
reasons as well I’m not aware of. 
 
But the point is this, Mr. Speaker, that SaskFILM, the office 
was doing a good job of promoting Saskatchewan. Now that’s 
to an outside studio. This Bill, this Bill seeks to assist any 
particular investor in the industry, but primarily I think focuses 
on our own film industry here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Compare that, compare that with the record of direct investment 
in the film industry by the NDP — $4.5 million a couple of 
years ago, taxpayers’ dollars, invested in a company now worth, 
according to their own financial statements, the government’s 
own financial statements, now worth a half a million dollars. 
 
A $12 million sound stage, Mr. Speaker, that by all accounts is 
very much underutilized, partly we understand because of the 
cost, of companies that would like potentially to use a sound 
stage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is the record of tax credits versus direct government 
intervention. 
 
And what causes us concern, Mr. Speaker, grave concern, is the 
response we get from the government and from the minister 
sponsoring this Bill, and specifically when we ask questions 
about the track record of this government investing directly into 

film production companies. The $4.5 million was a specific 
point we raised. 
 
Well here is what the minister responsible said, and this is on 
the CBC Arts News Web site when she was asked the same 
question by the media about the $4.5 million invested in Minds 
Eye and the approval for another $2 million, and I’m quoting 
here, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Crofford would not say if this additional investment was 
part of Minds Eye’s first business plan. 
 

And this is a quote. 
 

“It is not my job to ask a business every detail about what 
they plan to do in the future,” said Crofford. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if that is not the job of ministers of the 
Crown who are putting in harm’s way millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars into risky business adventures — in this case the film 
industry — if that’s not their job, then what is their job, Mr. 
Speaker, if it’s not their job to ask tough questions? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill today, Bill 34, speaks to the 
fact, underscores the fact that we wouldn’t have to worry about 
any of this — we wouldn’t have to worry about ministers not 
asking the right questions, ministers losing 4 million taxpayers’ 
dollars, other ministers losing 28 million in SPUDCO, 8 million 
in bingo — we wouldn’t have to worry about any of that if the 
government recognized the strength of Bill 34, a tax credit 
measure, instead of, instead of direct government intervention. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the problem is, is that this government 
doesn’t realize that. This government doesn’t get it. This 
government continues to put taxpayers’ dollars in harm’s way 
in a big way, not through tax credits but through direct 
government investment. 
 
The member for Kindersley asks a good question: why would 
they do that? The record is clear. After six decades of doing this 
and three different political parties in government doing the 
same thing, it hasn’t worked. It’s really betrayed the potential of 
Saskatchewan. So why would they do that then? The answer 
must be, the answer must be ideological, that that is their 
ideological belief. 
 
And every once in a while they tinker on the edges of sound 
fiscal and economic development policy with Bill . . . with 
something like Bill 34, the film employment tax credit. They 
get close to it, Mr. Speaker; they stumble on almost blindly to 
what will work in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the heart and soul of their plan isn’t about tax tools; it’s 
about reaching into taxpayers’ wallets, putting money in harm’s 
way, and chasing away venture capitalists, in this case in the 
film industry. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will be supporting the principles of Bill 34. 
However the critic involved has a number of questions that are 
best asked in Committee of the Whole as the Bill is considered 
in a clause-by-clause fashion. 
 
And with those remarks then, Mr. Speaker, the opposition’s 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

 

pleased to inform the House that we believe this Bill is ready to 
go to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 11 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a few comments to make on Bill No. 11, 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Act this afternoon. 
 
The first comment, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that this Bill 
has been delayed a number of times after its introduction and 
there was never an explanation from the government opposite 
as to whether or not the people who are affected by this Bill had 
problems with it, or whether or not it was just a bureaucratic 
nightmare that was tying it up. Nevertheless we finally see the 
Bill come forward today and believe that in our consultations 
with various people that the Bill proposed this year is a bit of a 
compromise. 
 
You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Act, amendment Act, of a couple of years ago was 
introduced by this government and, after seeing that draft 
proposal, there was a tremendous outcry from a number of 
different groups involved within this plan. And as a result, the 
government withdrew that Bill. It was I believe the only Bill 
that was withdrawn that year. 
 
Now there seems to be a compromise that has been put forward. 
I understand the government had an individual travelling 
around the province and consulting with the various 
stakeholders. 
 
By stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, I mean the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipal Association, the Saskatchewan Rural Municipal 
Association, and the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, and of course the various employees that are 
affected by this particular change. Those employees of course 
represent various business associations and officials of various 
associations, as well as of course firefighters and police officers 
and the various trade unions that are represented primarily 
through CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees). 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at the Bill it is 
a significant Bill in that it has at least six significant 
components to it where there are a number of changes. The first 
one, Mr. Speaker . . . And I note the minister’s comments 
contained in Hansard of April 14 where the minister said that, 
of course the introduction of the Bill was necessary to improve 
benefits to plan members and to create a new structure and 
composition for the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Commission. 
 
With regards to the first half of the minister’s comments, Mr. 
Speaker, of course the very first change that is being 
implemented is that employees with a pensionable service on a 

10-month year, for those people employed that way, they will 
now receive credit on that basis. 
 
And of course that is significant because there are a number of 
people employed, especially in the education sector, that are 
employed for a 10-month basis. Teacher assistants, bus drivers, 
and the like, Mr. Speaker, are employed on a 10-month basis 
and this now will address some of the concerns that those 
people have been putting forward. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The second concern or the second improvement as indicated, or 
in the Bill is where the members who will work a portion of an 
academic year, they will be credited on a pro-rated basis. So 
that is also very important because there are half-time 
employees, and those will be credited based on a pro-rated 
basis. 
 
One of the more important changes in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is 
that there will be retroactivity for receiving credit of 
pensionable service on that 10-month basis. So it will address 
concerns that have been put forward in the previous years. 
 
Another point is that excess contributions that will be contained 
in the plan will be used to either improve the plan, or they will 
have the ability to improve the pension benefits with the interest 
and of course the contributions made by the member that are in 
excess of what is required. 
 
One of the other changes is that the excess contributions will be 
used to enhance the member’s pension. And that is a significant 
change as well to that, to improving the pension benefits that a 
member will be able to obtain upon retirement. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the, I think the most important 
changes that is being proposed by this amendment is that there 
will be a new structure to the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Commission. 
 
If we take a look at the existing condition which was circulated, 
Mr. Speaker, in the explanatory notes, we note that of course 
the commission contained a representative of the Government 
of Saskatchewan appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council who shall be the chairperson of the commission. Mr. 
Speaker, that entire section has been withdrawn in that the 
commission members will not be selected, none of the 
commission members will be selected by the government. 
 
There will be a process in place where the 10 members who 
will now make up the commission will select the chairperson 
and the vice-chairperson from within that group. And I think 
that’s a very wise move because the commission members will 
recognize who the position is best filled by, a particular 
member, and they will choose that chairperson accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note also that the makeup of the commission is 
in sort of two sectors. The first sector as indicated is going to be 
persons who are deemed to be employer representatives. 
 
And I note, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipal Association, SUMA, will have one representative; 
the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities will have 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

one member. There will be one member appointed by the 
associations that represent regional college; and there will be 
two persons appointed by the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, of course because education playing such a key 
role in this number of employees involved. So we’ll see five 
individuals who will come from the employer side. 
 
The second category in this commission, Mr. Speaker, is that 
persons will be representing the employees and there will be 
one person who will represent or be appointed by — I’m sorry, 
I shouldn’t say represent — they will be appointed by the Rural 
Municipal Administrators’ Association. Another individual will 
be appointed by the Saskatchewan Association of School 
Business Officials. A third individual will be appointed by the 
Urban Municipal Administrators Association. 
 
A fourth person will be appointed by the trade unions that 
represent employees who are members of the plan, and a fifth 
person will be appointed by associations that represent 
firefighters and police officers who are members of the plan. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, in looking at that composition, it’s a 
much different proposal than we saw in this Legislative 
Assembly a short, I believe, two years ago, two sessions ago, 
when we saw an amendment. It looks like it has been fixed up. 
According to the member from Swift Current, yes, it seems to 
have been fixed up because, as I stated earlier on in my 
remarks, the government chose to withdraw that initial 
municipal employees’ amendment Act. 
 
This one seems to have had much broader consultation. It seems 
to have arrived at a compromise that is acceptable to the 
participants in the plan, not only from the point of view of 
employers but also from the point of view of employees. 
 
There are a number of technical questions that we require 
clarification on, Mr. Speaker, because there are reference to a 
certain number of dates and different terms that need to be 
clarified, but those will be best dealt with, Mr. Speaker, in 
Committee of the Whole, where we will have the opportunity to 
question the minister and the officials on a clause-by-clause 
basis. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, the opposition would best be served 
and the people of Saskatchewan would best be served if the Bill 
proceeded to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 29 — The 
Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 
modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to rise in the House and speak to this Bill, Bill 
No. 29. The essence of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, addresses 

something very important and near and dear to all Canadian and 
citizens of Saskatchewan to their hearts, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is the community service performed by very many volunteers 
throughout our great province. 
 
I know that at all our cities and towns, rural communities, we 
have volunteers and they really hold our communities together. 
 
Specifically what this amendment protects, Mr. Speaker, is 
directors and officers of non-profit corporations from civil 
action from losses suffered by persons as a result of carrying 
out his or her duties within a charitable organization. 
 
I know that this legislation is very necessary and somewhat 
overdue because the lack of it arguably could have led to a 
detriment and a falling off of a number of volunteers 
participating in charitable groups. 
 
An example comes to mind, Mr. Speaker, where a charitable 
organization in a small town in Saskatchewan, a number of 
years ago, held a poker rally. And through no fault of the 
charitable organization and the directors involved, there was a 
snowmobile accident. It’s my understanding that there had been 
some alcohol involved in this and unfortunately a member on a 
snowmobile was very badly injured. 
 
But what came from this was a long and drawn-out lawsuit 
which threatened all the volunteers that were trying to raise 
money for their communities. And I know from experience, Mr. 
Speaker, that situations such as these have caused individuals 
sitting on volunteer boards to assist and request directors 
insurance, which is an extra cost to a charitable organization. 
And this piece of legislation will be a good way of redirecting 
those funds to better uses. 
 
It’s become necessary in the last number of years that if you’re 
sitting on a volunteer board, to make sure that this sort of 
insurance was in place, and now this should largely replace that. 
 
And it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that the monies used to 
pay those premiums are taken out of operating budgets, 
otherwise would be going for the many good and charitable 
causes that many of our non-profit, volunteer corporations 
participate in. 
 
This legislation, Mr. Speaker, will also protect a director or 
officer from non-profit corporations seeking to recover damages 
that may be awarded if the director or officer is not liable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again this is important. The tone of the Act is to 
ensure that our volunteer sector in Saskatchewan remains 
vibrant. We currently in Canada have a . . . 47 per cent of our 
population over the age of 15 report participating at some level 
in volunteer work. And I can’t emphasize enough how all 
members of this House appreciate the work that volunteers do 
in all of our communities and constituencies from, be it church 
organizations, charitable organizations, service groups. 
 
At the end of they day they accomplish a great deal of work, 
often at the community level but sometimes right across the 
province. And we’re glad to see that this piece of legislation is 
going to aid in stopping the deterrence of people becoming 
involved, not only at just giving an hour or two of their time, 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

 

but at the busyness required at the executive level of many of 
these volunteer organizations. 
 
Saskatchewan culture volunteers provides over $35.4 million of 
unpaid labour to maintain cultural activities in this province. 
And that’s estimated, Mr. Speaker, only at a minimum wage of 
$6 an hour. And this is according to a 1997 national survey. So 
we can see what a great contribution volunteer capacity in the 
province contributes fiscally as well, because had volunteerism 
not been taking place and providing these services, these 
services either (a) would not be performed; or secondly, they 
would have to be paid for. And they’d either have to be paid for 
at the municipal level or by a provincial government or a 
federal government. So again, I can’t emphasize enough the 
nature that . . . and appreciation we have for our volunteers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And to end, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to say that we are in 
support of this legislation and its overall intent in what it . . . the 
direction that it’s going to allow for volunteer organizations, 
and specifically their executives, the freedom to participate 
without worry about recriminations from litigation from 
problems which from time to time may arise but wouldn’t be 
the fault of volunteers per se. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the feeling from this side of the House that we 
would have no more further questions and that anything further 
that needs to be answered could be answered at the Committee 
of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all hon. members in the House, I’d like to 
direct your attention to our east gallery. We have 39 students 
from Wadena Elementary School, grade 4 students. 
 
With them is their teachers, Denise Nelson, Helen Argent, 
Myrna Daviduk; and we have a chaperone, Shannon Hoffart 
and Dale Achtymichuk; and our bus driver, Gerry Griffiths. 
 
I have had the opportunity to meet with these students earlier 
today, and we had a long discussion on the workings of the 
House and the role of the Speaker and the mace. And they 
decided to come back again this afternoon to see the House in 
operation. And I really thank them for that. I hope you learn a 
lot this afternoon and go home with many fine memories of the 
Assembly. 
 
So welcome, and thank you for coming back. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Pawned 
Property (Recording) Act. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is being 
introduced at the request of our Saskatchewan police services to 
enhance crime prevention initiatives in our communities by 
improving the speed and accuracy with which information is 
provided by pawnbrokers to our police services. 
 
Under existing city bylaws pawnshops are generally required to 
provide to their local police services a written description of 
what items have been pawned in their stores and by whom. This 
information is then provided to the local police service on a 
periodic basis. 
 
In some communities this process has not changed significantly 
in decades. Once received, the information then awaits data 
entry by the police service. As a result, the information is 
frequently out of date and inaccurate. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the case in Regina and Moose Jaw. 
Since 1999, when an item is pawned in these cities that same 
information is entered on a secure computer at the pawn shop 
and simultaneously — simultaneously, Mr. Speaker, in real 
time -- transferred to the municipal police service where it can 
then be incorporated with the police CPIC (Canadian Police 
Information Centre) system. So right away the property — what 
it is, who it came from — is put into the system and the police 
are made aware. As a result, Mr. Speaker, stolen goods that are 
sought to be pawned on the same day they are stolen can be 
better identified and returned. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to pause here to say we should be 
concerned about the victims of crime. We should be concerned 
about people whose houses have been broken into, whose 
property has been stolen. We should be concerned about them, 
Mr. Speaker. And those individuals have the right to expect that 
when their property is stolen, that we will use all the tools that 
we can to tell the police where that property is and from whom 
it came. That is our responsibility, Mr. Speaker, surely, as 
legislators, to make sure that we give the police the very best 
tools possible to fight crime and, in particular, property theft. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the success of this project in Saskatchewan has 
resulted in our police community, led by the Regina and 
Saskatoon police services, asking the government to provide a 
legislative framework for the implementation of the system 
throughout the province. Simply put, this Bill does just that. It 
creates a framework for the implementation of computerized 
registration throughout the province on a 
community-by-community basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I pause here to say it’s time we came into the 
21st century. We have computer systems. We have high-speed 
Internet in our communities. We should use that system to fight 
crime and we’re going to do that with this Bill. 
 
Under this Bill, a pawnbroker will be required to obtain and 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

record information about an item being pawned before 
accepting goods for pawn. And it is a simple fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that some goods that are pawned are stolen. And we’re going to 
keep track of them. This information will then be provided to 
the police by way of a computerized registration system. 
 
The Bill also provides for standard regulation and inspection 
powers to ensure that pawnbrokers are complying with the Bill. 
Offence provisions are also included for those who do not 
comply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important to point out that this legislation 
seeks to work with municipalities by giving them the option to 
proceed with electronic reporting when their own pawnbroking 
community and police service are prepared for it. Ongoing 
consultations will be required prior to implementation in a 
given municipality to ensure that the system is properly in 
place, training has occurred, and that pawnbrokers have been 
properly notified of their responsibilities. 
 
The Bill does not dictate the type of computer reporting system 
a municipality and its police services may choose to use. I’m 
going to pause and repeat that, Mr. Speaker — I think it’s 
important. The Bill does not dictate the type of computer 
reporting system a municipality and its police services may 
choose to use. But it will provide, through the regulations, for 
the basic requirements with respect to operational capacity and 
security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also note that this Bill will impose on our 
police services a specific requirement that the personal 
information they receive under this process be held strictly 
confidential and used only for the delivery of policing services. 
This requirement on our police services is in addition to the 
existing responsibilities on other municipal officials under The 
Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in seeking to introduce this modernized reporting 
requirement, every effort should be made to respect the 
legitimate business needs of our Saskatchewan pawnbrokers. 
Interested municipalities and their police services will have to 
work with their pawnbrokers during the implementation process 
to make this transition as smooth as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, our municipal police services, the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), and those 
pawnbrokers who have already been voluntarily working with 
this system, for their efforts in bringing this important initiative 
to this stage. I would also like to thank them for their ongoing 
commitments with respect to implementation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our police community has told us this is an 
important tool for crime detection and prevention. We are 
advised that similar initiatives are being considered in the 
provinces of Alberta, Nova Scotia, Ontario, and British 
Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to be the first jurisdiction in 
Canada to respond to requests to pass this type of legislation. I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, there will be those who will criticize 
this legislation from a variety of perspectives. But I say to them, 

Mr. Speaker, this government is making a choice. Our choice, 
Mr. Speaker, is to come down on the side of victims of property 
crime whose homes have been broken into, and on the side of 
the police who need the most effective tools to fight crime. We 
are on the side of the victims of crime, and the police, Mr. 
Speaker. And we will remain so regardless of the noise that 
may come from the opposition benches. 
 
And so I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in closing, that we ask all 
members of this Assembly to support crime prevention in our 
communities by supporting this Bill. Stand with our police. 
Stand with property owners. Stand with the victims of crime. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An 
Act respecting Pawned Property. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a very interesting Bill and has some good points to it and 
some points perhaps that are less positive for some sectors of 
the community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The idea that there is a method to track and to determine which 
property being sold to pawnbrokers has been stolen is very, 
very worthwhile, Mr. Speaker. And fact is this system, if put in 
place as the minister describes it working . . . Although I have a 
bit of a queasy feeling about it that it might be like gun control 
and be all administration and no action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How about land titles? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Or, or as my colleague says, like the 
land titles system that absorbed $107 million and still can’t get 
a land title correct. Well, Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder 
about this. 
 
If it actually does work though, Mr. Speaker, and provides for 
the recovery of stolen property, if it helps to prevent property 
from being stolen, then that will be a benefit to SGI, 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance. That in turn, Mr. 
Speaker, should reflect positively in lower insurance rates for 
people in communities that actually pay a surcharge because of 
the number of thefts that are occurring in those jurisdictions, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if this whole Bill and project were successful, then I’m sure 
that the members opposite would ensure that the people of the 
province get the benefits of this through lower insurance rates, 
Mr. Speaker. But we’ve seen that it is very, very difficult to get 
any reduction out of this particular government, Mr. Speaker, 
when it comes to either utility rates, when it comes to insurance, 
or especially when it comes to taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They reduce service. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, they do reduce one thing, as my 
colleague points out. They reduce service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan pawnbrokers association, while 
supporting the concept, Mr. Speaker, does have some concerns 
with the way that the government has laid this out. They’re 
concerned that they’re going to be forced to deal with one 
agency, Business Watch International, in providing the 
communications between the pawnshop and the police, Mr. 
Speaker. 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

 

Now you have to look at the ownership of that. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, it comes down to the government in one hand 
supporting the other hand. Business Watch International is 
wholly owned by SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. No free enterprise 
allowed, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to look at . . . The government is saying 
that Business Watch International is going to be in a positive, 
cash-flow position in 2005. This is how the government’s going 
about ensuring that at least one, Mr. Speaker, of their 
investments is going to make a profit. It’s going to make a 
positive cash flow by forcing all of the pawnshops to deal with 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this program is to be successful, then the 
pawnshops are going to have to be allowed to make the 
connections between their shops and the police computer which 
will be providing . . . collecting this information in a manner of 
their choosing, Mr. Speaker, not because of the government 
forcing them to deal with another Crown corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the government does not like the 
idea that people have free will and the ability to choose for 
themselves in this province. The government is always 
believing that they are the elite and know better than everybody 
else, Mr. Speaker, and that’s wrong. And the people of this 
province will clearly state that in the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the idea of collecting the information and 
protecting people’s property from being stolen and returning it 
to them when it is, the concept of apprehending the criminals 
that have stolen this property is well and good, but the idea of 
forcing the pawnshops to deal exclusively with one 
organization is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know the minister stood up and said we’re not going to 
force them to deal with one organization. He said that the cities, 
Mr. Speaker, will choose — not the pawn owners — the cities, 
Mr. Speaker, will choose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that it would be better if the 
pawnshop owners and businesses chose their own connections, 
negotiate the best deal possible for themselves, rather than 
simply having to pay whatever fees SaskTel Business Watch 
International wants to impose, whatever charges and fees this 
government wants to impose. 
 
And you know, you look back on what SaskPower, as an 
example, imposes a $14 fee on every power connection for a 
reconstruction fee — and we’re not seeing any reconstruction 
— and yet they don’t even want to claim it as income to the 
company. That’s the kind of things that this government wants 
to put forward, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with Business Watch 
International and dealing with Bill No. 30, dealing with pawn 
property, Mr. Speaker, and how it’s recorded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the way to run a business. This is not 
the way to run a government. Therefore, I move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his many 
and sundry officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to introduce Darcy 
McGovern from Saskatchewan Justice, who is here to assist as 
official on consideration of Bill 20. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, 
I mean. Mr. Chairman, this is a very interesting Bill that allows 
for compensation to be paid to various officials, people around 
the province such as coroners, Justices of the Peace, notary 
publics, to members of the legislature in their official capacities, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
I’m just wondering when this Bill will come . . . when it comes 
into effect, will it apply immediately or will it come into place 
when the new rules that also deal with a number of these 
changes come into place? How will that work? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, as he’ll know from clause 7, coming into 
force, the Act comes into force on proclamation. 
 
But in terms of the actual timing of the proclamation, I think 
that’s a matter that we’ll want to be coordinated together with 
the Board of Internal Economy in order to ensure that 
compensations and positions that are referred to here are 
accurate, related to the timing of the implementation of the new 
rules that have been approved by the House previously, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Community Resources and Employment 

Vote 36 
 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

Subvote (RE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’m very 
pleased to introduce the officials to members of the committee. 
 
With me today to assist in responding to inquiries are the 
deputy minister, Bonnie Durnford, to my right; to my left, the 
assistant deputy minister, Darrell Jones; immediately behind me 
is assistant deputy minister, Shelly Hoover; and to her right is 
the executive director of finance and property management, 
Don Allen. 
 
Behind the bar, Mr. Chair, a number of distinguished officials 
including Phil Walsh, executive director, employment and 
income assistance; Jan Morgan, operations manager, 
employment and income assistance; Marilyn Hedlund, the 
executive director of child and family services; Betty West, the 
acting executive director of community living; Dorothea 
Warren, associate executive director, child and family services; 
Larry Chaykowski, executive director of housing operations; 
and Debbie Bryck, director of child care. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon to the 
minister and to his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would appreciate if you would outline for us the 
relationship between the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
and Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation, in terms of 
providing housing to residents of northern Saskatchewan, 
particularly in the northern administrative district. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the 
question from the hon. member. 
 
There’s two parts to the answer to the question asked regarding 
the relationship between CMHC (Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation) and Sask Housing as it relates to housing 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Currently there is the centenary affordable housing program 
which exists throughout Saskatchewan, including northern 
Saskatchewan. And there is monies — I’ll keep my comments 
just to the northern housing portion because that’s the context 
with which the question was asked — there is $3 million of 
federal monies that flows through CMHC to the centenary 
affordable housing program. And this will be matched then by 
$3 million in total which will come from the province of 
Saskatchewan and the local municipalities for a total of $6 
million intended to be invested then in the construction of 
affordable housing in northern Saskatchewan over the course of 
the centenary affordable housing program. 
 
So that’s the most recent and the current housing program that 
links the two bodies together. There is also in addition to that 
then, there has been an historical relationship of funding 
between CMHC and Sask Housing for the social and affordable 
housing stock in northern Saskatchewan. That is historically 
done there. It’s now currently under the Social Housing 
Agreement which was reached in, must be 1993 . . . 1997, when 
the federal government, after the federal government had 
removed itself from the world of social housing. Then there was 
a management agreement related to current stock that the 
department . . . sorry, that Sask Housing arranged. And so that 

becomes the current now mechanism for managing the social 
housing in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The majority, the substantial majority of the housing in northern 
Saskatchewan then, is managed locally through the local 
housing authority. So that would be the outline of the 
relationship between those bodies in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, in reference to the historical agreement that you 
just described, is that, is that agreement, or does that agreement 
provide for the purchase of housing by individuals that would 
qualify for this or are they subject only to rental agreements? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the question, 
there was an historical program that was referred to as rural and 
Native housing in northern Saskatchewan which actually has 
discontinued some number of years ago. 
 
But under that rural and Native housing program, there was a 
combination of opportunities to own and rental units. And of 
those who were renting, then many of those people of course 
are still renting. And of those who came into an ownership 
position, some of them have converted to rental at some point 
over the years. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, currently is 
there provision for individuals to own rather than rent those 
properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate the member’s questions, and 
as they’re fairly specific it’s taking a bit longer than I wish we 
needed in order to pull together the ability to respond. 
 
In response to the question about ability for people who are 
renters to become owners, there are two programs. One is the 
remote . . . what has been, was introduced a small number of 
years ago, referred to as remote housing program, which will 
now become a component of the centenary affordable housing 
that I referred to just a moment ago and will provide within that 
program the ability for people to become owners, to build and 
become owners. They may be renters now, but it provides a 
grant for people to establish a new circumstance and become 
owners. 
 
There is also a program entitled rental purchase option which is 
made available to people who have been long-term renters and 
recognizes their long-term rental payments and enables them to 
transition to ownership. 
 
So those would be, I think, the two programs that respond to the 
member’s particular interest, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would ask 
you, in both of those programs, what is the criteria that the 
individual would have to meet in order to get the grant that 
you’re speaking of? And is there other criteria that would have 
to be met in order to own rather than rent? And if you could 
outline that criteria for me, I would appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In order to be 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

 

eligible for both programs . . . I’ll deal with what’s common to 
both and then what’s different between the two of them. 
 
First of all, in the centenary affordable housing and then the 
renters, the rent-to-own. In both cases, to be eligible the 
household would have to be in what is defined as moderate 
income, which is a maximum of $49,500 gross family income, 
gross household income. And so for income there is an income 
criteria. 
 
In the centenary affordable housing there is a criteria which 
targets that the housing should be directed as high priority, to 
families as a high priority. 
 
The centenary affordable housing provides a grant up front to 
reduce the amount of money that would have to be there for 
mortgage. And what would also be necessary then, of course in 
both cases, is that the individual or individuals then would need 
to be eligible to obtain the financing that they would make 
through their own arrangements. 
 
So that will depend on their personal circumstances in the same, 
in the same circumstances that . . . Sorry, we were distracted by 
somebody’s phone call there, Madam Chair. And I would say 
the hon. member is in definite running for Olympic eligibility 
the way that she scooted out of here. 
 
But meanwhile back at the ranch here, the individuals will have 
to qualify for the financing on their own, on their own merits. 
The financing is not done through the public sector. 
 
For the rent-to-own, then in addition to those things, the 
household will have to have had an established track record of 
being a good, responsible renter in terms of payments and that 
sort of thing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, why was 
the sum of or the figure of $49,500 as a minimum income 
between people in the household requiring . . . Why was that 
amount established? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The forty-nine five 
was a number reached to define, in the North, a moderate 
income. Somewhere along the line you have to reach a 
definition that justifies the contribution of public of funds to 
assist people who would otherwise not be able to find 
themselves being able to afford a home. And that has to be 
balanced together with the, obviously with the ability for people 
to be able to therefore manage the responsibilities that they are 
taking on. 
 
And so that particular number was reached through a 
combination of analysis of the marketplace in the North, the 
impact of that, the amount of financial institutional involvement 
that would be available there, the amount of equity that it would 
take in order to get the finances into a manageable range, and 
all of this in the context as well of what would be . . . seem to 
be the pattern of incomes in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So it was no one thing. It was a combination in summary to try 
and find a manageable balance between what the market would 
suggest, balanced with the ability to afford, and all of this is 
then, is also in the context that the higher the income the lower 

the grant that’s available. That pattern holds true no matter 
where it is, including of course northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, for those 
individuals who would be in a situation where they’d have to 
stick with rent, is there a standard rental rate that is required of 
them or do their rental rates vary according to their income? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — In the North, as in all of Saskatchewan, 
there are two categories of rental rates that will be set by the . . . 
And the rates themselves were set by the local authority. There 
will be what’s called affordable housing, and the centenary 
affordable housing program is in that category, affordable 
housing. 
 
And affordable housing will have as its criteria a set rental rate 
that’s the same for anyone regardless of their circumstances, 
and is decided by the local housing authority to be put at a place 
that the low end of the market costs for the locale. And 
therefore, obviously it makes sense, that that’s determined by 
the local housing authority. So that’s affordable housing. 
 
There’ll be another category then called social housing, and the 
social housing rents then will be a factor related to household 
income. And so the exact amount of rent that an individual 
household would pay will . . . For example two identical units 
in the same building for example may be different because of 
the household incomes varying between them. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, how many 
local housing authorities are there in the northern district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I don’t have the exact number here. There 
are 285, I believe, is provincewide. In the North, the number is 
either seven or eight. I think it’s eight authorities that are in the 
North. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I don’t imagine that you 
have in front of you or with you today, or possibly your 
officials don’t have with them, the rate of rent that is required 
from each of those housing authorities. If you have that, I would 
appreciate it; if not, I would appreciate receiving the rate that 
has been set by each of those housing authorities in the North at 
some time in the near future. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The hon. member is quite correct, Madam 
Chair; I don’t have that level of detail here, but happy to 
provide it. Could you just clarify — is it the affordable housing 
rates for each of the authorities or is it social housing that 
you’re asking for? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d appreciate from both 
of those . . . having information on both of those. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — We’ll provide that, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I’d just like to move my line of 
questioning into a subject that we have discussed many times in 
this House. And I discussed to some degree some of the 
measures that are necessary for children that have been abused 
on the streets and have been exploited through the sex trade, 
some of the measures that are necessary for their ongoing 
recovery. 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

(16:00) 
 
Mr. Minister, when I spoke with you the last time we had 
estimates, I asked you about what kind of provisions are in 
place for youth that have been exploited and it has been 
determined that these youth in fact do need to have drug or 
alcohol-related recovery assistance. You, at that time, 
mentioned to me that there were 26 spaces, I think, that have 
been allotted and had been set aside specifically for youth 
exploited in the sex trade. 
 
And so I guess there’s a little more detailed questioning that I 
need to do regarding the nature of those spaces. After the 
committee recommendations were looked at and subsequently 
legislation was brought forward in this legislature to deal with 
the deterrence of johns or people that would exploit children, 
we had some questions and some discussion regarding the other 
part of the issue which would be measures that are ongoing for 
the recovery of young people. There are many different and 
varied needs, I guess, for youth that have been through this. 
 
But in reference to the 26 spaces again, if those spaces are to 
provide for drug and alcohol rehabilitation and counselling 
related to that, what’s the nature of those spaces, Mr. Minister? 
I don’t know exactly where these young people would end up 
going, because at one time earlier I understood the 26 spaces 
were foster care homes. If they’re not, then where are the 
spaces, because we only have a limited number of spaces and 
certainly for drug and alcohol rehab for youth. So I’d be 
interested in learning whereabouts that may be taking place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in the interest of clarity it may 
help if I just tell you exactly what those 26 places are that I’m 
referring to. 
 
If the hon. member got the impression that I said last time we 
spoke that these were 26 drug and alcohol treatment spaces, 
that’s certainly not what I was saying. Perhaps if I go through 
them what the hon. member will recognize, Mr. Chair, is that 
some of these will be agencies that have drug and alcohol 
counselling as part of their programs, and they will all have 
connections to drug and alcohol treatment services in their area. 
 
So these are not identical spaces and actually none of these 
would fall into the category of foster homes. 
 
So perhaps if I just go through and put on the record where 
these 26 spaces are. And these are 26 spaces that are held as 
priority for young people who have been exploited as a result of 
. . . sexually exploited. And so that we’ve set in our system that 
these 26 spaces will be held. They’re not exclusively for 
children who have been victims of sexual exploitation but that 
if a child comes to the attention of our system and they’re in 
that category that they’re a victim, then this becomes a priority 
space that puts them to the front of the line. 
 
And here’s where they are. Ten of the spaces are at Ranch Ehrlo 
Society. And I’ll go maybe relatively slow; I see the hon. 
member is making notes here. One space is at the Prince Albert 
Grand Council Child Care and Education Centre, that’d be in 
Prince Albert. One is at the Denholm therapeutic group home. 
And so those are in the category of residential children’s 
services. 

Then Dale’s House here in Regina has two that are priority 
spaces. The Saskatoon Children’s Shelter has two priority 
spaces. And the Saskatoon safe house has five spaces. 
 
Then in the category of community-based organization 
adolescent group homes, there are five. One here in Regina at 
Gemma House. Sorry, that’s two, two here in Regina at Gemma 
House. One at Bridge House in Saskatoon; one at Sundance in 
Prince Albert, and one at Gamin-Abet in Moose Jaw. So you’ll 
see when you look at those facilities they’re spread around the 
province. 
 
And these spaces are incorporated as priority spaces within 
programs that are obviously much larger than that, and these 
will be, as I . . . just to again give the hon. member the 
assurance that drug and alcohol attention is being appropriately 
dealt with because I know that’s the basis of the question. 
 
Some of these will have, they’ll have varying expertises in 
terms of on-site counselling but . . . And when you look at the 
list you can see that these are all agencies that have good, strong 
local connections to services that, to which they can refer kids 
who . . . refer young people who are, who may need something 
more than they are able to provide themselves directly. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’d like to just take this 
apart a little bit. Your reference to . . . I forget how many spaces 
you said at the Saskatoon children’s crisis centre, I believe it is 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Shelter, I’m sorry. There’s two? 
Generally what is the age of children that are given services at 
that centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The age range would be from 10 to 16. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I know that throughout 
Canada and throughout North America for sure, there has been 
a real dilemma, I guess, about providing proper counselling 
services and proper drug and alcohol rehab services as well as 
trauma . . . attention to trauma of many kinds for children 
exploited in the sex trade, or that have been and who have, you 
know, have or could have had sexual abuse as part of their 
childhood in their homes. 
 
The whole issue has been the topic of discussion at many 
conferences, the issue of not really having proper therapeutic 
counselling in place for this specific trauma. 
 
So I recognize that the Government of Saskatchewan has 
outlined the initiative that you have taken and you have 
provided spaces or you’ve seen to it that these are priority 
spaces, albeit when spaces come open. And that’s not really, I 
would say, dealing with the immediate need. But nonetheless, I 
recognize that you have designated these spaces. 
 
But is there any ongoing work on you . . . from yourself as 
minister or from any department of your government to try to 
work with people who have been therapeutic counsellors, who 
recognize that this issue of children that have been sexually 
exploited along with all the other components of physical 
abuse, etc., that this issue be looked at separately to see if 
something can be developed within our country that would be 
specifically targeted to this kind of traumatic experience, rather 
than just have a modified drug and alcohol treatment program? 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

 

Just a lot of . . . a lot of people, experts out there, say that they 
don’t believe that we have developed, at this point, proper 
programming specifically for youth, and their family also that 
have had such a multiple trauma in their life. I mean, there are 
many things that happen to these youth on the streets. 
 
And so I think that’s . . . When we had the youth treatment 
centre at Yorkton, one of the good things about that was — and 
I recognize that that whole program was very costly — but one 
of the good things about it was that it dealt with families and 
youth that were looking for rehabilitation due to drug and 
alcohol abuse and that kind of thing. And so it dealt with the 
families. It was targeted for drug and alcohol rehab and then 
went back into . . . some of the counselling had to do with 
dysfunctional families and that was good in itself. 
 
Now if you take, if you take drug and alcohol recovery and look 
at how important it is for the entire family to be working on this 
recovery along with specialists, and you know what a great 
work that is. I mean it takes a lot of input. It takes a great deal 
of dedication, knowledge, and experience and professionalism 
to deal with this. But there was a pretty positive outcome from 
White Spruce, from the White Spruce program. 
 
So if you take that component, then when you look at the other 
trauma associated with sexual abuse, I just maintain that to this 
day we don’t have proper programming in place to deal with 
this, this issue. It is an issue of great magnitude in reference to 
the trauma that’s caused. 
 
And I’m wondering if your government has seriously looked at 
trying to work with other agencies and other governments 
across this country perhaps, or in North America, to have a 
specific recovery program for youth that have been sexually 
exploited through the sex trade and are suffering from major 
traumatic experiences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The hon. member 
raises, I think, in her question the very important factor that the 
children who are coming to the resources that we provide, as 
victims of sexual exploitation, will have many needs and among 
those needs will be the fact that many of them will have 
addictions. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And it is . . . In responding to this I don’t want to leave the 
impression that the approach to trying, to responding to the 
needs of these kids is stovepipe. I think one of the things that 
we will all agree is that it is important in many ways, and we’ve 
seen many examples and we won’t go there, in other ways, but 
in programs — we can if you want — but that as we deal with 
these young people, these children, that we respond in a way 
that is holistic and recognizing that they come with a 
combination of needs. 
 
In the process of responding to the needs of kids who are 
sexually exploited there are, and we can go into more detail if 
you like, but there are funds that are dedicated to other 
community supports that are very sensitive to the needs of 
young people who have been sexually exploited. In that mix 
will be child and youth services in the mental health services of 
the health districts, who have advised that they consider this to 

be a priority area. 
 
I do want to point out as well that, reflecting back on those 26 
spaces that I outlined where they’re located, you will recognize 
that these are some of our most capable programs and workers 
in the province of Saskatchewan dealing with troubled youth, 
and who will have a broad knowledge of resources available as 
well as a fairly high level of expertise themselves. 
 
And in addition to that, one of the structures that was put in 
place in the response to the children who are victims of sexual 
exploitation are the local intervention committees, which also 
bring expertise from a broad range of social and health 
responders within the local community to come together to 
input as well into what is . . . you know, what kind of program 
plan best responds to the needs of this young person. 
 
I think we will all recognize that — I think the hon. member 
used the word traumatized, and I think that’s probably a pretty 
accurate description in a number of cases — and that it can be, 
it can be a complex plan which has many facets to it to provide 
a holistic response to the needs of the kids. 
 
So it will be that attempt to be realistic and therefore holistic in 
developing plans that will be . . . attempted to be provided as 
close to home as possible because I think it’s also accurate to 
say that there’s a strong bias that kids can . . . people will 
respond when they’re receiving services as close to home as 
they can possibly be. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
approve of and nor do I think that, you know, stovepiping is the 
way. I mean, it’s a very simplistic view on things and we all 
recognize that there is complexity to treatment because there’s 
complexity to the traumatic experiences that the child has had. 
 
My concern and my hope is that there has been some effort 
made to provide ongoing . . . or a strategy, I guess, that has been 
developed by your government to have ongoing services when 
in fact the first services that a child would receive at any one of 
these agencies or places may be some drug and alcohol 
treatment and an effort towards rehabilitation. But the 
rehabilitation would also include, you know, possibly treatment 
for venereal diseases. It would require more an ongoing 
counselling for the child and their family. 
 
There are a number of things I could add to that, Mr. Minister, 
but the ongoing support and recovery are rather necessary for 
recovery . . . is really very important also. Because we 
recognize that it’s important to have these first steps taken so 
that these 26 spaces serve a good purpose. There’s no doubt that 
they do. 
 
But if after this initial treatment the youth are basically back on 
the streets or returned to an environment that has been 
detrimental to their health and well-being, that is no good 
either. And so we need to ensure that there is an ongoing 
recovery and stabilization of their lives. 
 
And I’m wondering if your government has done due diligence 
in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think the hon. member 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

will find some assurance in understanding how the process 
works. When a young person comes to one of the facilities I’ve 
referred to, it will be standard procedure that one of the first 
things that will occur is there will be an assessment that will be 
determined . . . used to determine the physical, the mental, and 
the emotional damage and needs that the person will have. 
 
And when he or she leaves that particular facility, without 
exception, they will always leave with a case plan as they return 
home. And the case plan will always then include necessary 
follow-up procedures and activities, again related to the needs 
— be it physical, mental, or emotional — and there are periodic 
reviews of those case plans. 
 
So it is not seen . . . it should not be seen and it’s certainly not 
intended that these 26 spaces that I refer to are seen as the be-all 
and the end-all of the response to them. They’re a good, solid, 
credible resource for a young person to come to, to have their 
needs determined, and at which the case for rehabilitation or 
recovery, whatever . . . in whatever ways are approaches . . . 
sorry, whichever ways are necessary, that those will begin and 
that that will continue and enable the young person hopefully to 
be able to develop the strengths physically, mentally, and 
emotionally to become capable adults. 
 
I think I’m getting the signal that the hon. member has finished 
her question in this regard, Mr. Chair, and I do know that . . . 
Am I accurate? Yes. 
 
And I do know that the Community Resources and Employment 
critic is here and that enables us to be in position to move to 
consideration of the Bill that we want to consider today. And 
therefore, Mr. Chair, I’ll move that the committee rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I would 
like to introduce to members of the committee today officials 
who are here to assist me. To my extreme right is, well to my 
immediate right is the assistant deputy minister, Shelley 
Hoover. And then seated behind her is the executive director of 
child and family services, Marilyn Hedlund. And directly 
behind me is the associate executive director of child and 
family services, Dorothea Warren. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you. Mr. Minister, just a few 
questions regarding the Bill before the Assembly. 
 
And as we’ve all discussed to date, something that I think in the 
past we’ve talked about a bit before — certainly an issue that 
I’ve raised on a number of occasions; I’m not sure how many 
times my colleagues have — about family care. And really 
making every effort possible, when a situation develops where a 
family situation arises where it’s deemed necessary to remove a 
child from the home, of utilizing some of the family care out 

there. 
 
And I think you’ve probably had many, possibly grandparents, 
or aunts, uncles, or people of fairly close kinship relationship 
talk to you about it. I know I’ve had a number of individuals do 
the same. 
 
And so this, as I see it, this piece of legislation that you’ve 
brought forward that we’re going to be addressing today is 
something that I think is certainly worthwhile and it’s a time . . . 
being brought forth in what I would consider a timely fashion 
considering the debate we’ve had over the past number of 
months and years. 
 
And well some would say, well why wasn’t it done sooner? I 
guess the facts are, let’s accept the fact that it’s here today, 
we’ve arrived at that point, and let’s move on and deal with the 
issue so that we can address the situation of children in care. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you talk about identifying kinship care, 
caregivers. And I guess first of all, can I ask you exactly what 
you mean when you talk about kinship care? I think I have a 
pretty good idea, but I think it wouldn’t hurt to give us a bit of 
details of how this process will unfold should it be determined 
that a child must be removed from the home of their parent or 
legal guardian. And will parents have any say who the kinship 
caregiver or givers will be? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. It is a 
very important question that the hon. member asks, Mr. Chair. 
When we talk about kinship care then what we’re wanting to 
achieve . . . and just to summarize that, I think to put it into 
context and then describe who, because I think the question in 
essence is who is that kinship care provider then and whether 
the parent of the child, parent or parents of the child, have input. 
 
Clearly what we’re looking at here is a circumstance where for 
safety of the child, the child has to be removed from the home 
for some period of time. And the intention is to have the safe 
place that that child goes to be as loving and caring and familiar 
as it can possibly be. So therefore in thinking about who will be 
the people to provide the kinship care, I think it’s probably 
summarized by referring to extended family, which can include 
things like brothers and sisters and uncles and aunts and 
godparents and grandparents and that sort of thing. 
 
It can also include what will be formally referred to as a person 
of sufficient interest, who may not have the status that you’d 
call extended family, but there is some established relationship 
with that child. It might include for example a band member, 
for example, who is not a relative, or someone who is closely 
involved with the family; maybe it might be a coach, for 
example, or something of that nature. But someone who has an 
established kind of relationship and caring. 
 
And the intention then is for that child, for the period of time, 
the objective will always be, if at all possible, if the child can be 
safely returned to their home, that’s the end objective that we 
seek to achieve. 
 
And in the period of time when the child cannot be there for 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

 

their own protection, we want them to be as close to home as 
you can be without being home I guess is probably a colloquial 
way of putting it. 
 
Can the parents have a say? The answer’s definitely yes, and it 
is . . . In fact the kinship care process systematizes that to 
ensure that a parent who is not in a position to care for their . . . 
to provide the caring for their child right now will be asked, 
who would you suggest is the best person to take care of the 
child now? And that will be taken into consideration in the 
decision. Ultimately the decision about location would be made 
of course by the court. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
when we talk about kinship care and the last part of that 
question that I had asked was regarding the parental 
involvement. 
 
When the decision is made to remove a child from a home 
because there’s fear of violence or some other abusive 
situations, and even as that child is removed from that home, 
what steps are taken to talk to the parents about the reasons 
prior to removal about the fact that there’s a very serious 
concern about the safety or the well-being of your children? 
 
What steps are taken with that parent to relay that message and 
then to work . . . Well I shouldn’t say just that parent. Some 
cases it’ll be that parent; some cases it’ll be those parents — 
there’ll be a father and mother relationship. In many cases 
unfortunately there might be some just single-parent 
relationships. 
 
But what steps are taken to relate to those parents, or that 
parent, the reasons why a child would be removed from the 
home, and then to indicate what process would then need to be 
followed for that child to be again placed back in the home? 
 
And then in the meantime, as you had indicated, well there’s 
this period of removal, inviting the parents to offer some 
suggestions of some kinship care or close friends that may be 
available, because, like you’re right, some relatives, the 
grandparents, might be in another province or miles away and it 
just would be inappropriate. 
 
And I think at the end of the day as well, the other thing we 
need to be careful and try to address as much as possible is 
making sure that there’s at least access so there’s still some 
bonding between parent and child. 
 
And so I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what avenues you’re 
following or how you’re addressing those circumstances. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The attempts by the 
department officials, the workers who are involved, will be to 
do two things — to make it . . . to meet obligations of law, 
because it’s a very serious matter under the law. We have The 
Child and Family Services Act which entitles authority to 
remove a child for their protection. And so that’s in law and the 
formalities of that must be honoured. At the same time, there 
must be the realities of attempting to reunite family and parents 
together. 
 
And so what happens is that following an investigation, when 

it’s concluded that a child is in need of protection, then the 
social worker is required to notify the parent in writing of their 
conclusions. And that’s probably very helpful both for reasons 
of legal obligation but also in the interest of clarity. Because as 
we can all understand, in those circumstances there is a ton of 
trauma that’s going on and it’s oftentimes in reality pretty 
difficult to hear things accurately that are being said to you. So I 
think it’s not only legally helpful, it’s also in program terms 
helpful because it puts into, quotes, “into black and white” what 
the concern is. 
 
And then from that what happens is that there is the discussion 
and plans are then put into writing as well, as to what kinds of 
supports will be made available to the family, with the objective 
of enabling the — when I say to the family, to the parents in 
this case — to enable the return of the child that’s been 
removed to come back. 
 
And in that plan it can involve certainly counselling services. 
There may involve other forms of supports that are identified as 
appropriate in order to enable that parent to adequately care for 
that child and also to offer the hope, both to parent and to child, 
that they can be reunited without going back to the same 
circumstance that existed before. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, another question that arises is one set around the fact, 
when a complaint comes forward, what efforts are taken by the 
department to first of all look at whether or not they could 
address the situation, without even removing the child from the 
home? Are there efforts done that would look very carefully at 
whether or not we can deal with the complaints and address the 
issue while the child still remains in the home and help the 
family overcome this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member 
may be somewhat encouraged to know that in fact . . . Here’s 
the process. A complaint is made. When a complaint is made, 
the worker has no choice — by law an investigation must occur. 
And that’s sound law that I think all of us would agree. 
 
The reality is that from that point forward . . . In fact, it’s the 
majority. About two-thirds of the . . . Following the 
investigation about two-thirds of the cases never do result in the 
removal of a child. That what happens is that it’s the complaint 
which brings the investigation and then the obligation to 
provide support services, if possible, to enable the child to 
continue to live safely in that circumstance. And I’m pleased to 
say that in the majority of cases that’s in fact what does occur. 
 
It’s also worth noting as well that sometimes as a result of this 
process, it is permitted under law as well that a child . . . On 
occasion a parent will voluntarily give up custody of their child 
temporarily without it going to court. Because they recognize 
that there’s some issues that need to be addressed and dealt with 
in order to be a safe and supportive parent and will give 
custody, without the courts being involved with them, on a 
temporary basis with the, with the initiative of the family. 
 
So it will always be the case that when we come to the 
circumstance that it seems to be necessary to remove the child 
in the interest of the safety of the child, which then becomes a 
matter for the courts, that in the judgment and the work of the 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

worker who’s involved you’ve tried to not get there. But, you 
know, the bottom line is you have . . . The obligation is to, is to 
support the safety of the child. 
 
And then with this Bill if you do get there, then when you go to 
the courts, if that’s where we’re going, then the first, the very 
first thing the courts will consider before transferring custody of 
the child to the minister would be transferring custody of the 
child to a kinship care arrangement which would be then 
someone who is by definition close to the child in a meaningful 
kind of way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you for the 
comment because I think it’s important that we make every 
effort prior to. That we . . . When a complaint is raised, and in 
some cases it’s basically an accusation, that’s taken very 
seriously. But at the same time, I think we need to be careful 
that we seriously look at where it’s coming from, why it’s 
coming, rather than rushing in and entering into a situation that, 
down the road after investigation, it may be determined that 
maybe that action shouldn’t have been taken. 
 
And I think it’s important that we do take the time to carefully 
look at how we assess this. And I think your comments 
indicated that your department certainly does attempt to look at 
these cases very carefully before a movement is made to even 
remove a child, or indicate to parents that we believe at this 
time for the safety and well-being of your child we will have to 
place them in alternative care. And I think that’s . . . it’s very 
important that we establish that. 
 
(16:45) 
 
I want to address another issue. Mr. Minister, in your second 
readings speech you commented about home study. And I’d 
like to just quote from that speech: 
 

To ensure the best interests of the child are protected, we 
have included a provision which requires that a home study 
must be filed with the court. The home study will outline 
the safety and adequacy of the caregiver’s home. 

 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you’d give us a little more 
detail about what this home study is, who would conduct the 
home study, what requirements must be fulfilled if a home is to 
be deemed safe and adequate. 
 
For I think we all recognize when we’re dealing with a situation 
like this, it’s in the best interests of the child that we work 
quickly; and must the home study therefore be conducted, 
completed, and filed within the court under strict guidelines? 
Are there guidelines as to when this home study is to be 
completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The hon. member will recognize by the 
time it takes for me to get the list, it is fairly extensive. The 
problem with asking a complex question is that you get a 
complex answer, and we seem to do a fair amount of that I’m 
afraid. 
 
But to cut to the chase here, the home study is done by the child 
and family services worker, and the development of it is not 
finalized at this point in time yet. It’s still being worked on and 

will be finalized before the Act is proclaimed and put into 
place. 
 
But the home study will include things of this nature: we’ll look 
at the family makeup, who’s living within the family; we’ll do 
criminal record checks. We’ll do an assessment of parenting 
skills and experience; we’ll look at the management of children, 
experience with the management of children; the relationships 
with children, of those who are in the home. They’ll look at the 
ability to manage safety issues, also the disciplinary practices 
that are used within the household, and also supports for the 
children to be involved in things like education, recreation, 
those sorts of things. 
 
So that will be the nature of what takes place. As you can see, 
it’s a fairly comprehensive and detailed look at the life that’s 
going on within the home. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I guess one of the 
concerns I have when we talk about the home study, and one 
comment you made perked my ears — discipline. And I’m not 
exactly sure where a lot . . . I know where some people are 
coming from when it comes to discipline, and I know there’s 
some discipline out there that people say, no, that’s kind of 
cruel, it’s after the fact. 
 
And fortunately maybe in that case I’m a little old-fashioned. 
Even my daughter thinks that a spanking once in a while 
doesn’t hurt if it’s done at the appropriate time. And with the 
consequences being known at . . . prior to, if you cross the line, 
whether it’s a spanking or a talking to or go to your room or 
whatever. There’s so many different forms of discipline. 
 
My concern is in one case though we have almost ruled it out to 
the point that it’s almost abuse, that you may spank your child 
as a form of discipline. And I have a major concern if that is 
one of the aspects that we look at now and consider. If you’re 
beating your child it’s one thing, but a reasonable form of 
discipline certainly is not. And if we had a little more of it we 
may have fewer, less people to deal with at the other end of the 
day. 
 
However, having said that, when we look at the home study as 
well, going to the home study, one of the questions that came, 
and it came in the Karen Quill situation. The grandparents 
raised the question about the fact that they had asked if this 
child could have been placed in their care. It was a loving, 
caring relationship. 
 
However, what we’ve been informed is their house didn’t 
quite. . . some of the structures of their house didn’t quite meet 
the requirements. And I’m not exactly sure if that’s . . . if you 
were talking about structural requirements of a home when you 
talk about the home study and some of those issues, if they 
become an issue, or exactly what you were talking to. 
 
Because I think at the end of the day, we’re talking about 
individuals who lovingly care for a child, be it a grandparent, be 
it aunts, aunts and uncles. They may not have all the means and 
as a result their house may not be as neat and tidy as a house 
down the street. But I think we need to be careful how we 
address that and I’d like your comments just to get a better 
understanding of where you’re going with this home study. 



May 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair, and I deeply appreciate 
the questions the hon. member is asking. Let me say three 
things. First of all, the objective here, the context is to assess 
and determine that there is a loving and caring and safe and 
secure environment. That’s what this is intended to do. 
 
In terms of the physical layout, this is not a circumstance that is 
equivalent to licensing a home, meaning we’re not looking at 
the neatness or that sort of thing. 
 
But I do want to perhaps just . . . I think the member raised the 
sensitivity about the matter of discipline, and it is a sensitive 
one. And we need to differentiate between discipline and 
physical abuse. 
 
And this is one that has to have some sensitivity because keep 
in mind that what we’re talking about, when a child is removed 
for their own safety is they’re coming from an environment in 
which they’ve experienced abuse. If that had not been the case, 
they wouldn’t be being removed from the environment. And so 
there needs to be a sensitivity to the way that a child will relate 
to means that are used for discipline because that’s the healthy 
. . . it would be unfair to do otherwise. 
 
For a child who may very well for example — and we have to 
keep in mind these are all done on an individual basis so you 
can’t sort of paint a single brush and include all circumstances 
— but if a child has come from a circumstance where they have 
been physically abused for example, it may be very, very 
traumatic to be in a circumstance, where use of physical force to 
discipline may be very inappropriate for that child at this point 
in their life. 
 
So therefore it’s part of the assessment. It’s also I think part of 
the sensitivity to the home that the child is going to, to know 
what kinds of things, given that child at this point in their life, 
what does it take to be the kind of caring, loving environment 
that you want to provide. 
 
So perhaps that gives some comfort to the hon. member when I 
make reference to that as one of the criteria and the potential for 
it to be very significant in terms of the ability for this to be a 
good place for the kid to be right now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Minister, I agree wholeheartedly that we certainly don’t want to 
put a child in another situation where there might be aggressive 
discipline — if I can use that word type — if that’s the trauma 
they’ve come out of, like an abusive form versus just an 
appropriate disciplinary action to confront a wrong. 
 
But on the . . . Having said that, Mr. Minister, as well I think 
it’s . . . We’ve talked at length about the caregiving and the 
well-being of the child, and that’s certainly appropriate and 
important. One other thing that possibly will arise — and the 
Bill does indicate that — is the fact that a caregiver, while it 
may be a very loving and in many cases a person with a close 
relationship, may not always be of a financial well-being to 
meet all the requirements should they have to provide care for 
that child for a period of time. 
 
And the Bill talks about providing some financial assistance, 
and, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could clarify exactly what 

you mean by the level of financial assistance that would be 
available to caregivers providing that care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, and from my point of view this 
in many ways is one of the highlights of the Bill, is that it brings 
the responsibility and the authority for the province then to 
bring financial means to the circumstance. The details are still 
being developed. Again that will be finalized before the Bill is 
proclaimed. 
 
But the intention here is to recognize that there will be costs 
involved for a household to take a child in a kinship care 
circumstance, and the Bill enables then the provision of 
finances to support that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d just like 
to revert for a moment, if we could, back to the discussion 
between you and the opposition critic regarding the home study. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the event that a home . . . or part of the home 
study was to look at the condition of the physical structure that 
say a grandparent, an aunt, or an uncle, whatever kin it was, 
wherever the child was going to go into this home of their 
relative, and the condition of the physical structure was the only 
prohibitive factor to that child being there, would your 
government consider financial assistance to assist in getting the 
home up to standards to a certain degree, or is the financial 
assistance specifically targeted for the ongoing day-by-day 
maintenance of the child? 
 
(17:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I’m not sure exactly what the hon. member 
is thinking. The finance is not intended to upgrade homes. But, 
for example, if the home didn’t have a baby gate and you 
needed a baby gate in order for it to be safe for the child to be 
there, then that sort of thing could certainly be responded to. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I bring this up because again 
looking back at the Karen Quill case, it came to my attention 
that the grandparents of Karen Quill had offered to keep the 
child, and they were refused that child. And the child was put 
into the care of Social Services simply because the home of the 
grandparents was not up to standards as far as the physical 
structure of it. And I deem that a terrible shame in view of what 
happened. 
 
So in the event that that kind of a situation would happen again, 
if the physical structure, the condition of the physical structure 
is the only prohibitive factor to a child living with their 
grandparents or another sibling or aunt, uncle, whatever it may 
be, I would think that the department is going to have to look 
into how they’re going to handle that kind of a situation. And 
I’d ask you how you would. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, this may be a circumstance 
where the reorganization of the department comes very 
helpfully into play because the same department that is 
responsible for child and welfare and this . . . enforcement of 
this Bill, is also the same department responsible for all our 
housing programs, including the administration of things like 
the residential rehab program and the like. 
 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2003 

 

And it may be that in circumstances where that’s appropriate 
that there could be the ability referred to, to take advantage of 
some program in order to meet the needs of a household. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Just a couple 
more questions and comments regarding the Bill. I think we all 
recognize that this is in some ways breakthrough legislation. 
 
I think it’s, we’ve indicated certainly a positive and right way to 
go and it’s going to no doubt impact Community Resources and 
Employment as to . . . And you’ve already indicated some of 
the comments you made in the second reading such as the home 
study, you’re still working out the details of what that will mean 
at the end of the day as to how you address these circumstances. 
 
I’m not exactly sure, Mr. Minister, if the department of . . . 
there may not be some changes in the Department of Justice as 
well as we look at this legislation and bringing it forward and 
changes in some of the ways that the Department of Justice 
deals with these circumstances and . . . which means that there 
will need to be significant changes even for your department 
and personnel as to how they now proceed. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can tell this Assembly 
how the staff of your department, the Department of Justice will 
be trained to adapt this new legislation or if indeed this is 
something that’s ongoing at the time, and which staff will be 
trained, and why, and how. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, some of that has already been 
occurring and will continue to. Training will be done, including 
the Department of Community Resources and Employment, 
Justice certainly, Indian and Child Family Service agencies 
certainly as well, and the Act will not be proclaimed before the 
training has all been completed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. So I guess at 
the end of the day, when do you anticipate that the Act will be 
proclaimed? I think in the past we’ve seen Acts come forward 
and we’ve seen proclamation actually take place a number of 
months down the road. I think the Act is certainly the right way 
to go. We’ve talked about that and I’m wondering if you can 
give us a timeline as to when you anticipate to have this new 
Act fully enforced. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, we’ll be proceeding as soon as 
we’re ready, and I can’t give you an exact date but I expect it’ll 
be this fall. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I think this is certainly appropriate. I want to thank you and 
your officials for having come forward, for bringing forward 
these ideas. I think we’re moving in a direction that is 
appropriate and as we look at the needs of children, and I 
appreciate the fact that Indian and family services is part of the 
discussion that’s taking place as well because I know my 
colleagues and I have been approached by Indian and family 
services and they’ve made comments about the fact that they’d 
like to be a little more involved in view of the number of First 
Nations children that are dealt with as well. So having said that, 
thank you to you and your officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I also highly value the input of 

the First Nations Child and Family Service agencies who have 
been a part of the process of developing the legislation as well, 
as I know the hon. member is aware. And I want to thank the 
hon. members for their questions. They’ve been thoughtful, 
important. And I think at the end of the day, it will be 
vulnerable kids in Saskatchewan who will be the benefactors of 
this legislation and that’s as it should be. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a time and passed under its title. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
move a motion regarding the composition of Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Member on the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Moosomin: 
 

That the name of Brenda Bakken be substituted for that of 
Carl Kwiatkowski on the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:11. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1265 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1266 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
  Hamilton ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1266 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1266 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1266 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1266 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1266 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1267 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1267 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1267 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1267 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1281 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Convocation at Saskatchewan’s Universities 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1267 
 National Transportation Week 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1267 
 La Ronge Receives Insurance Bureau of Canada Award 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
 Consul Student Wins Essay Contest 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
 SaskEnergy Community Spirit Award 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1268 
 Candidate Nominated 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
 Team Saskatchewan Launched 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1269 
 Call for By-election in Carrot River Valley Constituency 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1270 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1270 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1271 
 Provincial Finances 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1272 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1272 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1273 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1273 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1274 
 



 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
 Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/ 
 Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1274 
 Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1276 
 Bill No. 34 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1277 
 Bill No. 11 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2003 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1279 
 Bill No. 29 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2003/ 
 Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1280 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1281 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1282 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1283 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1283 
 Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1288 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................1288, 1292 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1291 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1283 
 Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1292 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Community Resources and Employment — Vote 36 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1284 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1284 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution of Member on the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1292 
 


