















































Hansard: June 10, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1553 
 June 10, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people in my constituency who are 
concerned about Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Okla, 
Preeceville, and Kelvington. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this 
afternoon I rise on behalf of citizens concerned about the lack 
of dialysis service around Moose Jaw. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Again this afternoon all the signatures on this petition are from 
the city of Moose Jaw, and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our petition today is 
on behalf of producers from the communities of Leader and 
Sceptre. The petition respectfully is submitted on behalf of 
these producers in relation to Sask Crop Insurance premium 
increases this year. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg, Vanguard, Neville, and Atwood, 
Ontario. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition with citizens concerned about the deplorable and 
the rapidly deteriorating state of Highway No. 20. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Bulyea, Duval, Strasbourg, and the city of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency and elsewhere who have grave concerns over the 
condition of Highway 47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan; Sorrento, 
BC (British Columbia); as well as Montague, Prince Edward 
Island. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens in Moose Jaw and 
district who are very concerned about the lack of a 
hemodialysis unit. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of residents in my hometown who have offered a 
constructive proposal with respect to a CT (computerized 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

tomography) scanner for the Swift Current Regional Hospital. 
The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition today has been signed by residents of 
the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise again today representing citizens who are 
very concerned about their safety travelling on Highway 43. 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan who are very concerned with the alarming 
number of rural school closures. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to retain schools in rural communities 
such as Denzil and supply adequate education for rural 
families of our province. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from the 
village of Denzil. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy 
to be able to present a petition on behalf of constituents 
concerned with the condition of a section of Highway 22. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Imperial and Lumsden. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to present a petition signed by Saskatchewan people who 
are concerned that deregulation and privatization in the 
electrical industry is causing electrical rates to increase 
dramatically in other jurisdictions. 
 
The prayer, Mr. Speaker, reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan including SaskPower will not be allowed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Kindersley, 
Prince Albert, Wilkie, Unity, Eston, North Battleford, and 
Rosetown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
signed by the Saskatchewan people who are concerned about 
deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry which is 
causing electrical rates to increase dramatically in some 
jurisdictions. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan including SaskPower will not be allowed. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Estevan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so submit. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 36, 41, 119, 120, 124, and 126. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills, I present to 
you and the Assembly the tenth report of the said committee, 
which is as follows: 
 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

 

Your committee has considered the following Bill and has 
agreed to report the same with amendment: 
 
Bill No. 301 — The Western Christian College 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 
 
And further, that the fees respecting Bill 301 be remitted to 
the petitioners, less the cost of printing. 

 
I would move, seconded by the member from Kindersley: 
 

That the tenth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 60 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: for the fiscal year 2002 to 2003, can 
the minister provide all donations and grants given out by 
SaskPower? 

 
Also, I have similar questions dealing with SaskTel, 
SaskEnergy, and SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 60 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many multi-peril crop 
insurance contracts does Crop Insurance Corporation carry 
protected . . . or carry in 2003, and what is the projected 
liability attached to these contracts? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 60 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming: in 
light of the fact that comments made by the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming in the legislature on April 9, 2003 
during oral questions contradict RFP, Western Canada 
Lottery Corporation, reference no. 621-97, section 12, 
which refers to supplier expertise and which stated Western 
Canada Lottery Corporation is not an expert in the work 
and therefore will rely on the skill, expertise, judgment, and 
representation of suppliers, who made the decision to 
present Wascana Gaming incorporated to the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming for final decision, RFP 621-97? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 60 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: did any Saskatchewan Crown 
corporation pay TouchStar Systems incorporated anything 
for supplying any business services in 1996? If so, how 
much was paid by which company and for what service? 

 
And the same question for the year 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 
2001, 2002, and the present date. 
 
I so present. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to this 
House, Nebraska legislator, Senator Pam Redfield from District 
12, Omaha. Pam has been with us now for a couple of days and 
will be with me for the afternoon. 
 
There are a number of unique things about the Nebraska 
legislature that have been introduced to us over a few years. 
One of them is that it is a unicameral House, which is quite 
unique in the United States, and the members who run there run 
as independent; they are not represented as either Republican or 
Democrat, though they would hold membership in a party. 
 
And so I’m looking forward to an afternoon with Pam, being 
able to talk about the differences between our legislatures. And 
so I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming her to this 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to other members 
of the Assembly, and to the people of Saskatchewan, Senator 
Adrian Smith. Senator Smith represents District 48 centred in 
Gering, Nebraska. 
 
He was first elected to the Nebraska legislature in 1998, 
re-elected last year in 2002. He serves on the Government 
Committee, the Military and Veteran Affairs Committee, and 
the Transportation and Telecommunications Committee. Mr. 
Speaker, he is a real estate agent and prior to being elected to 
the legislature, he was a member of the city council — sounds 
like someone I know in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask all the members to extend a very warm welcome to 
Adrian this afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to be able to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, Senator Daryl Beall who is a state 
Senator from Iowa and . . . as a Democrat. Mr. Beall and I had a 
busy morning together with the Private Members’ Bill 
Committee, looking at the constituency office and the 
constituency where we discussed volunteerism and 
philanthropy. He was very impressed with the offices here and 
in the constituency. His desk is his office, which really made 
me impressed on how organized as an individual he must be. 
 
Senator Beall and his wife, Jo Ann, live in Fort Dodge and they 
have three grown children and seven grandchildren who are 
living in Iowa and Alaska. Mr. Beall represents a constituency 
that’s about 95 miles outside of Des Moines, Iowa. I would ask 
all members to join in welcoming Senator Daryl Beall. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
and to all members of the legislature I’d like to introduce 
Senator Ryan Taylor, state Senator from North Dakota. He 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

represents District 7 which is centred I think around the town of 
Towner in McHenry County. And this is just about 40 miles 
east of Minot, which is a place that many people from 
Saskatchewan know well. 
 
Senator Taylor is a rancher. He’s also a writer, a columnist, and 
he’s a territory manager for Fort Dodge Animal Health. He has 
an ag economics degree and this is his first term in the state 
senate. 
 
(13:45) 
 
I’m very pleased to have this chance to introduce Senator 
Taylor because on Saturday I was in McHenry County. And I 
just met Senator Taylor today but I was there within, I think, 
about 5 or 6 miles from Senator Taylor’s ranch, visiting a 
famous place for all lovers of Norwegian culture. 
 
And this is very interesting because not far from where Senator 
Taylor lives is the grave of a famous Norwegian named Sondre 
Norheim, and a lot of people don’t recognize that name but he 
invented downhill skiing and he is the person that they celebrate 
in the Winter Olympics every time there’s a Winter Olympics. 
And he ended up homesteading in this beautiful part of the state 
of North Dakota where Senator Taylor is from. 
 
Just to give you an example of how beautiful this area is, 
Towner has a huge tree nursery and they plant trees all over the 
state of North Dakota. And when you go and visit in Senator 
Taylor’s area, you’d be amazed at the forests that have been 
planted by people and that have really changed that part of 
North Dakota. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome Senator Taylor and to 
say it correctly, we have to say it, willkommen to 
Saskatchewan, Senator Taylor. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to join in 
the introductions of our guest from the United States here again 
this afternoon and to introduce our final guest who needs no 
introductions to many members of this Assembly, Ilene 
Grossman, who works for the Midwest Council of State 
Governors administrative office in Chicago. Ilene, it is very, 
very nice to have you back here. 
 
As was pointed out by my hon. colleague from Melville 
yesterday, Ilene’s been very instrumental in working with 
Saskatchewan and getting us involved as a legislature with the 
Midwest Council of State Governors. And amongst her very 
many talents, it is my understanding that she has taken on new 
duties to become a wedding planner for some unnamed member 
of this legislature. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I too add my words of welcome to my friend, Ilene 
Grossman, and to the US (United States) state legislators. 
 

I suppose they have received a cursory bit of knowledge, a 
beginner knowledge about Canadian politics from their time 
spent with the Saskatchewan Party and the NDP (New 
Democratic Party). It’s too bad, it’s too bad they don’t have 
time to spend a day with the Liberal caucus where they will get 
a post-graduate understanding about Canadian politics. 
 
I understand tonight that Senator Taylor will be entertaining us 
at Government House — I look forward to that — and that 
Canadian national honour is going to be maintained by what is 
laughingly referred to as home-grown talent, and I look forward 
to that competition. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, seated in your east gallery, 28 grade 6 students from 
the school of Cut Knife. They’ve travelled since 6:30 this 
morning; they’ve been on the bus getting here this morning. 
 
Also accompanying them are teachers Len Dupuis, Linda 
McCallum, Paul Runalls, Ian Switzer, Diane Dupuis, Joanne 
Scott, John Woloshyn, and Cindy Stapley. 
 
And would you join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a honour to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
legislature, two distinguished guests from my hometown of 
Swift Current seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. The CEO 
(chief executive officer) of the Cypress Hills College — which 
is headquartered in Swift Current but it has a campus presence 
in Maple Creek, Shaunavon, and Gravelbourg — the CEO is 
with us today, Dr. Neil Clarke. And accompanying him is the 
chairman of the Board of the Cypress Hills Regional College, 
Mr. Bill Doidge. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Doidge taught me in high school a 
couple of years worth of economics, but I’d ask members not 
hold that against him but rather, but rather to welcome them 
both here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery I’d like to introduce two very impressive people. 
They were visiting me here today and they’re also great hockey 
players from the past, Mr. Speaker. The only thing I’m sorry of 
is I missed them by about 15 years. 
 
First of all I want to introduce Isadore Desjarlais. It’s rumoured 
that Isadore — out of Buffalo Narrows, a very successful 
businessman, and he’s a Co-Chair of our Northwest 
Development Council — and Isadore, it is rumoured that he 
actually nailed a fire manager from SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) right out of the 
hockey rink, and that manager is Robbie Gardiner. And that 
shows his prowess as a hockey player, but equally so, Mr. 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

 

Speaker, his business attributes and his skills are certainly well 
known throughout the North. 
 
And next to Isadore Desjarlais, of course, Isadore Campbell of 
Patuanak and the English River First Nations. And Isadore as 
well has a history in hockey and used to come and beat up guys 
in Ile-a-la-Crosse, and I certainly wish I was there at that time; 
we would have straightened out the problem 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think I want to ask all members of the 
Assembly to welcome these two impressive gentlemen. They’re 
both Co-Chairs of our northwest development council, very 
strong and ardent supporters of economic development — the 
message of jobs, jobs, jobs, I mean, we always want to see 
accomplished. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
these two hockey players and two Co-Chairs of the economic 
development committee. And incidentally, for the American’s 
information, I think Isadore Campbell’s son, Trent Campbell, 
has got a hockey scholarship at a state, in Michigan I believe, to 
go play hockey there. And we wish him well and certainly we 
know that the American people will be great hosts. And we 
want the Assembly members to welcome these two fine 
gentlemen here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, someone seated in your gallery, Ms. Diana Ritter, 
retired high school teacher who in the past years has brought 
her grade 12 class from Robert Southey School to visit with us. 
And I know she must have enjoyed her visits because she’s here 
with us today to watch the proceedings. And I’d ask all 
members to welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, two individuals seated in the western gallery. They 
are Kelsey Rose and Tanner Morrison. Now they are together 
an incredible debating team that is . . . You know they’ve 
undergone something of a reunion because Kelsey has been off 
in BC for the past year at Lester B. Pearson College on quite the 
scholarship. Tanner, meanwhile, has been back here in 
Saskatchewan where he has won the Model Parliamentarian 
Award not once, not twice, but three times. 
 
They’re both very intelligent young men and they’re going on 
to great things. I’d urge all members to join me in giving them a 
warm welcome to this place. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Anna Mlazgar Celebrates 104th Birthday 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to extend my congratulations to Mrs. Anna Mlazgar who 
has just celebrated her 104th birthday. Mrs. Mlazgar, or Annie 

as she likes to be called, celebrated her very special birthday 
with her family and invited guests this past Saturday at the 
Cupar and District Nursing Home. 
 
In 1908, nine-year-old Anna and her family immigrated to 
Canada from Pennsylvania and settled in Lebret, Saskatchewan. 
There she met and married Frank Mlazgar, and as a young 
pioneer woman she faced many hardships while raising her 
family on the farm near Lebret. 
 
Anna remembers the depression when people had nothing and 
had a hard time putting food on their tables. Through the 
kindness of the Maritimers, bags of potatoes would arrive by 
train to feed those in need. In each bag was a treat placed on top 
of the potatoes — things like red-eating apples, cans of corned 
beef, turnips, or the prized jar of pure strawberry jam. These 
gifts were shared freely with their neighbours. 
 
In those early years the train was the only means of receiving 
news from other parts of the country and around the world. As a 
young woman, Anna remembers being one of the first people in 
Lebret to receive the news of the First World War as the station 
agent announced that it had just begun. 
 
A lady of perseverance and strength, Anna has had the 
opportunity to witness many historic events and watch the 
province progress and change. I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to help congratulate Anna Mlazgar on the occasion of 
her 104th birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Views of Member of Parliament 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my statement deals with Jim 
Pankiw and with racism. 
 
While racism still exists, we can state that the road to greater 
respect among all people has improved in our generation from 
which our parents experienced. We have a ways to go but we 
have made positive advances. The case of MP (Member of 
Parliament), Jim Pankiw, is therefore a cause for concern. 
 
His views smack of the old colonial racism of the past. His 
arguments are exclusionary and filled with the politics of 
division. Instead of building bridges between people, his 
message is one that promotes anger, resentment, and disrespect. 
 
In his latest pamphlet entitled, “It’s Clear Who The Racists 
Are” Pankiw continues his attack on what he calls First Nations 
employment equity. Although the equity plan includes women, 
persons with disabilities, visible minorities, as well as 
Aboriginal people, Pankiw singles out First Nations people. 
This view needs to be challenged. Fortunately many are 
confronting him. 
 
Positive changes are being made in our schools, in our 
post-secondary institutions, and in the public and private 
sectors. We clearly need to build on our successes so far and 
continue to promote positive relationships that include 
Aboriginal peoples. Let’s not turn the clock back to the politics 
of division, exclusion, and disrespect as represented by the 
misguided Jim Pankiw. 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

Let’s continue to work together towards a community of hope 
and respect in this province and in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Resident Assists Orphans in Romania 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 
today to talk about a remarkable young lady from Outlook. 
Miss Brea Hainstock returned home from Romania on May 31 
having spent the entire month in that country helping out in an 
orphanage located in the city of Craiova, southwest of 
Bucharest. 
 
Miss Hainstock had travelled to Romania as part of World 
Vision group of 12 people from across Canada who offered 
their time and their compassion to the orphans in that country. 
Miss Hainstock, who works with the Sask Abilities Council, has 
sponsored a child in Romania for the past two years, took the 
opportunity to travel there as part of World Vision’s Destination 
Life Change program that seeks to assist in the ongoing struggle 
to care for 40,000 orphaned children. 
 
All throughout the month of May, Brea helped to look after 60 
small children, aged 2 months to 17 months. Brea said that the 
Romanian government is working hard to place these children 
with local families with a goal to complete the adoption process 
across the country by 2007. 
 
Miss Hainstock said that it was a moving experience to help 
look after these infants and that the language barrier through 
Romanian caregivers was no hindrance in doing her work. 
Indeed she said that the common language of child care was in 
abundance between the Romanian and Canadian caregivers. 
Brea also said that it was very difficult to leave the orphanage 
as she had formed many strong bonds with the children. 
 
I would like to personally congratulate Miss Hainstock for good 
work overseas and would ask that all members join me in 
thanking Miss Hainstock for her fine humanitarian work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Firm Wins Canadian New Media Award 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report 
that ZU.COM Communications a company from my 
constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin that specializes in Web 
sites for large corporations, cities, the health industry, and 
educational organizations, recently received a Canadian New 
Media Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ZU.COM received the CNMA (Canadian New 
Media Awards) Employer of the Year award that recognized the 
company that best motivates, values and rewards the talents and 
skills of its staff. ZU.COM employees benefit from flex time, 
office shinny leagues, extravagant Christmas parties, profit 
sharing, weekly potlucks, and R&D (research and development) 
days to allow breaks from the stresses of regular production. 
 
Partners Ryan Lejbak and Tony Zuck accepted the award with 
these words from Mr. Zuck: 
 

We wouldn’t be here without our great staff, without them, 
we’d just be 2 good looking guys. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the management and staff at ZU.COM 
Communications on receiving the CNMA and especially 
providing a stellar example of employer/employee 
relationships. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Melfort 171 Squadron Celebrates 60 Years 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, and members, the Melfort 171 
Squadron of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets recently celebrated 
their 60th anniversary. The squadron’s first post-war 
commanding officer, Major Stan Miller, attended the 
ceremonies as a reviewing officer. It was an honour, he said, 
because: 
 

. . . for a squadron to celebrate 60 years is a big 
achievement. There are very few squadrons across the 
country that have ever achieved this. 

 
When the squadron was started in 1942, the cadets were 
seriously preparing to go into battle. Now the Melfort squadron 
focuses on seriously preparing the cadets for their future. Their 
training includes areas such as leadership, survival, technical 
and pilot instruction. The cadets gain further experience by 
working closely in the community with organizations like the 
Legion and the Wildlife Federation, and going on group tours 
across our country. 
 
The Melfort 171 Squadron of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets 
has helped to launch many young careers, and some through the 
Royal Military College, some through the forces, and some as 
private pilots. Many more have been able to apply what they 
have learned to successful roles in their families, jobs, and 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the legislature, please join me in 
congratulating the Melfort 171 Squadron of the Royal Canadian 
Air Cadets on this historical occasion and hope that they will be 
able to continue for many years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Transition House Fundraiser 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I had the 
privilege of attending Soirée 2003, the 12th annual fundraising 
event for Regina Transition House, along with about 100 other 
supporters. But to call it just a fundraiser doesn’t even approach 
doing the evening justice. It was a highly entertaining, very 
interesting evening, which just happened to be for a crucially 
worthwhile cause. 
 
The event was hosted by Debra Hengen at her home in Regina’s 
warehouse district. There was excellent entertainment by Meara 
and Kieran Conway, who played a cello duet, and by Andrea 
Hedlund on violin. The music was worth the price of admission, 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

 

Mr. Speaker, as was the food. 
 
And I am told the evening raised approximately $5,000 for 
Transition House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina Transition House has been with us since 
1976. It is now in its second location. During its first 25 years, 
11,000 clients passed through its doors. This is both a testimony 
to the invaluable work done by Transition House and its staff, 
and an ongoing indictment of our society where domestic 
violence against women and children is still a too prominent 
fact of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I admire and I congratulate Maria Hendrika and 
the staff and the board of Transition House for their excellent 
work and I know all members wish them well. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Luke’s Lutheran Church 90th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Sunday I had the pleasure of attending the 90th anniversary of 
St. Luke’s Lutheran Church at Woodley. Although the town of 
Woodley has disappeared, this church remains very active. Over 
250 people, including many former pastors, attended the 
morning worship service, followed by a dinner and an afternoon 
of reflecting and reminiscing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, upon entering this church, you take a step back in 
time. I was accompanied by my mother who, along with her 
parents and 15 brothers and sisters, attended this church for 
many years. In fact, Mr. Speaker, mom was baptized, 
confirmed, and married in this church. Mom said the high-back 
wooden pews, the pulpit, and the wooden collection plates are 
those she remembers from her childhood. 
 
The building which has been very well preserved and the 
grounds that are immaculate have been designated as heritage 
property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to joint me in congratulating the 
members of St. Luke’s Lutheran as they celebrate the 90th 
anniversary of their church. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Swift Current on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to all the 
members for leave. Through you, to all of my colleagues in the 
legislature, it’s a great pleasure to introduce a great looking 
group of grade 5 students in the east gallery. They are from 
Ecole Oman School in my hometown of Swift Current. I know 
it to be an excellent school, Mr. Speaker, because our . . . Tami 

and my children go to that school in Swift Current. 
 
And the 52 grade 5 students are accompanied by some of the 
great teaching staff at the school. Mrs. Kolb, Mrs. Mann, and 
Mr. Franz are with the students today. Mr. Speaker, I’ll have a 
chance to visit with them, take a picture with the students, and 
then visit with them later and perhaps have a discussion of what 
they saw here. 
 
But in the interim, I’d ask all of the members of the Assembly 
to join here with me in welcoming them here to the legislature 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of 
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. The Western 
premiers and representatives from the beef industry have 
developed an emergency compensation package designed to 
address the difficulties facing the industry as a result of the BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy) case discovered in Alberta 
four weeks ago. Unfortunately this may be the easy part. 
 
Convincing the federal government to agree to this proposal 
may be the tough work ahead. It is my understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Western premiers are to discuss this package 
with the Prime Minister today by telephone. But we know the 
package details were already presented to the federal 
Agriculture department officials last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us what response has been 
received so far, if any, from any federal officials to the 
proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d be pleased to respond on behalf of the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
And the member is correct. The premiers have agreed on a 
temporary slaughter cattle disaster program that the industry has 
worked on for some time. It’s been presented to the federal 
government. I know that the Minister of Agriculture spoke this 
morning with the federal minister, Mr. Vanclief. He did not 
reject the premiers’ proposal, I can report to the member. 
 
He indicated one more time that there are some existing safety 
nets in place, referring of course to NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account). The Agriculture ministers and the 
premiers are very firm in their position that these should not be 
. . . that this should not be the form of compensation or support 
and that funding needs to come from outside of NISA. Four 
hundred million dollars from NISA might put that whole 
program at risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can say that we haven’t had a definitive response as a province 
from the federal Minister of Agriculture but the deputies are 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

meeting tomorrow in Ottawa. There is a meeting attempted to 
be put together by the Ag ministers for later this week and we 
will keep on top of the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, industry representatives are 
very, very, very concerned that the federal government has 
already made up their mind that a loan guarantee program and 
the new NISA program will be all that they will offer the beef 
industry, and the minister indicated that as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these types of programs will simply not address 
the difficulties caused by this single BSE case. And today the 
industry is publicly stating that if this is the only help coming it 
will be a disaster, especially for the feedlot industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister know if the federal cabinet has 
already completely made up their minds on the compensation, 
or if there is some possibility that this proposal from the 
Western provinces and the industry may cause the federal 
government to take a step back and commit to examining the 
possibility of implementing this package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
the member that the Western premiers just yesterday agreed to a 
package that would be put forth to the federal government. That 
has now been done. 
 
And I think what we all need to do is remain somewhat 
optimistic in that the magnitude of this circumstance is certainly 
beyond Saskatchewan’s ability to manage. I think it’s fair to say 
that it’s beyond the industry’s ability to manage, which is why a 
shared proposal has been put forward to the federal government 
allowing, hopefully, the federal government to assume the vast 
majority of the impact on this. 
 
What I want to say to the industry leaders, I want to thank them 
for their support. I know that they’re meeting this afternoon. 
This is an industry-driven proposal. 
 
I want to say to members of the opposition that what we need to 
do is continue to work together; governments — provincially, 
federally — the industry, to ensure that we have a positive 
resolve to what is a very difficult circumstance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
everyone agrees that the best solution is for the US trade 
restrictions on Canadian beef to be lifted. However, there seems 
to be no indication that this will happen before the international 
panel presents its written report in two weeks. But for many, 
two weeks will be a little too late and even then that may be 
optimistic. 
 
The USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) 60-day 
review period of comment on the trade restrictions doesn’t 
expire until July 28. And although the US has said that it is not 
a hard and fast deadline, it would be very unusual for them to 
move the comment period and to lift the ban on their industry 

stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister told the media yesterday he’s 
optimistic that the US may lift the ban in very short order. Will 
the minister tell us what indication that he has had from the US 
government that the ban will be lifted and when he expects 
Canadian beef may start moving across the border? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite is well aware of the circumstances that will 
open the American border and that is the determination of 
scientific evidence that, in fact, Canadian beef is safe for export. 
 
I think the member, as well, is aware that the report will be 
forthcoming very shortly. I think, as well, we’re all aware of the 
fact that Dr. Kihm, who represents the international body that’s 
looking at this issue, has indicated that it’s his belief that 
Canadian beef is safe. 
 
So what we need is, we need to be able to present the scientific 
evidence to the American officials to ensure that what we have 
is a safe product. They have to be satisfied that the scientific 
evidence will indicate that. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it’s not the 
provincial government that’s negotiating opening of the 
borders. This is a federal responsibility; federal officials are 
working on a parallel track to the scientific track and hopefully 
we can find a resolve to this sooner rather than later because I 
think we all understand the immediacy of the circumstance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
industry representatives are clearly frustrated by what they feel 
is a lack of understanding by the federal officials, and for the 
depth of the issue and the crisis the industry now finds itself in 
as a result of the trade restrictions on Canadian beef. And they 
don’t believe the federal government’s reaction on the issue of 
compensation needed to help the industry to get through this 
demonstrates any clear understanding of the seriousness of this 
situation. 
 
But even the two weeks that the international panel says that it 
will take to deliver their final report is far too long, Mr. 
Speaker, for many of the feedlot or cattle feeder industries who 
won’t be financially viable, quite frankly, at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister planning to do to ensure that 
the federal government doesn’t hide behind existing programs 
and doesn’t drag their feet in getting the final report prepared? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
member opposite is exactly correct in that industry participants 
are concerned. And they have every right to be concerned. This 
is an unusual circumstance. We’ve seen this play out in other 
parts of the world and it’s had some very dramatic impact in a 
negative way on the cattle industry in other areas of the world. 
 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

 

So I think it’s fair to say that that’s why Canadian, Western 
Canadian premiers are speaking with one single voice to our 
federal government who are negotiating on our behalf to open 
the American borders as soon as we can. I’m told and I 
understand by a media briefing this morning, the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food indicated that a final report should be 
ready in a couple of days from the international community. 
 
I think it’s fair to say as well that we have had good support in 
terms of the work that our federal government has done in terms 
of the investigation, putting the science together. It’s been 
commended by the international community. 
 
I think what we need to do is keep on top of this. We need to 
push hard to ensure that we get the funding, the appropriate 
funding for our cattle producers here in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Policy on Firefighting Expenses 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s been over a 
month since I first raised the issue of the Outlook fire 
department responding to two field fires that were started by 
malfunctioning SaskPower equipment. The town of Outlook 
asked SaskPower to pay for the firefighting costs. SaskPower 
said no. But the minister promised to review this decision. In 
fact his exact words were, I’m expecting a response very 
shortly. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s been over a month since the minister 
first promised this review. But has the minister gotten back to 
me? No. Has he gotten back to the town of Outlook? Well I 
checked there this morning. No. Will SaskPower reimburse the 
town of Outlook for the firefighting costs for the . . . for these 
two fires caused by SaskPower equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I thought 
a very public pronouncement about the response would have 
sufficed, Mr. Speaker. But I believe the member full well 
knows, Mr. Speaker, that this issue is currently being reviewed 
by the Ombudsman’s office, Mr. Speaker. It’s being reviewed 
by the Ombudsman’s office. At the time the question was 
asked, I was not aware of that — nor should I have been made 
aware of that; it’s independent. She is an independent body here 
in the . . . of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. I have been told by 
that office though, Mr. Speaker, that we can expect a response 
on that fairly soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Same stuff. They 
keep hiding behind either the courts or now it’s the 
Ombudsman. Can’t this minister make a decision on this 
policy? SaskPower has no policy. It has no intention of 
probably paying for these fires. This review has been on for a 
month. Can the minister himself make a decision on this case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
member raises a legitimate point. I mean the issue is absolutely 
legitimate, Mr. Speaker. SaskPower, however, assumes 
responsibility where they have been the cause of the accident or 
the cost, Mr. Speaker. Having said that, the town of Outlook 
disagreed with SaskPower’s position on this. It’s my belief that 
they probably were the ones that referred it to the 
Ombudsman’s office, appropriately so. They are an . . . She is 
an independent officer of the legislature reviewing this. I am 
advised that we will have a statement from her within a very 
short period of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Now everyone knows that it was SaskPower’s 
equipment that started this fire, so the . . . that was started by 
malfunctioning SaskPower equipment. Can the minister inform 
me . . . (inaudible) . . . of the decision of going to the 
Ombudsman, the town of Outlook, before going on here? Can 
the minister . . . How long will this . . . Has SaskPower made a 
policy on this? They’ve had over a month to do their own 
policy review on this. Will they make a policy on it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if that member knows factually that it was 
SaskPower’s equipment that caused the fire and that they 
should be solely responsible, I would encourage that member 
— it is incumbent upon that member — to get a sworn affidavit 
to that respect and provide it to the Ombudsman’s office, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s his responsibility if he factually knows that is 
the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, SaskPower . . . I indicated that 
we would review and we have done so, Mr. Speaker. I find, Mr. 
Speaker, that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. I would ask 
for order so that we can hear the response. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as I’ve 
indicated, the Ombudsman’s office is reviewing that and we are 
told we will be provided with her opinion on this shortly. 
 
Having said that, SaskPower always — as all of the 
corporations do — continue to review their policies as it 
pertains to this or any issue, Mr. Speaker. On this particular 
issue, I have not yet been advised whether or not SaskPower is 
contemplating any proposed changes in this particular policy, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — With that fire, it was investigated by the 
official of the fire department. They had officials out there. The 
chief of the fire department investigated. An official report was 
made to the insurance company saying that it was started by 
SaskPower equipment. 
 
How much more information do they need? What kind of more 
reports do they need where it started? 
 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
policy of SaskPower, like many private sector corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, assumes liability, assumes liability — and I ask the 
member to listen carefully — assumes liability where they were 
wilfully or were the cause as a result of, Mr. Speaker, as a result 
of having done something that falls outside of what they should 
ordinarily have done during the, during their work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Having said that, they, SaskPower, holds the view that they 
were not the cause of the fire as a result of having done 
anything outside of what they should have done. Mr. Speaker, it 
was a, it was a . . . The accident was or the fire was caused as a 
result simply of something entirely out of their control, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Investments 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for the 
Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Will the minister confirm, Mr. Speaker, that CIC president, 
Frank Hart, and senior vice-president, Zach Douglas, have been 
investigating and/or are in the process of establishing a private 
sector management company that will be given up to a 10-year 
contract to manage hundreds of millions of dollars worth of 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation) taxpayer-funded assets? 
And will the minister confirm that Mr. Hart and/or Mr. Douglas 
may be involved in the ownership or management of this new 
company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as I said 
yesterday, and let me try and be as absolutely as clear as I can 
possibly be, we have absolutely no intention of privatizing 
whatsoever — whatsoever, whatsoever, Mr. Speaker — the 
Crown Investments Corporation CIC III (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Industrial Interests Inc.) portfolio, 
none whatsoever. 
 
Although it seems to me that ideologically that Sask Party is 
stuck on that one agenda. They feel that the only way that we 
can work with the private sector is to privatize, Mr. Speaker. 
We have said, and I said in this Assembly yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ve said many times before, that our government, 
Mr. Speaker, Crown Investments Corporation, will explore all 
kinds of options in an effort to create jobs in our province, to 
create economic development, particularly in the areas where 
we think we have opportunities for creating economic 
development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, this minister is saying 
one thing today. His most senior Crown Investments 
Corporation officials said something quite different last week, 

Mr. Speaker. In addition to that, as the Leader-Post reported 
last year, that minister said that he was not ideologically 
opposed to the sale of assets if the conditions are met. 
 
But the point of these questions are pretty straightforward. It’s 
not about who owns all of these 570-plus million dollars worth 
of Crown corporation assets. It’s about the fact that the 
government appears ready to hand over the management of 
those assets to a private sector company whose principals — 
whose principals — are the current senior civil servants 
managing that file, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s what we want the minister to answer. Will he answer 
the question, stand in his place and assure the House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Would the member go 
directly to his question, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that two 
senior officials at Crown Investments Corporation are in the 
process of developing their own company to manage taxpayers’ 
assets for an up to a 10-year agreement with the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in 
response to his question at the end, as I understood it, Mr. 
Speaker, I can say categorically that we don’t have two officials 
within CIC trying to establish their own company for 
privatization of this CIC III portfolio, Mr. Speaker. I can say 
that categorically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said yesterday, and I don’t know how 
much more clear I can be, Mr. Speaker, within CIC, within our 
government, Mr. Speaker, we continually explore options 
where we can create economic development in our province. 
 
Part of that, Mr. Speaker, is the remarks that our president, 
Frank Hart, referred to in the Crown Corporations Committee. 
He can refer again to Hansard as it came out in the Crown 
Corporations Committee where Mr. Hart talked about the 
options that were being explored. But I guarantee that member 
and that Sask Party that we will not be privatizing CIC III — 
full stop, period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is not answering a very, 
very serious question about the management of taxpayers’ 
assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that CIC president, 
Frank Hart, and senior vice-president, Zach Douglas, have been 
investigating and/or are in the process of establishing a private 
sector management company that will be given up to a 10-year 
contract to manage hundreds of millions of dollars in CIC 
investments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if that 
member has some proof of that and he has some documentation, 
I would be pleased to . . . if he would provide it here in the 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to say again, there is no contemplation of privatization 
of that portfolio, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will always look to options that will increase 
jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. We will always look at 
options, Mr. Speaker. There’s nothing new about that. 
 
And let me say as well, that within the CIC III portfolio, on an 
individual basis — much like the Great Western Breweries 
where we supported Great Western Breweries on an individual 
basis — when it is appropriate for government to exit, 
government will exit. But as a portfolio, Mr. Speaker, in the 
CIC III portfolio there is no contemplation of privatization of 
that portfolio. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister isn’t coming anywhere 
near close to answering the question. We’ll ask the question 
again. 
 
Will the minister confirm that the NDP hand-picked CIC 
president, Frank Hart, and his senior vice-president, Zach 
Douglas, and maybe others, have been investigating and/or are 
in the process of establishing a private sector management 
company that will be given up to a 10-year contract to manage 
hundreds of millions of dollars in taxpayers’ assets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let me 
say, Mr. Speaker, there is not a contemplation of any 10-year 
contract, Mr. Speaker. There is not a contemplation, Mr. 
Speaker, of privatization of this portfolio. I just don’t know how 
much clearer I can be on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will always explore options for creating jobs in 
this province. We will always explore options for leveraging 
private sector money, Mr. Speaker. We will always explore 
those options but, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve said before — on an 
individual basis out of that portfolio. Much different than 
investments by our subsidiary Crowns, SaskTel and SGI and 
SaskPower, where they make investments, where they want to 
privatize those and sell those off, Mr. Speaker. We do not. 
 
But within CIC III on an individual basis, when it is appropriate 
for government to exit those investments once the jobs have 
been created, once we have economic development in those 
areas in our province, many of the areas they represent, it is 
absolutely appropriate that government exit. But as a portfolio, 
Mr. Speaker, we will not privatize that portfolio. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, who owns the assets and who 
manages the assets can be completely different entities. 
 
The minister keeps talking about whether or not he’s got plans 
to privatize Crown Investments Corporation III. Well we know 
that his officials have been at least exploring that plan. We also 
know they’ve been exploring options to privatize parts of a 

major Crown, TransGas. We found that out two weeks ago. But 
we’ll take the minister at his word on this particular file. 
 
However what he’s not answering is the issue of who will 
manage these assets and who will be paid to manage these 
assets. Right now, two senior civil servants hand-picked by the 
NDP, among others, are managing the assets. 
 
We’re asking the minister to assure the House that they will not 
be allowed to unilaterally set up a private company, Mr. 
Speaker, that they would own and continue any kind of a 
long-term management agreement for those assets. Will the 
minister make that assurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the president — I don’t know if I need to speak slower 
— but the president of Crown Investments Corporation, in the 
Crown Corporations Committee, Mr. Speaker, made it clear that 
we will explore many options. Those options will not include 
privatization, Mr. Speaker. They will not include privatization. 
Mr. Speaker, there is no such deal around a 10-year contract. 
Mr. Speaker, no deal whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in addition to that, let me make this point, Mr. Speaker. If 
there was ever a contemplation of privatization of the 
management of that portfolio, let me reassure this House that it 
would not include that member from Swift Current who was 
involved in the guitar camp, Mr. Speaker, who would know 
nothing about managing private sector investments, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the minister has 
basically just admitted that two hand-picked NDP friends that 
are running the Crown Investments Corporation are working to 
set up their own company so that they can take over, on a 
long-term basis, the management of a company. You know 
what, Mr. Speaker . . . the management of the Crown assets. 
 
That sounds a lot like, Mr. Speaker, senior NDP officials 
covering themselves off, understanding that these are the dying 
days of this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it 
sounds like, that’s what it sounds like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same government that 
brought us SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) and didn’t tell the truth about it for six 
years. This is the same government that has not come clean on 
the bingo scandal. This is the same minister that can’t answer 
questions in this House because everything’s before the courts 
or under investigation. 
 
But now we need some answers on this particular question from 
that minister. Will he come clean for the people of the province 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

and tell them exactly what is the government contemplating? 
Are they contemplating handing over hundreds of millions of 
dollars of assets — the management of those assets — to two 
senior NDP officials at the Crown Investments Corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. 
Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me answer this in a 
very straightforward and unequivocal way. When I listened to 
the member from Swift Current, it tells me that he’s thinking 
back to the good old days when he was the chief of staff for 
John Gerich in the old Tory, Grant Devine days. Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, they can attempt to 
holler me down all they want but, Mr. Speaker . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker, they can attempt to holler me down all they want, and 
I said I was going to give them an unequivocal answer and I’m 
going to do it right now. 
 
This government is not about to set up a sweetheart deal for two 
officials who work in Crown corporations. I’m going to tell you 
that. Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is going to manage 
the assets. CIC III has been delivering very positive returns for 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has said unequivocally that we’re not 
about privatizing the III assets. The member opposite seems to 
be taking himself back to the good old days when Grant Devine 
and his friends were hunkering hundreds of millions of dollars 
out of the economy of this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s not 
how this government operates and that’s not what’s going to 
happen in this instance. 
 
If that member has any evidence — any evidence whatsoever 
— that there is a sweetheart deal being put together by anyone 
to ensure that two people benefit in an unfair way, he should 
bring that evidence forward. Other than that, Mr. Speaker, he 
should take the member, the minister at his word who said, it 
ain’t on. And I’m saying on behalf of this government, that’s 
not happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, it is my 
duty to table two documents. 
 
First, the annual report on operations for the year ended March 
31, 2003, submitted by the Office of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Second, the 2002 annual report submitted by the Provincial 
Ombudsman of Saskatchewan. 
 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions nos. 710 through 716 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 710 to 716 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 8 — Property Taxes 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise today to 
bring forward a motion that has the backing of not just the Sask 
Party members but I believe the backing of some of the 
government members as well, as well as every landowner in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion is: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the very unreasonable 
burden put on the shoulders of property owners in the 
province due to this provincial government’s off-loading of 
the cost of education on to the local tax base and that we 
further recognize that Saskatchewan’s high property taxes 
harm our province’s competitiveness and ability to grow 
economically. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think this motion actually talks about what’s 
happening to the whole province of Saskatchewan today. We 
can never look at education as a single department or a single 
issue. And what we have here is government’s misplaced 
priorities has put education into the situation where it’s harming 
every . . . not only the children of the province but everyone 
who believes in lifelong education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is really the key to a successful future 
for our province, for our communities, and all the individuals in 
this province. We have seen that in the last few years this 
government has off-loaded on to the taxpayers of this province 
in education considerably. 
 
K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) education in Saskatchewan 
has only two sources of funding. That’s the foundation 
operating grants and local property taxes. And that’s the 
education portion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decision on how much that education tax 
portion is, is decided every year by the school boards. And it is 
decided right after the budget is presented. It’s something that’s 
a real concern for all tax . . . for all board members in the 
province because normally the budget comes down at the end of 
March and they have to have their assessment out to the school 
. . . to the RMs (rural municipality) by the end of April. And it 
gives them just a little over a month to actually make the 
decision on what they’re going to be doing for property taxes in 
this province. It’s a huge responsibility and something that 
every trustee in the province really gets very upset about every 
year and waits to find out what this government is going to do 
for education. 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

 

Local taxpayers cover the majority of the cost for K to 12 
education in many school divisions. There’s a lot of school 
divisions that only get 80 per cent . . . or 20 per cent of the 
funding from the government and up to 45 per cent. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sure most members in this House are well aware 
that there are 18 school divisions in this province who get not 
one penny from the province and yet they are responsible for 
the whole education issue of the children in the province, every 
one of them. And the children are the future of our province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 when this government decided to not 
just cut back . . . or not just freeze education funding, they 
decided to cut back education funding and to put the 
responsibility on to the taxpayers of the province, they actually 
cost the taxpayers of this province $380 million since 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, provincially the province funds 42 per cent of the 
cost of K to 12 education and local ratepayers across the 
province fund 58 per cent. We all know that the percentages 
vary from school division to school division because of the 
differences in the taxable assessment of property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the last two previous ministers of 
Learning it’s been very apparent not only to members on this 
side of the House but to people in the province, that there seems 
to be no way that they can equate mill rate and assessment 
because I’ve heard many of the ministers say the mill rates have 
gone down and this is a great thing to have happen — which we 
know it is — but they forget invariably that the mill rate has to 
be a part of the assessment or be compiled with the assessment 
before you know what property taxes are to be paid in this 
province. Many of the school divisions that have a low property 
tax when combined with the assessment are still paying way 
more per quarter of land or per household than one with a low 
mill rate . . . a higher mill rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when expenditures increase — and that’s salary 
increases, natural gas rates, and field costs — boards must 
reduce expenditures or they have to raise the mill rate. Our 
increases to the provincial funding grants usually only cover a 
portion of the increased costs. Most taxpayers are 
understandably opposed to mill rate increases, but most also 
seem to be opposed to expenditure reductions. 
 
I have met very few teachers or parents or students in this 
province who want to see a school closure, who want to see a 
staff reduction, who want to see their education system actually 
downgraded which they believe happens whenever there is a 
. . . whenever the amount of money coming from the province 
isn’t increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at one point the provincial government actually 
picked up 60 per cent of the cost of education and taxpayers 
picked up 40 per cent of the funding. That was around the early 
’90s when this government came into power and they decided 
that really to look at the big picture of the province’s funding, 
they should be down . . . they should be finding other ways to 
either save money or to get money from taxpayers. And one of 
the things they did do was download, not only on to 
municipalities, but really on to school boards in the province. 
 
Across Canada, 26 per cent is the average amount of education 
property tax on land. Now when we know that we’re at 58 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, we cannot possibly say that businesses that 
are looking to move to this province or individuals that think 
that Saskatchewan might be a good place to live, when they 
look at the cost of the education portion of their property tax, 
they’re turned off by the whole idea of owning property in this 
province. It’s something that’s . . . It is a disincentive to be in 
Saskatchewan, not just for individuals but for businesses in the 
province and it’s something that has to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some provinces in Canada that fund 
education fully from the provincial tax base or from general 
revenue funds. And that’s something that I know that is under 
consideration in a number of areas. 
 
But really in Saskatchewan it’s gotten to the point that most 
people, even a few years ago, were talking about tax revolt. And 
this year, with 66 per cent of the school divisions having to 
increase their taxes, the thoughts are going through people’s 
minds again. 
 
Since 1997 the total property taxes including municipal and 
education tax for cities have gone up 15 per cent. I know that 
the government, the Premier and ministers, have had meetings 
or numerous meetings with SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) talking about their concerns about 
cutbacks to funding from the province. It’s an issue that’s . . . 
It’s affecting their cities and their viability as cities and their 
opportunities to provide other services to their citizens. So it’s 
not a new item to this government but it’s something that they 
have failed to address for over 10 years. 
 
Since 1997 total property taxes have increased for rural 
municipalities by 28 per cent. Now I know that most of the 
members on the other side of the House are not from rural 
Saskatchewan and they do get comments from their local 
towns, from their . . . the cities in their areas. But most of them 
don’t have rural municipalities and maybe they’re surprised 
when they learn that rural rates have gone up 28 per cent 
compared to the 15 per cent for cities. But it’s a fact, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course in some areas, it’s more than that. And for 
agricultural land, school taxes alone have gone up 26 per cent. 
 
Now in the . . . Since this session started, agriculture has been a 
main area of concern in the province, not just lately because of 
BSE but many other issues. But right now, Mr. Speaker, we 
have many farmers in this province who are looking at the 
drastic impact of this issue that is way beyond their control, 
something they hadn’t expected, they can’t plan for. And 
regardless of what their management skills are, who could have 
thought that some of, the major part of our cattle herd would be 
destroyed because of a disease that we weren’t . . . no one could 
even have expected could happen. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the cattle farmers, we have feedlots and 
feedlot owners that have met with us, and I’m sure with the 
government caucus as well, and told them that they will have a 
matter of days — not weeks — but days before they’re not 
going to be able to make it. The impact on them is going to 
ripple through our economy in a way that we can’t even 
imagine today. 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

We have trucking firms, we have auction marts, we have 
stockyards, we have farmers that have 30 and 40 head of cattle 
that are waiting to take the calves in for fattening at a feedlot. 
All of those people are going to be disastrously hurt. And at the 
same time at the end of the day, they know that they’re going to 
have to pay the property tax on their land and it’s going to be 
. . . They have to find out a way to pay the taxes, to pay the bills 
that are coming in, and at the same time manage their own 
business. 
 
And when things happen to a business that are beyond their 
control, businesses don’t say, I’m going to refuse to pay my 
education tax; I’m going to refuse to pay my property tax. 
Because citizens of this province care about education, they 
care about their communities, and they care about keeping their 
schools and their divisions open. 
 
But there’s only so . . . You can’t get blood from a stone, Mr. 
Speaker, and if there isn’t money there, there’s going to be a 
disastrous impact on our schools and our school divisions right 
across this province. 
 
To put this in perspective, according to the Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation the total property tax intake has risen 64 per cent 
faster than inflation since 1997. Mr. Speaker, most of us talk 
about inflation and try and keep our wages . . . or like to keep 
our wages in comparison with the inflation rate. But when you 
think that property taxes have increased 64 per cent faster than 
inflation, we know that it’s got to be disastrous for everyone in 
the province. 
 
It’s something that the government has to be looking at, and it’s 
something that we realize doesn’t just affect education or 
community development; it affects the growth of our province 
as a whole. 
 
Earlier this year the 2002 residential property taxes and utilities 
charges survey revealed that in Saskatoon, while municipal 
taxes are among the lowest in the country, this city’s education 
tax is the highest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina has many signs around this 
area, and many of their business people are running around with 
the little buttons that say, I Love Regina. The mayor and the 
business people are doing their very best to promote the city but 
at the same time when people are actually looking to move into 
the city, they do study, they do some research and they figure 
what it’s going to cost them to live in this province, to live in 
this city. 
 
And as a homeowner one of the things that people do say is, I 
can manage the mortgage on my house, I know what the 
mortgage payment each month is going to be, but the taxes are 
above and beyond that. 
 
And it’s something that we don’t have any control over; it 
changes on a yearly basis. And when there’s a 64 per cent 
increase in five years, it’s the type of thing that people aren’t 
expecting and I’m sure that it’s the type of thing that has a 
negative impact on our growth. 
 
The average school tax across the country is $684; that’s right 
across Canada and all its various jurisdictions, and it’s the 

average of all of them. But in Saskatoon the number skyrockets 
to $1,301. It’s the highest education tax among 26 major 
municipalities across Canada. 
 
This isn’t the type of thing that aldermen and mayors and city 
councils want to advertise. They don’t want to have to say, 
come to Saskatchewan, come to Saskatoon, even though your 
property taxes are going to be the highest in all of Canada. But 
it’s the kind of fact that they have to live with when it comes to 
keeping their city growing and alive. 
 
For a number of years this NDP government has off-loaded its 
responsibility of properly funding education on to the backs of 
taxpayers, and it’s resulted in some serious education property 
tax hikes. In fact, Saskatchewan property owners are paying the 
highest education property tax in Canada on their land. 
 
In addition to rising education property taxes, there has been a 
serious impact on programs and services that school boards are 
able to offer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the school boards try and make the decision 
every year of what they’re going to do, what services they’re 
going to provide to the students in their area, they wait, again 
with bated breath, to see what the foundation operating grant is 
going to give them, if anything. And then they decide what their 
expenses are going to be. And then they have two options, and 
it’s simple. They either have to cut programming or they have 
to raise the taxes. 
 
It’s something that they deliberate over for hours. And even 
though they do their very best to juggle the numbers, they’re 
still invariably have to make the decision that will result in 
telling their neighbours and their families and their friends that 
yes, you’re going to have to pay more taxes this year in order to 
keep your schools open and your teachers in the schools to offer 
the programs that we all need. 
 
We know on this side of the House that in order to grow the 
economy, in order for Saskatchewan to increase by 100,000 
people over the next 10 years, we have to have a skilled, 
educated workforce. The only way we can do that is by 
ensuring that every young person in this province has the 
opportunity to have a school that’s close by them, that they’re 
offering the programs that they need, and that they can be part 
. . . the parents can have a choice in some of the programs that’s 
allowed for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a tough decision that local people make; that 
we sitting in this building and the government side of the House 
doesn’t get involved in. The minister has said . . . says 
frequently that decisions like that are made at the local board. In 
fact when serious questions come to the minister’s office, and 
usually we are aware of them, the minister will say it’s a local 
decision. 
 
Well the local decisions are invariably based on how much 
money they have. And when this government decides that they 
would rather spend money on SPUDCO, they’d rather spend 
money out of this province than on education and on the people 
of this province, then I would think the . . . then they have a 
huge impact on the people. 
 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

 

Many school divisions have been forced to cut back on what 
they can offer simply to maintain basic services, all the while 
ensuring that increasing costs such as teachers’ salaries, 
increases in utilities . . . (inaudible) . . . are covered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that it was not too long ago that there 
was a 22 per cent increase in SaskEnergy rates in this province. 
That type of increase has to be covered by the school boards. It 
wasn’t something that was part of their planning, but it’s 
something that they do have to pay for. The government 
members are well aware that they are hidden from the real 
impact of this because there’s a school board that’s going to 
take the flack when they have to raise the . . . when they raise 
the mill rates again. 
 
Without sufficient funding from the provincial government to 
cover basic necessities, school boards are forced time and time 
again to raise their taxes. And taxpayers in this province clearly 
end up paying for this NDP’s mismanagement and lack of 
funding and also for their lack of priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only way that we can really get this province 
moving is by having our young people staying in this province, 
educated, and have a well-paying job so that they can be part of 
growing the province. And we know the disastrous numbers 
that have been put forward by . . . in the last while with people 
leaving the province, and it’s usually our young people. It’s the 
ones in the age group of 24 to 44 years old, the ones that are 
paying taxes and doing a lot of the spending. They’re the ones 
that leave this province and they’re the ones that we need here 
to grow our economy. 
 
It’s so serious today that some school boards are looking for 
alternative revenue sources to make up from the loss of funding 
from this NDP government. They’re talking about anything 
from corporate sponsorship to other forms of fundraising. And 
anyone that’s a parent knows that the word fundraising in the 
school system is something that’s got to be a common term, 
where you . . . fundraising for everything from playground 
equipment to sports trips to year-end trips. There’s always a 
bake sale or a raffle ticket or something to be sold or bought so 
there’ll be . . . the schools can actually receive some of the 
benefits; our students can receive what they want to actually get 
the kind of education we consider a whole education for our 
students. 
 
School boards are tired of having to go to the taxpayers every 
time there’s a shortage of funding from this NDP government, 
and it’s certainly not what school divisions want to do. But this 
government has given them no choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the money has to come from somewhere, and the 
government — whose job it is to ensure that education is 
properly funded — has shirked its responsibilities and its duties 
so that the school districts are looking desperately for other 
options. 
 
They have to maintain the status quo to ensure that the essential 
programming and services are kept and that teachers’ salaries 
are paid and that we can have the type of professional people 
that we want and need in our school divisions that our children 
deserve. 
 

We have to compete globally, not just for the teachers but for 
the students as well. And we have to be able to offer services 
and choices that are ones that will take this province into the 
future. 
 
We all know what happens when the government fails to live up 
to their responsibility. There’s no alternative but for our school 
boards to hike property taxes. We know that boards work 
diligently to ensure that they are as efficient as possible, but that 
isn’t always possible for them to do it without raising taxes. The 
picture is one that the taxpayers don’t want to consider. They 
have no appetite for any more downloading onto the school 
boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the money that we bring into this province into the 
General Revenue Fund every year is $6.2 billion. Now I believe 
that in 1991 when former Premier Romanow came to power, he 
said that any government should be able to operate on, I believe 
it was about $4 billion. Now 10 years later, $6.2 billion is about 
. . . is the kind of money that we are spending in this province 
but that’s without the money that is going into the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every single dime that’s spent out of this province is actually 
taking away an opportunity for the people of this province to 
actually enjoy some of the benefits. And every single penny that 
was spent in this province in the last few years has been lost, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that as of lately we have spent money on 
issues that the official opposition has brought to the attention of 
not just the government, but to the people of this province. And 
it’s the type of thing that we can determine whether, is this the 
best use of taxpayers’ dollars? Should we be spending money 
like $8 million on a mega bingo project that has failed or should 
we put $8 million into the education portion of property tax? 
 
Is that going to be a more successful way to grow the province 
or is spending money on things like ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan)? $77 million we have for 
approved borrowing from taxpayers; we have $18 million in 
operating grant from taxpayers; and we have $12 million in 
equity from taxpayers. That is $107 million, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’ve decided — this government has decided — to spend on a 
land titles system that doesn’t work. At the same time they 
could have spent some of this money, determined that a priority 
that would be better for the people of this province was 
education. 
 
This is the type of thing that government every day makes 
decisions on. And we as the opposition have been constantly 
telling the government there has to be a priority. The priority of 
every government is health care, infrastructure, and education. 
It’s not a priority to be spending our taxpayers’ dollars outside 
of this province, and yet that’s what we’ve been seeing. 
 
ISC is actually 500 per cent over budget, Mr. Speaker. We have 
Coachman Insurance, Mr. Speaker, that spent . . . we lost $9.4 
million in Coachman Insurance that was brought forward . . . 
the information was brought forward not too long ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to go through the list of some of the 
losses that this government has had in the last little while 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

because at the time when the decision is made to spend money 
outside of this province, the government has made a conscious 
decision of whether this money is going to go into the province 
of Saskatchewan or whether it’s going to be invested outside of 
the province. 
 
We’re taking taxpayers’ money and spending it elsewhere. The 
job of government is to determine what is the best use of 
dollars, and I think it’s our job as opposition to make sure that 
people know where this government’s priorities are. 
 
They had a priority of putting money into the potato industry. 
And what happened? They lost $28 million in SPUDCO. We 
decided that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member is wanting to bring in other 
items into the debate, but the member ought to be reminded she 
should be relating all of her items to the topic which is under 
discussion. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that we’re 
talking about property tax, and at the same time that we’re 
talking about high property taxes harming our province’s 
competitiveness and ability to grow economically. 
 
There are decisions that this government’s making that is 
actually hurting our competitive ability and our ability to grow. 
When we have to make decisions about where our taxpayers’ 
dollars are going — the fewer dollars that we have because of 
the number of people that are leaving this province — the 
decision is made, and the government and the people of this 
province have to pay the consequences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have losses that amount to millions and 
millions of dollars — I believe $85 million is the losses in the 
CIC in the last year — the kind of dollars that could have been 
spent on property taxes, could have been spent on the education 
structures, infrastructure. And if CIC is basically part of our 
economy, it’s part of the money that we get to spend as a 
province, then we can be making those decisions. 
 
The annual report, the 2001 annual report of CIC, showed there 
was a net profit of $110 million but the NDP government took 
$200 million in dividends out of that. So obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, the government decides that there’s going to be money 
spent that’s brought into this province outside of their own . . . 
outside of the wishes of the people of the province. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are monies that are spent from the 
government coffers that affect everyone directly — things like 
$75 golf balls. Most of the people in this province can decide 
whether they want to spend money on this kind of issue or they 
want to spend money on education. Mr. Speaker, every penny 
that is lost by this government, there is a choice of whether it 
can go towards education or whether it can go to another 
government priority. 
 
What we, on this side of the House, are trying to get this 
government to realize is there are choices they’re making. And 
the choices that they’re making are hurting the taxpayers of this 
province, they’re hurting the children of this province, and 

they’re hurting the future of our province. There isn’t just a few 
million dollars lost here and there; it’s the type of thing that’s 
affecting the growth of this province. And as soon as this 
government decides that they want to give up the reins and let 
us show them how to run this province, we’ll do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan 
spent $480,000 not too long ago to evaluate the market value of 
SaskEnergy. They spent $25,000 to review the Broe deal, which 
isn’t even in effect at this time. Mr. Speaker, it sounds like a 
few thousand dollars here or there, but it’s everybody . . . Every 
penny of that is taxpayers’ dollars, and every penny is a priority 
that these people decide whether it should be going into 
ventures that are outside of the people’s choices or whether it 
should be going for education and the children of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a negative GDP (gross 
domestic product). In fact I believe it’s one of two provinces in 
Canada that’s had a negative GDP for the last two years. We 
also have had a negative population growth. And as I said 
before, this population growth is the type of thing that is 
affecting not just the amount of money that we spend but the 
amount of money we bring in. 
 
We need taxpayers in this province. We have to increase our 
base of people that are contributing to the province, and this has 
not been happening. The Dominion Bond Rating agency said 
that a $100 million cash-flow deficit at SaskTel is because of 
the need to fund the NDP’s money-losing non-core investments 
around the world. $100 million, Mr. Speaker, towards the 
education portion of property tax would make a huge difference 
in the people of this province that are trying to go to work every 
day, make a living, and just pay their taxes, and not expecting 
the government to get into their face. 
 
We have . . . As of this latest budget, there’s been a $900 
million increase in government debt. Every time that the debt 
increases, that means that there’s going to be an increase in 
interest rates, there’s going to be an increase in interest period, 
and that money that could be spent on things like property taxes 
and education is actually going on . . . paying interest instead of 
doing what we should be doing in this province and that is 
growing the number of people. 
 
It wasn’t too long ago, Mr. Speaker, that we learned that the 
government was going to invest more of our taxpayers’ money 
into Nova Scotia, through their energy program. I believe it’s 
about $60 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $60 million investment has to come from some of 
the funds within the province of Saskatchewan. There was a 
decision made that this was a good place to spend our money. 
We, on this side of the House, believe a good place to spend our 
money is in this province and on the people of this province. 
We also spent $12 million on a sound stage that we’re waiting 
to see some financial return from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this means that people in this province have fewer 
dollars that are disposable for them, or fewer dollars that are 
available to the people of this province for spending on their 
own priorities. 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

 

The taxpayers had to spend $20,000 for the evaluation of their 
own investment fund. It’s, in the end, potentially leading to a 
private sector management company with a 10-year 
management contract with NDP buddies to potentially privatize 
a hundreds of million of dollars of our own assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the priorities of this government are ones that 
we’ve been talking about since the session started . . . Or I 
should say the lack of priorities are the ones that differ greatly 
from what we believe should be happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have schools, communities, and families have 
been forced to take a back seat to the NDP’s high-risk foreign 
ventures, business ventures, and we know that since the NDP 
has been in power, municipal revenue and government sharing 
grants were cut in half. The situation has progressed to a point 
where there are literally tax revolts in municipalities across this 
province, and there’s talk of it happening again especially since 
the NDP has cancelled its education property tax rebate 
program. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that it didn’t look like a big 
budgetary item. It was $25 million and when the program was 
introduced it was something that the RM said could be done at a 
local level; it didn’t have to be run through government; the 
administrators were quite capable of making the paperwork 
happen right at the local level. They didn’t have to hire more 
people in Regina, but I guess it was an opportunity for the 
government to send out a cheque so people could say, gee I got 
a cheque from government. But really at the end of the day, it 
wouldn’t have made any difference to the people of this 
province except the local people again would have had some 
control over what was happening. But that isn’t something this 
government likes to do. 
 
The government doesn’t seem to understand that while property 
and education taxes have been increasing, taxpayers’ incomes 
have not. And what’s even more troubling is that those 
taxpayers in rural areas are often the ones who can least afford 
to absorb any kind of tax and they’re the ones that are hit the 
hardest. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the former minister of Learning, 
when he was a Liberal in 1999, campaigned on a promise to 
increase the provincial share of education funding to local 
school boards and he said up to 45 per cent. 
 
It wasn’t too long after the coalition government was formed 
that we had the Liberal leader and now the Finance minister 
thinking it was okay to again download on to the local 
taxpayers and ensure that their worldwide ventures were the 
ones where the interest was and not to the local people in this 
province. 
 
It’s no surprise that we waited and waited for him to live up to 
his promise. And after joining the NDP, the former minister’s 
just become another chip off the old block. 
 
We look at the Saskatoon Public School Board which said at 
one point that in order for it to meet its budgetary demands, it 
was going to have to lay off more than 40 teachers. This means 
an increased student/teacher ratio in the classrooms. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Public School Board is proud, as we all 
are, proud of the subjects that are offered and their ability to 
offer education to the students. But in order to do that, they’re 
relying on their professional teachers — the people that have 
been trained to provide the education to their students. And yet 
we have them forced to lay off, potentially lay off 40 teachers 
because of the increase in taxes. 
 
Rural taxpayers are extremely disappointed with the NDP’s 
decision not to continue with the farm land property rebate and 
SARM has indicated its disappointment as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this month the government decided they 
were going to have a commission on financing the K to 12 
education. It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that at this 
year’s SARM convention, the Premier told the delegates the 
status quo for education taxes was simply not on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was at that convention and you have no 
idea how excited those rural delegates were when they actually 
heard the people . . . the Premier say that the status quo was not 
on, that the property tax issue had to be addressed and that this 
government was going to be looking at it. It was something that 
they’d been waiting to hear for years and they finally heard the 
words that were magic to their ears. 
 
As one journalist in The Western Producer aptly pointed out in 
a recent special edition on farm education tax, said, and I quote: 
 

There was just one problem when Saskatchewan premier 
Lorne Calvert told rural municipalities . . . last month that 
the reliance on property tax to fund education must change. 
(But) He built expectations that he didn’t immediately 
fulfill. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what we really got was an announcement in this 
year’s budget speech that the government would launch a study 
of how the K to 12 education was funded in Saskatchewan. 
While the idea to look at the problem is a good one, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s something that is way too long overdue. 
 
The Leader of the Official Opposition has already stated at last 
year’s SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 
annual convention that when the Saskatchewan Party forms the 
next government, it’s committed to increasing the province’s 
share for funding to 15 per cent. And what have we got from 
the NDP government? Yet another study. 
 
We all know that education property tax is a serious problem in 
the province. It needs to be addressed now, not studied and not 
dissected. We need action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the continuing trend that we see with the NDP 
government. They act when things hit with a fever pitch. What 
we need in this province is a government that is proactive, not 
reactive and jumping from crisis to crisis trying to put out fires 
that they’ve started due to their own mismanagement. 
 
Neal Hardy, the president of SARM, was incredulous when he 
heard that the NDP government was going to do yet another 
study on this issue. Hardy had this to say to the media, and I 
quote: 
 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

“I heard the Premier say distinctly, and he repeated himself 
a couple of times at our convention, that the status quo . . . 
(was) not on, that education tax on . . . (priorities) was . . . 
not acceptable,” . . . 

 
One can only understand Neal Hardy’s frustration. After all, 
SARM has been lobbying for over 40 years to change this 
system. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in 1964 the SARM convention 
passed a resolution that suggested that, and I quote: 
 

(The) costs of education be borne by society as a whole and 
that revenue for education be derived from an equitable tax 
imposed by the federal and provincial government on the 
ability of pay principle. 

 
Mr. Speaker, now we’ve got to the point where this government 
has shirked its responsibility to the point of paying for 42 per 
cent at the maximum of education, and taxpayers, the people of 
this province who are trying to make a living and own some 
property and get ahead personally, their responsibility is all of a 
sudden to bear the cost of education; 60 per cent of the cost of 
education in most cases. 
 
We think of property owners, we are often thinking about 
farmland owners, the people who own residences as single 
family or multi-dwelling residents. But don’t forget that 
condominiums and apartment owners are also paying that 
education tax. It’s broke up into the monthly rent. But again it’s 
an increased cost because of the high cost of education tax. It’s 
no wonder that people are irate right across this province. 
 
SARM isn’t the only group that’s really had it from this 
provincial government. After the release of this year’s 
provincial budget, there were critics from all around the 
province. The StarPhoenix pointed out, and I quote: 
 

Although education spending was hiked to a record $1.2 
billion . . .  
 

And remember that this was not . . . includes not just K to 12 
education but also post-secondary education. 
 

. . . response from that sector was lukewarm at best . . .  
 

Responses from that sector was not the kind of response the 
government had hoped to have. 
 

. . . with trustees suggesting that . . . increase covered a 
salary hike for teachers . . . (but only) fixed a few leaky 
roofs on schools, . . . (and) didn’t buy any new 
programming or quality improvements. 

 
Mr. Speaker, after the budget came out and we learned that 
there was going to be about $32 million more put into 
education, the releases that came from the government were 
quite . . . they were excited and trying to prove that they really 
cared about education and saying that they had increased the 
funding, and it was going to make a difference to the education 
system in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we really know is that this education . . . the 
amount of increase in this budget really barely covered the 
overall teachers’ salary increases and in most cases it didn’t do 

that. Unless you’re getting 100 per cent of the cost of education 
from the government, there is still a substantial increase 
required from taxpayers. 
 
At the same time we have the Minister of Learning telling us 
that there was an extra $15 million put into community schools, 
there was an extra $1.5 million put into special education, there 
was extra money put in for other areas of education, and yet 
they said they covered the cost of the salary increases. You 
can’t have the . . . You can’t spend the money twice and three 
times like this government is trying to do. 
 
No wonder people are irate and, Mr. Speaker, many school 
divisions have since announced that they’ll be increasing 
property taxes. And we’ve already stated that 66 per cent of the 
school divisions are actually increasing their school taxes this 
. . . or the mill rate this year. 
 
Saskatoon’s two school boards recently approved a 3 per cent 
mill rate increase. Actually, Mr. Speaker, according to Canadian 
Taxpayers Association, on property, and I quote:  
 

. . . are “inherently unfair, complicated and inefficient,” . . . 
 
It’s the type of thing that says because you own property, 
you’re rich. It’s the type of thing that says with the zero . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and the 18 of them in this province, that because 
there’s a high assessment, they have a high ability to pay.  

 
What the people often fail to realize or forget to realize is that 
just because there’s a high assessment, doesn’t mean there’s a 
high cash flow. Sooner or later people would end up having to 
sell their capital assets to pay their taxes, especially the farm 
land . . . in farm land. Right now it can be highly assessed farm 
land and yet with poor crops and the problems in the ranch . . . 
in the beef industry right now, there isn’t a cash flow. 
 
And at the end of this year there’s people are going to have to 
decide which bills they’re going to pay. In most cases the 
education tax and property taxes are bills they do choose to pay 
because they care about their communities. But there’s not . . . 
And they have to decide and some bills aren’t going to get paid. 

 
Mr. Speaker, now it’s not just ranchers that are having a 
problem this year. At the beginning of the month we heard that 
it looked good for agriculture as a whole this year. And yet 
we’re already hearing that there’s a need for rain in many areas, 
the grasshoppers are going to be a concern in many areas, and 
that farmers are already scratching their heads saying, maybe 
with an above-average crop I can make a living this year. We 
cannot base our economy on an above-average crop, although 
the Minister of Finance seems to base our budget on a 6.8 per 
cent increase, which of course is hard to believe as well. 
 
(15:15) 
 
The Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce also has some 
significant concerns. The chamber argues that if this 3 per cent 
mill rate hike becomes a trend, and I quote: 
 

Saskatoon will face a crushing load as we continue to 
develop and attract investment. Not only will that hinder 
our capacity to attract investments and generate jobs, it will 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

 

have an adverse effect on the average homeowner. 
 
And what did the Minister of Learning have to say about that 
kind of mill rate increase? Let’s just say it is not worth 
discussing and that it was embarrassing. 
 
When the reporters asked how a 2 mill increase would affect 
community, the minister characterized such an increase as 
minute and insignificant. She also said, and I quote: 
 

I don’t know what impact it will have in each single 
community as it is assessed.  

 
According to Craig Melvin of the SSTA, a 2 mill increase is 
significant; 10 per cent is unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party caucus has been watching 
with alarm over the last years as we’ve seen the number of 
people leave from this province. Every time one of the young 
people leave from this province — anyone, but especially our 
young people that are the taxpayers — it has a devastating 
effect on this province. 
 
According to Statistics Canada third quarter demographic report 
for the period ending October 1, 2002, Saskatchewan’s 
population decreased by 1,801 persons — the worst quarter of 
population loss since 1991. The province also posted the worst 
out-migration numbers since 1992, with 2,537 people leaving 
Saskatchewan in that three-month period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not just parents that are leaving the school. 
It means their young people are leaving their schools, that we 
have a . . . there was a decrease in the number of students in this 
province, and a decrease in the number of taxpayers. It doesn’t 
mean that there isn’t . . . the need isn’t still there. We have 
fewer people in the classroom and fewer people to pick up the 
tab. 
 
The Minister of Learning’s own numbers have indicated last 
year that they expect to see a decline in the number of students 
in Saskatchewan of 35,000 over the next 10 years. Mr. Speaker, 
with that number of students leaving the province, that means 
the parents have left and that means that property owners in this 
province have left, and that means that there are again fewer 
taxpayers in this province to pick up the burden of education 
tax. And it’s an issue that has to be faced by everyone. 
 
Between October 1, 2001 and September 30, 2002, 8,635 
people left Saskatchewan. Of these people that are voting with 
their feet, 62 per cent of these people were between the ages of 
15 and 34 years. Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of impact that 
we’re going to feel now but we’re going to feel down the road 
even more as our people have left. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the latest round of government-funded polling 
shows that a growing number of Saskatchewan people see 
population loss as the most important issue facing the province. 
 
Our leader said that he was also going to point out that the 
failing policies of the NDP government, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Excuse me. Order. Order. Order. Members 
will have their opportunity to get into the debate I’m sure. 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when the majority of people in 
the province that have had . . . been polled see the decline in the 
population as the worst problem this province is facing, it 
means they do understand the big picture. When the 
government may not, the people in the province do understand 
because they know that there are fewer people to pick up the 
burden of taxes. 
 
I believe the numbers that were given to us not too long ago 
was that in Saskatchewan for every one person that pays more 
into government than receives out, there are seven people that 
are leaning on that one person to actually make their living in 
this province. One person that is a farmer or a business person 
or someone that’s not working for government or getting a 
pension from government or getting some sort of salary, one 
person has to hold seven of us. And I include all of us in this 
room as those seven. That burden is getting higher and it’s 
getting harder to do, Mr. Speaker. It’s the type of thing that 
cannot continue or the province is going to continue to decline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I stated in the motion, high education property 
taxes are not only a burden on the shoulders of the property 
owners in this province, Saskatchewan’s high education tax will 
harm our province’s competitiveness and our ability to grow 
economically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second part of this motion has to be included 
because we cannot look at one issue without the other. We can’t 
look at education as a single issue, just like we can’t look at 
health care or economic development as a single issue because 
they’re intertwined with each other like cogs in a wheel. You 
can’t grow the economy without educated people. You can’t 
have the education system if we don’t have the people that are 
paying the taxes to allow the education system to be there in the 
first place. 
 
According to the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association, 
property taxes have become a major factor in housing 
affordability. Mr. Speaker, the association is finding a vast 
number of situations where taxes . . . where the people’s tax bill 
is as high as their mortgage payment. Many of us maybe aren’t 
into that situation, but we do know of people and we’ve heard 
of people who have tax payments of 6 or $700 a month, the 
type of thing that we definitely cannot afford to do. 
 
The association has stated, and I quote: 
 

“High property taxes affects the affordability of housing 
and skews the move-up market to the point where it’s 
created greater demand on the low end of the market and a 
detrimental affect on housing affordability” . . . 

 
These hefty property taxes have artificially inflated the 
affordability of our starter homes and are keeping people from 
moving up to larger, more expensive homes. 
 
The SREA (Saskatchewan Real Estate Association) also argues 
that although Regina and Saskatoon have low home prices 
compared to other cities in Canada, the level of property tax 
prevents some people from moving into the province. 
 
As stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, people don’t just look at the cost 
of the house. They have to figure out how much it’s going to 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

cost them every month to stay in that house. And the cost of the 
property tax is something that they have to look into in their 
operating budget each month. 
 
They have to look at their electricity bill and their transportation 
and their power and utilities and mortgage payment, but on top 
of that they have to look at the tax bill. And it’s something that 
it’s having a negative impact on the number . . . people who are 
thinking about moving into this province. 
 
The association has noticed, and I’m quoted . . . and I quote: 
 

In many areas of Saskatchewan, this has resulted in reduced 
affordability in the residential markets and a competitive 
disadvantage to attracting investment in . . . commercial, 
industrial and agricultural markets. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, we can’t look at education or 
any department as a stand-alone department. The budget that 
we’re living through right now, and that we’re basing our future 
forecasts and the impact on the people of this province on, is 
based on a 6.8 per cent growth in GDP and a return to an 
average or normal crop year. 
 
Now as I said earlier, there’s a number of farmers in this 
province who already know that an average crop isn’t going to 
do it for them. They’re going to have to have an above-average 
crop just to break even. 
 
The most prudent farmer understands that he never loses a crop 
before it’s seeded and he never sells it before it’s in the bin. 
With this new budget, our new Finance minister is committing 
the province’s finances and its future to growing an average 
crop and selling it all before it’s in the bin. 
 
According to a number of esteemed University of Regina 
professors, this budget is simply not sustainable. Mr. Speaker, 
when we talk about the budget, we have to realize that in order 
for this budget to be something that’s sustainable, it means that 
we have . . . the money has to come in in order to pay the 
education tax, in order to send out to the school divisions, and 
the wheel goes on. 
 
John Allan, professor emeritus in economics, is concerned that 
this NDP government’s budgets are based on the assumption 
the province will see a 6.8 per cent in real growth in GDP. In 
today’s Leader-Post there’s a story entitled, “Profs call plan 
unsustainable,” in which Allan discusses his concern. And I 
quote: 
 

That would be an extremely large GDP increase, Allan 
said, adding that the province’s deficit is likely to rise even 
higher if the economy fails to perform as projected. 

 
Mr. Speaker, another interesting point to note is over the last 
three years a number of ministers on that side of the House have 
stood in their place to lecture the members on the Saskatchewan 
Party that the Saskatchewan’s economy is so well diversified 
that it could sustain its strength. It would not be affected by a 
downward turn in the economy. Yet, Mr. Speaker, we know 
that people like the former minister of Economic Development, 
Janice MacKinnon, and the current minister of GRAA 
(Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs) when he was 

minister of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
would ask the member to tighten up her remarks with . . . and 
confine them to what is the motion, the very motion that she 
herself is sponsoring and save the other stuff for another debate. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I definitely will do 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess what I was hoping that the member’s 
opposite would realize is that we can’t just talk about one part 
of government by itself. We can’t talk about the amount . . . 
about education or education tax without involving the 
economy. We have to know that money that’s spent in this 
province — whether it’s through Crowns or through the 
General Revenue Fund — is the taxpayers’ dollars, and 
government has decided their priorities are . . . their priorities 
make the decision on where we’re going to be spending money. 
 
And right now with . . . when this government has decided not 
to fund education to the 60 per cent that it was a few years ago 
or even to 50 per cent, then it has an impact on every aspect of 
our economy and every part of our lives. It’s something that we 
all have to live with. 
 
And we, as the 58 members in this House, are supposedly 
making decisions, but in actuality 31 people in this province 
decide how much money’s going to be spent on education. 
Thirty-one people decide if there’s going to be an increase in 
education tax, and 31 people decide if the . . . if taxes are going 
to increase on a farm where they’re already having a hard time 
making ends meet. And they’re going to have a hard time 
deciding whether they can pay their increase in SaskEnergy rate 
and their increase in tax rate and their education portion of their 
bill. 
 
And a lot of people in this room maybe don’t understand that 
the decisions that we make impact everybody on a daily basis, 
and we have the future of the province in our hand. And that’s 
the responsibility that we all have. It’s something that we all 
have to bear, thinking about that. We can’t just shrug it off. It’s 
something that we know that we are affecting the future of this 
province. And the way this province has not been growing in 
this last 10 years means that we’re doing something wrong in 
this province. When we have an out-migration of people, when 
we have a down turn . . . in the GDP, that means that things are 
not going the way they should be going. 
 
Everyone in this room wants to see an increase in the number of 
students. Everyone in this room wants to see the property tax 
bill decrease. And everyone in this room knows that in order to 
have a bright tomorrow we have to have a skilled workforce. 
 
Well we’re not going about it in a way that’s going to make a 
difference to the people of this province. We’re not going about 
it in a way that’s going to show our children that they can stay 
in this province and raise their own children and . . . or else 
bring our grandchildren back again. 
 
It’s the kind of thing that we all have to think about seriously 
when we raise our hand to decide that this is a good way to 
spend money in this year’s budget. When a decision is made to 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

 

invest money outside of this province, every time we do that we 
have to decide: would we be better off spending it on something 
that would make an immediate difference to the future of the 
province and to the future of our children? 
 
Education is the key to the future. It is the future success of this 
province that every one of us has to bear. . . has to think about 
that responsibility. And we have to understand that when a 
decision is made to spend $8 million in a mega bingo, it may 
not be in the best interests of the property owners in this 
province or the taxpayers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to bring to your attention the fact that 
there are different school divisions around this province that are 
finding . . . that are having an impact on their viability, on the 
work they’re doing, because of the decisions the government is 
making on property taxes. 
 
There’s a school division of Englefeld, Englefeld Protestant 
school division that was started not too many years ago. It was 
actually closed down by the Humboldt Rural School Division, 
and then after one year it was reopened under the auspices of a 
separate school with provisions under The Sask Education Act. 
The school since its opening has K to 12 curriculum that’s 
enrolled under the direction of the Englefeld Protestant school 
division. Needless to say the school is vital to the community 
and to businesses and to the manufacturing plants in Englefeld. 
Englefeld and area ratepayers are facing a challenge by the 
Humboldt Rural School Division, using the solicitor of the 
SSTA, on its tax roll. 
 
We actually have the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to look at a 
school division that thinks that they can actually open up and 
grow in this province. They know that they can bring students 
into the province because there’s, the economic development in 
that area is such that they can actually hire people. 
 
The manufacturing plant employs a great number of people. 
And when those people move into the province or into the 
business, one of the first things they ask is there a school? Is the 
school a part of the community so that I can raise my family 
close to where I’m working? And when the school division says 
yes not only is it here, it’s growing, it’s sustainable, then they 
actually . . . And they give that business a chance to grow. But 
in so many places where there’s a cutback in education, schools 
are forced to close, and school divisions come to us and say: 
with rural revitalization, how can we possibly say that we’re 
going to keep all of rural Saskatchewan growing when we cut 
back on the fundamentals like education, health care, and the 
infrastructure? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to a remark that the Minister of 
Learning made to me a while ago when I talked about funding, 
again the funding that was given in this year’s budget. We 
talked about an amount of money that was coming in; they said 
it increased funding by $32.3 million. There was $477.6 million 
in the 2002-2003 budget, and this year it was 509. But there 
was special warrants for money in September for 9.2 million 
and January for 6.9 million. That’s a total of $6.2 million — 
half of the total amount of increase that the teachers’ salaries. 
 

The calendar year for increase with teachers’ salary is 23.3 
million and they already have 6.9 million of that. In order to 
keep the commitment, the government is going to have to cover 
the teachers’ salary costs; they’re going to need $16.2 million 
by the end of December. 
 
The minister was . . . I wanted the minister to commit to paying 
the other $7 million that we required to pay for the balance of 
the teachers’ salaries that was negotiated for the first three 
months of the next year. And the minister said that they have 
committed to paying the complete cost in 2002; they’ve 
committed to paying the complete cost in 2003; but they have 
not done so for the 2004 budgeting. That remains to be seen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what that means is that even though the minister 
has talked about covering the complete salary increase, if you 
retroactively see that the money was paid for some of last year’s 
salary, there’s going to be money that’s going to be needed by 
December this year in order to cover the teachers’ . . . 
(inaudible) . . . And it’s going, school boards are already saying, 
okay I’ve only got money up until the end of December, I 
wonder what the government’s going to do. Last year they put 
through special warrants twice in order to pay for the increase, 
and we’re waiting again with bated breath to see if they’re, 
there’s going to be an increase in . . . if there’ll be special orders 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had . . . there’s a number of people that have 
written articles about property taxes in this province and some 
of them I think it’s important that it’s brought to the attention of 
the members and people that are interested in seeing this. 
Murray Lyons, a business editor of The StarPhoenix, said in 
one of his articles that talked about the province’s root, the 
province roots of education problem said: 
 

The problem with education taxes in the province is mostly 
the fault of the provincial government. That’s where the 
spotlight should . . . (shine). I hope the NDP doesn’t 
trumpet its personal income tax cuts in the coming election 
campaign. Because the truth is for every dollar we’ve saved 
on income tax (in) the past three years, we’ve paid it out in 
property tax increases. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s not a surprise to the people of the 
province. They’ve known that on one hand there’s supposed to 
be a decrease in income tax but on the other hand their property 
taxes have increased. It just goes from one pocket to another. 
There’s really no decrease in the amount of money that we’re 
spending to keep this government alive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have an article that talks about, 
“Education tax increases irritate business groups”: 
 

The Canadian Taxpayers Federation and local business 
representatives (have) voiced concern over rising education 
taxes . . . after Saskatoon’s two school boards approved . . . 
(2.9) per cent . . . increases this . . . (year). 

 
(Schools are going up . . .) “School taxes are going up . . . 
and up . . . (and) the number of the students and the 
population of Saskatchewan is . . . (declining). 

 
He says: 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

. . . taxes on property are “inherently unfair, complicated, 
and inefficient,” and that the fact (that) “school taxes are 
rising out of control” has a lot do with the formula the 
provincial government has adopted for funding schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the province . . . he’s indicated that the province 
must stop downloading on to local property taxpayers. It’s the 
kind of thing I know we hear every day and I’m sure the 
government members hear as well because it’s an issue that’s of 
big concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is many issues that we can be discussing 
when it comes to education tax and I know that the government 
has decided that they need a commission to actually do the 
work for them at this time. We have a lot of respect for Ray 
Boughen, the man who is actually heading this independent 
commission, the gentleman that is going to be looking at the 
complex issues that are facing government and each of us when 
it comes to funding education in the province. 
 
They are looking at the appropriate balance between provincial 
and school board contributions; it’s one issue. They’re also 
looking at the appropriate balance between the use of property 
tax and other sources of taxation. They’re looking at fairness 
and equity in financing education among the existing classes of 
property tax payers, that is the agricultural, the commercial, and 
the residential. And they’re also looking at the wide variation in 
the fiscal capacity of school divisions to raise tax revenues and 
the variations in assessment and spending per student among 
school divisions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, every one of us agrees that all of these 
issues are something that has to be looked at. But at the end of 
the day we have to . . . what people are saying is that education 
is the responsibility of government. All of these issues can be 
looked at and should be dealt, looked at. But what we really 
have to do is ensure that the government increases the size of 
the pie that’s given to education. 
 
In the last few years the only thing we’ve seen the government 
do is take the same pie and cut the pieces into various sizes, 
depending on whether they want to benefit agricultural people, 
whether they want to spend more money on community 
schools, whatever they want to do. That’s a decision that’s 
made in the Department of Finance. 
 
The real decision that should be made is how big that pie is 
going to be. We have to increase the amount of money that’s 
spent on education in this province if we’re really going to 
make a difference. It’s the government’s responsibility as the 
elected people’s responsibility to ensure that the people have 
more money to spend on education, not just the local property 
tax payers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a responsibility that comes with this job 
that I feel every one of us has to relook at or rethink. The only 
way that we can really grow this province by the 100,000 
people that we all know we need to do in the next 10 years is by 
having an educated, skilled workforce. We can only do that by 
ensuring that every child in this province has the education that 
they need to be part of a growing economy. 
 
I’m not just talking . . . And that includes our Aboriginal 

children who right now are dropping out of school before 
graduating, at an alarming numbers. It’s an issue that has to be 
dealt with at the provincial level as well as the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) level. I 
understand that the minister has an M of U (memorandum of 
understanding) signed with FSIN discussing children’s . . . 
discussing education. It’s something that we wholeheartedly 
applaud. But to just do another study or another memorandum 
doesn’t mean that we’re actually going to solve the problem. 
 
The bureaucrats and the people like us in this province are not 
the ones that are making the difference in education. It’s the 
teachers, it’s the trustees, it’s the parents who make choices on 
where their children are going to be going to school. They’re 
the ones that are going to be making the difference and we have 
to give them the tools, and the tools means the money, Mr. 
Speaker. We can’t just say . . . We can’t let them decide that if 
they need more programming for their children, if they need 
computers, if they need equipment, if they have to repair the 
roof of the school, it has to be done partially with government 
money. It can’t all be done on the backs of taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
For too many years we have expected that property tax payers 
in this province are going to bear the brunt of education. It’s not 
their responsibility; it’s our responsibility, the government’s 
responsibility, and everyone in this room. We have to know that 
we were elected to make the decision on how to grow this 
province. Whether on this side of the House or that side of the 
House, we all know that we need a growing population, an 
expanding tax base if we’re finally going to get this province 
going. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Saskatchewan is less than 100 years old, Mr. 
Speaker, and yet we have, our population isn’t a lot higher than 
it was in the 1940s, and the dreams and goals that our 
grandparents had and the pioneers had when they moved to this 
province aren’t being seen. 
 
We have to see it . . . They knew at that time when they started 
this province that there was some jobs the government had to 
do, some jobs they couldn’t do themselves. They could build 
their own house, they could clear their land, they could sell their 
grain. They could do whatever it took to keep their life going, 
but they couldn’t supply their own health care, they couldn’t 
supply their own infrastructure, and they couldn’t do their own 
teaching. They needed an education system to ensure that their 
students had . . . their children had every opportunity to be the 
very best they could, not just in Saskatchewan, but in Canada 
and in the world. 
 
And that meant that they have a . . . They were looking to a 
level of government that was beyond what individuals could do 
to supply that. We have not seen this happen in the last 10 years 
with this government. We’ve not seen it happen, especially in 
the last six years, where we see the opportunity that this 
government’s had with the dollars that have come in. 
 
In the 1990s when there was economic growth right throughout 
Canada, Saskatchewan had some. Not to the same degree that 
other provinces had, but we had some. But what we did do is 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

 

decide that we’re going to spend the money outside of this 
province. We’re going to . . . We decided to spend money on 
ventures that did not benefit the people of this province. We 
forgot that the real future of this province was in the hands of 
our children. It’s not in the hands of government, it’s not in the 
hands of Crown corporations, it’s in the hands of the parents 
and the children that are going to grow this economy. 
 
We have to ensure that our children not only are educated here, 
but they stay here. Too many of our young people are educated 
and then we export them. We allow them to move across the 
province, around the world and they grow Alberta, and they 
grow Ontario, and they grow BC, and they go all places or 
every place around the world, but they’re not growing 
Saskatchewan. And we need them to come home; we need them 
to stay here . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — We need to ensure that the government that . . . 
understands their own responsibility. It’s not up to us to tax 
everybody until they don’t have a penny left in their pockets 
and leave the province. And then we’ll say, it’s okay, we’re 
going to invest your money wisely for you and the dividends 
will make this province run. Well it hasn’t worked. It hasn’t 
worked since the 1940s and it hasn’t worked today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — We’ve been trying this archaic type of 
government now since the ’40s and it’s not working. Every 
place in the world has tried it or have seen it, and they all know 
but here in Saskatchewan it’s not working. 
 
We have to do something different. The definition of insanity is 
doing the same thing over and over again expecting something 
different. Well, we’ve been doing the same thing for a long 
time, Mr. Speaker, and we know on this side of the House it’s 
not going to change unless we make a significant change to the 
way we’re governing — and that includes education, that 
includes health care, that includes the infrastructure, and 
includes the way we’re spending taxpayers’ dollars from Crown 
corporations. 
 
We have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, as we turn in . . . we go 
into the new century, to ensure that Saskatchewan is the shining 
star in Canada. We have an opportunity to show that, right 
around the world, people can start seeing that Saskatchewan has 
the natural resources; we have the people resources. We have 
the potential to outshine every place in the world, but we 
haven’t done it. 
 
Everything that we’ve done in the last 10 years has not been . . . 
has not grown the province. We know that education is key to 
the part . . . to growing the province and we know that in able to 
pay for education, we have to ensure that government, not 
property owners, are going to pay for that education system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I know that 
there are other people that would like to get into this debate, 
Mr. Speaker, but . . . So I’m going to let them. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move this motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the unreasonable burden put 
on the shoulders of property owners in the province due to 
the provincial government’s off-loading of the cost of 
education on to the local tax base and further recognizes 
that Saskatchewan’s high property taxes harm our 
province’s competitiveness and ability to grow 
economically. 

 
And this motion will be seconded by the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — It’s with great pleasure that I enter into 
debate today, and am happy to second the motion which I shall 
now read. The motion reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the unreasonable burden put 
on the shoulders of property owners in the province due to 
the provincial government’s off-loading of the cost of 
education on to the local tax base and further recognizes 
that Saskatchewan’s high property taxes harm our 
province’s competitiveness and ability to grow 
economically. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t have anything closer to home for the 
Kindersley riding when this year alone we have three school 
closures slated for the end of June. This is absolutely shameful. 
We have the school . . . elementary school at Brock in the 
Rosetown School Division which is a negative grant division; 
we have the school of Denzil in the Lands West Division; and 
the school of Major in the Lands West Division. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that in being in contact with 
members from these local school boards and the district school 
boards, this is a heart-wrenching decisions placed on these 
communities and it guts the rural infrastructure and economy. 
 
There is a . . . The school in Denzil, Mr. Speaker, has just been 
upgraded. It is a beautiful facility. And we happen to have, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s an intern working in this Legislative Assembly 
during this session that was a graduate of that school and is now 
a graduate from the University of Saskatchewan. This school 
has produced excellent students, it has a great staff, and it is the 
centre of their community. It’s the Sacred Heart School. 
 
And what will happen, Mr. Speaker, if this school closes? Well 
first of all it’s going to move children. They’re going to be on 
the bus a lot longer on very unsafe highways in some cases. 
And further to that, anyone that has any equity in any business 
or any house in the town of Denzil, that will be destroyed 
outright. 
 
And it’s a shame, and it’s completely shameful, Mr. Speaker, 
that the provincial government has off-loaded this burden on to 
the Lands West School Division to have to keep asking for tax 
rate increases, especially the Lands West division with regards 
to the Major School. 
 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

Antelope Park, one of the RMs, provides about half of the 
taxation for the entire division due to the oil wells and oil 
revenue there. Yet this provincial government is willing to go 
forth and say to them, we’re going to close your school. It’s all 
right to have 5-year-old children riding the bus an hour and 
one-half down deplorable highways to get to school and that 
they’re supposed to, they’re supposed to be able to learn from 
this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a negative grant board, as we have three out of 
four of the school divisions in the Kindersley riding, are boards 
that raise all of their funds from local taxation. They receive 
absolutely no funding from the provincial government. 
 
And it really hurts in the west central area when we see how the 
government has ignored the area and taxpayers are asked again 
and again to come back to pick their pockets to again pay for 
something that they believe is important. But they look at all of 
the money that is leaving the area, that is leaving the area 
through the oil revenues and being redistributed through the 
province, and we find that it’s very, it’s very unfair that this 
money is not staying locally. And hence we have people voting 
with their feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the 1999 general election to the 2002 
by-election, we had 1,000 fewer voters in the Kindersley riding. 
And that’s because, that’s because the rural infrastructure under 
this NDP government has completely collapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I think with regards to the 
motion before us and to really understand the aspect of tax, and 
keeping in mind the interest that I know that the member from 
Athabasca shares in this subject, I would like to go through a 
historical perspective of the development of taxation; how 
taxation relative to property has been an anachronistic system as 
to date in an industrial and post-industrial economy. And so I 
hope that, Mr. Speaker, the House or the Assembly can be 
enlightened from this necessary historical devilling to make 
sure that we have the correct context. 
 
I think that if we look at taxation first and foremost, we find 
that it does not arise until we have a state system, which at least 
entails a monarchy or principality system. We can see that from 
the hunter-gatherer society, there’s no use for taxation. 
 
It’s frankly a matter of a barter system. You cannot get into a 
taxation system until we’re at the level of having at least 
currency — currency being, having something demonstrative of 
value. And we know that this begins, Mr. Speaker, in the Tigris, 
Euphrates, with the Phoenicians coming up with the first 
currency. And this is required that we had to get to a level of 
metallurgy, being able to allow for barter to have a substance 
which can . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview on his feet? 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in your 
west gallery, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 
Assembly, 23 students from St. Mark School with their 
teachers, James Strasky and Dan Pawluk. I understand there are 
seven chaperones. 
 
And St. Mark’s is in the Premier’s constituency; once was in 
Fairview, a constituency which is mine. So I welcome all 
students and I look forward to meeting with them and I hope 
they’ve enjoyed their tour and their drive to Regina. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Arm River on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Asking leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to welcome also another school 
group here from the town of Windthorst School. A number of 
11 students with teacher, Robin Roy Hampton. 
 
I hope that they enjoy the proceedings here — we’re in an 
interesting debate going on right now — and that I will . . . me 
and a couple of maybe other MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) will have a talk with them after and maybe answer 
some of their questions in the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 8 — Property Taxes 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To return to the 
Phoenicians — and I can see that I have the full attention of the 
member from Athabasca — with regards to the printing of 
coinage and the discovery of metallurgy allowing for a denotion 
of a monetary value in something that does not deteriorate, 
hence we see the rise of silver coinage, copper coinage, bronze 
coinage, and of course gold coinage. 
 
But what’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s not until we 
move out of biblical times into the Middle Ages that we see 
taxation being applied to property. In the early . . . As we see 
from Exodus, taxation is applied first and foremost to animals, 
even to some extent to slaves. So there isn’t a direct linkage, 
Mr. Speaker, between property and taxation with regards to 
property as landed property, i.e., real estate. Instead, we still 
have a . . . it’s the productive value — so many jugs of wine, so 
many goats. And I can see that from . . . the member from Swift 
Current agrees that my biblical interpretation in the number of 
goats is absolutely correct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the movement really towards landed and property 
tax occurs in the Middle Ages and there’s a correlation between 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

 

this and the setting in of the Crusades. Of course we all know 
that during Roman times there was taxation as well. But again 
this was production tax, by and large. It would be the amount of 
wine taken out of a vineyard, or the amount of olives pressed. It 
wasn’t linked directly to acreage. 
 
We see though that the movement into the Middle Ages, that as 
individuals became tied to landed bases through serfdom and 
whatnot and the development of the feudal system, that the 
actual property starts to denote the production value. And this is 
measured first and foremost in acreage, related to the number of 
persons on it, the production value, the number of cattle, etc., 
etc. 
 
Where we start to see property tax becoming more and more set 
in is with regards to the feudal system when we really get into 
the aspect of the Crusades and there is the need to raise money 
for leaving the local premise to be able to go forth and fight 
wars. The money hence had to be converted into coinage and 
we know that history teaches us the actual amount of coinage 
and whatnot in the Middle Ages was very, very miniscule, but it 
was tied directly to property. 
 
And that relates directly back to the motion, Mr. Speaker and 
now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we’re seeing that the 
beginning of the tying of property tax for whatever use — in 
this case it’s education — actually has its roots in the medieval 
feudal system, coming out from the Crusades; the need to raise 
monies locally but to be transferred all the way up, in the case 
of the Crusades to be able to wage war. 
 
There’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that this transcended into the 
British common law and was very much a measurement for 
being able to equate value to tax. And there was no doubt that 
this existed for quite some time. We see really there isn’t a 
change in the economic structure, even though we get into the 
mercantile structure in the 16 and 1700s, but the base of the 
world economies was still first and foremost agrarian. The 
taxation was first and foremost agrarian. We see from our own 
history from the British Isles that this was again collected on a 
semi-feudal system from whence it was, from whence it 
descended. 
 
We start to see a real change in this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
the Corn Laws were repealed and we got a change with the 
beginning of the British Empire, that we had Lord Townsend 
collectivize the properties in rural England, and from that put a 
bunch of persons out of work and the taxes base for the 
economy moved into the cities and correlating with this, was we 
get the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. And if we put a 
date on this, the fair date would probably be around 1850 that 
we really see a marked change in the nature of where taxes to 
run a government are derived from. Prior to that date I would 
say it would be fair to say the vast majority of taxes were 
derived from the agrarian production related directly to real 
estate. 
 
Following that the mercantile system and industry starts to 
become the larger generator of the economy. And we see that 
the economy since that time forward has continued to grow and 
continues to grow at an abundant pace. And really from that 
point up until the 1950s, we see greater and greater movement 
away from an agrarian-based property taxation being the first 

and foremost means for government to raise revenue. 
 
In our own province’s situation, being a very agrarian-based 
province, it was natural that this would be the first and foremost 
place that we would try to derive taxes from. I know that on our 
own farm, we happen to own one or two school quarters. There 
was the province in its early days set aside school quarters to be 
able to generate revenues to produce local schools. 
 
We have a local school only four miles away still standing as an 
historical site, the Royal Canadian School, which has been 
upgraded lately by my neighbours Joe and Brad Guidinger. And 
this is a nice building that demonstrates when children used to 
walk to school, everyone was around, and you’re kind of in a 
4-mile radius. 
 
The point was at that point that was a very fair mechanism for 
determining where taxation should come from because 
everyone was in the same boat. We had quarter section farms. 
There would be one family per quarter, or one family per half; 
everyone was paying their fair share; there were many children. 
 
After 1950, Mr. Speaker, we really . . . in the post-Second 
World War era we see that property continually fails to be a real 
good demonstration on the ability to pay. 
 
The fact of the matter is, the Western world has taken on the 
position with regards to taxation that ability to pay should be 
linked to how much is earned on a raw percentage basis. And 
the common term for this is progressive tax. 
 
And we see this reflected, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our taxation 
rates, or income tax, and whatnot. So this really gets to the heart 
of the matter today, begging the question of why would we be 
using this anachronistic system to pay for education, this 
especially in lieu of the current agricultural crisis that we have 
seen. 
 
In my area we’ve had three years of drought. The year 2000 we 
had cereal crop production but it was still a drought with 
regards to the pulse crop productions. We now have this mad 
cow scare in front of us which is devastating the beef market. 
And again there’s often going to be a correlation between the 
cattle owners and property owners and no correlation on the 
other side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the ability to pay this. 
 
So the question comes down to really a question of fairness. Is 
it fair that when you have a government that has put various 
policies in place that have caused 16 quarters of depopulation, 
debt? At some point the people left there . . . fewer of them are 
left holding the burden and even though that there’s no 
correlation that the production values of those lands might not 
be able to carry that burden. We’ve had tax revolts throughout 
the province on specifically this issue. 
 
And the reason that this issue exists, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
due to the fact that the government opposite has very skewed 
priorities, not only on education but on the economy in general. 
And if we go down into the last few lines of what this motion is 
speaking to, we recognize that Saskatchewan’s high property 
taxes harm our province’s competitiveness and ability to grow 
economically. And this seems to be a fact that’s been 
completely missed on the members opposite. 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

(16:00) 
 
It seems, on a repetitive stage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
members opposite still cling to a belief that an industrialized 
economy can be managed from the state and from the state 
centre. We on this side of the House recognize, with the world 
over, that this just is not the case. 
 
It has been proven since 1991 with the collapse of the Berlin 
Wall. The post-World War II world history demonstrates there 
was a battle for two economic models. There was a 
state-controlled model and there was a free enterprise model. 
One of those models, Mr. Deputy Speaker, won that battle and 
it won it unequivocally and without apology. And that is the 
free enterprise model. 
 
And, I mean, it has been championed not by one nation alone 
but by the democratic free world. And the linkage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, between a free enterprise economy and basic freedoms 
that many of us believe in and champion has been a direct 
correlation, whereas a state-controlled economy has seen some 
of the greatest abuses in human rights, anti-democratic, 
anti-humanitarian positions. And we’ve seen that one works, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and one doesn’t. 
 
This really gets us . . . begs the question again how, when we 
have one system that has prevailed, how is it possible, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we have a government opposite which has 
a party Web site and on their party Web site they have a 
manifesto that says they want to eradicate capitalism. It would 
seem to me that this is something that is anachronistic. It may 
have had some merit, though I think not, in an idealistic time 
during the Great Depression but it certainly has no merit today. 
And it really speaks to the mentality of this side of this 
government and our ability to be competitive and grow 
economically. 
 
When this is the first and foremost thing that companies coming 
to invest in our province — companies that would invest 
monies and possibly thereby grow the economy to have persons 
which could pay taxes, which could then be shared and we 
could keep rural schools open, for example, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — they’re going to be scared off by this because they 
know that at the heart there are members, there are 30 members 
opposite that believe that first and foremost the state should be 
in control of the economy. 
 
And this has been the disaster, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has 
held this province back from being the shining star in 
Confederation that it really should be, from seeing our growth 
in population from the province’s inception in 1905 through to 
the late 1920s from tens of thousands of people, up to 1 million 
people, and then we have stopped. And we have stopped, and it 
has been shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It has been absolutely 
shameful when we take into consideration the abundance of 
natural resources that we have, the 47 per cent of the arable 
farm land in this country, one-third of the world’s best uranium 
in the world in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, oil reserves, 
gas reserves, potash — one-third of the world’s potash — and 
what have we done with this? 
 
We’ve squandered the opportunity because someone at some 
fundamental level was so insecure as to believe that somebody 

may make a profit from this and that it may not be shared 
directly with me. 
 
So rather, rather than do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see a 
situation where this government makes choices that leave 
taxation high and leave taxation on the wrong areas. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the . . . Just with regards to the uranium in this 
province and the electricity that it generates worldwide, there 
should be . . . Had this not been squandered away, had we had 
the refining here, had we had reactors here, had we had the full 
control of this material from the time it’s taken out of the 
ground until the time it’s disposed of, we could have had a 
much, much larger, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a much, much larger 
heritage fund that would pay for all the schools in this province. 
 
But it’s been ideology from the other side that has watched this 
dream slip away, and to a point where we hope that it’s not lost 
forever, but we are on the brink. And we see 16 consecutive 
quarters where former citizens of this province agree with us. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very, very problematic again when we 
get back to property tax — property tax related directly to 
education. So the idea again, as has been demonstrated from the 
Phoenicians to the Crusades and forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that this tax is supposed to be linked to the ability to pay. 
That’s what we believe in a post-modernist society, that 
taxation should be rendered on those persons or entities that 
have the ability to make the payments, and at that point it 
should be redistributed so that it can be used for the common 
good. It should not be placed — it should not be placed — on 
persons or entities that fail to have the ability to pay. 
 
We can imagine the hollering and the outrage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if it was ever proposed by any party that we should 
have a tax on homeless people. And the reason that we would 
have this hollering is because that would be wrong. And it’s 
obvious, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there’s persons in that 
unfortunate situation don’t have the ability to pay, and 
exploiting that is morally and fundamentally wrong. Which 
begs the question is, what have we seen from the NDP 
government over the past number of years in their treatment of 
our farmers who are property owners, who have been 
struggling? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we now have a situation in Saskatchewan 
where 80 per cent of the farm land is farmed by 20 per cent of 
the farmers. And this means, over the long term, that our ag 
sector, though it may not shrink in actual dollar wise, it will 
shrink in the number of jobs and good jobs that it’s allowing 
persons to have. And further, it’s going to cause shrinkage in 
the number of actual ownerships in individual farms. 
 
And a large part of this is due to the fact that this government 
has overtaxed individuals and forced small producers out of 
business. And that’s shameful because at the end of the day that 
also forces large producers into financial hardships. 
 
And I give you a direct example of this in township 24, 27 in 
the RM of Chesterfield where we have no, where we have no 
residents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with school children. Now 
perhaps the Hayes family but I think their children are about to 
graduate. 
 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

 

And the fact of the matter is, is that you have land which is 
assessed; it is assessed in a manner which allows to calculate 
thought productive ability. But this land happens to be so far 
removed from the elevator and rail system, it happens to be so 
far removed from any working, operating hospital, it happens to 
be so far removed from a good highway or, in this case, 
adequate schooling, that no one cares to live down there. 
 
And hence the capital assets in that particular township, relative 
to their productive capacity, have systemically been low and 
have been falling. And what this means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 
we expand this across the province in a gutted rural sector, is 
that even farmers owning property, owning large farms, their 
capital assets are going to depreciate because those assets are 
not supported by anything which exists around them. 
 
Just to demonstrate this point outright, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there is very, very little value on a skyscraper in the middle of 
the Congo — location, location, location. 
 
We had a province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which had a great road 
system, which had infrastructure, which had, which had small 
communities all over. And the gross productive capacity of that 
may have been smaller, but the point is there was more persons 
to share in the tax burden, and the economy as a whole, 
proportionate to the individuals, was more participatory not 
less. 
 
Current NDP policies on taxing property excessively means, at 
the end of the day, fewer persons are going to be left paying the 
bill for everyone else. And this means that they’ll . . . that the 
services will suffer. Members opposite don’t understand that. 
 
They don’t understand this when in our . . . in the riding of 
Kindersley, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are three rural school 
closures slated for the end of June this year. And why is that? Is 
it because the local areas around them aren’t productive areas? 
Well no, that’s not the case. 
 
The fact of the matter is is that the high level of taxation has 
forced a number of persons to move out. Where our population, 
specifically in the Major and Denzil areas, should have been 
robust and well off, unfortunately all the oil servicing — 
mechanics and everything that goes around the oil patch 
industry — have chosen to relocate in Oyen or in Provost. And 
so little towns like Denzil and Major have suffered the massive 
exodus where their own citizenry will move only 50 miles away 
to gain from the taxation breaks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And hence, when there’s fewer people left in town owning 
houses to pay tax — to pay tax of either kind, whether it be 
income tax or a property tax on a residential property — the 
school still needs to be maintained, the teachers still need to be 
paid, the bus drivers need to be paid, the buses need to be 
maintained. And so that this continually falls back onto the 
local school boards or the district school board having to raise 
the money from a local property tax base, even though there’s 
few of them and there’s a poorer and poorer ability to pay. It’s 
completely unfair and it has been going on much too long. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to change gears here a 
little bit and talk about the second part of the motion which 
“recognizes Saskatchewan’s high property taxes harm our 

province’s competitiveness and ability to grow economically.” 
 
If we look at one thing in the world that allows for economic 
growth, there are a plethora of things that are necessary. First 
and foremost, you need peace. You need a stable government. 
Without this, investment is really not part and parcel to follow. 
 
I’m very happy to expand some of my comments directly for 
the member from Regina South as I know that he is going to be 
thrilled with some of the content as he has a keen intellect and 
has, I know, been awaiting with bated breath some of what 
we’re going to speak of here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the 
economy. 
 
So the fact of the matter is after having peaceful and stable 
government which first and foremost would be determined by a 
democratic system in our minds, after that you need a certain 
level of infrastructure which all of Canada has thankfully been 
blessed with. And following that you need something 
productive-wise that is going to attract investment, otherwise 
people, citizens are not going to exist there for no reason 
whatsoever. 
 
So again, Saskatchewan has a great abundance of natural 
resources, of human resources. We have all the elements to 
make an economy grow and function. But in a post-industrial 
economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in and of itself is not 
enough. 
 
The reality is, is that our competitive field is now global. 
Everything that Saskatchewan has to offer, and there are a great 
many things, have to be weighed in . . . have to be weighed in 
complete balance with what is to offer elsewhere in the world. 
We can see this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from everything from 
high-tech right down to the most basic of production in wheat 
or barley. 
 
The point is, in a global environment and now that we have the 
telecommunications ability to access markets globally, we have 
the infrastructure to move products globally. Whether they be, 
whether they be products, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which are of a 
physical nature or of an intellectual nature, the fact of the matter 
remains the marketplace for all those products can exist 
anywhere in the world and the place to provide those products 
also exists anywhere in the world. 
 
So what we have learned from the dominance of the market 
economy over a centrally planned economy is at the end of the 
day the market will determine what is first and foremost the 
answer, and the best price winning out on questions of 
economic decision. 
 
We can see this, this is . . . really equates right back to any 
first-year economic course which is determined by the classic 
phrase of supply and demand, where we have value will be 
equated to something that is wanted — either it be a goods or a 
service — and the equation will be in direct relationship to the 
demand. If the supply lowers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s likely 
that the demand will increase because it becomes harder to 
obtain. 
 
So with regards to that and the way that Saskatchewan’s 
economy functions globally, any product, any service that we 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

provide will be relative to those terms. But we’re not just 
competing with Manitoba, Alberta, North Dakota, and 
Montana, we’re competing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with New 
Zealand, with Australia, with China, with India, the former 
Soviet Union. We’re competing everywhere the globe over. 
 
Hence, and we get down into the basic business model, there’s a 
cost of production for . . . whether it be a product or whether it 
be a service. And that cost inherent in it is going to be what it 
physically costs to produce something — man hours — but a 
great part of that cost is going to be the tax structure in which 
the product has to be produced and factored in and sold for. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hence when margins become slimmer and slimmer, which they 
do in a global marketplace because the market is able to 
determine, the buyer is able to determine, what is the best 
product for the buyer. And at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there’ll be a number of factors that determine that. 
Some of them are going to be consistency of supply, quality of 
supply, the ability to deliver, all these things. But all those 
things being equal, probably the largest factor in and of itself is 
going to be the price. 
 
Hence we go back, the determination of the price is in part 
going to be determined by the level of taxation under the 
jurisdiction in which a product or service was produced. So if 
we have a situation where we have a high taxation jurisdiction, 
it in and of itself makes that product uncompetitive. Somewhere 
else has to find out about . . . There has to be margins made up. 
It’s either going to be taken out of the profit that is going to be 
made on the product or service, or it’s going to be taken out on 
one of the other factors. 
 
Our government seems oblivious . . . our provincial government 
seems oblivious of this fact. And we can see this specifically 
again related back to the property tax issue and the way that our 
farmers and rural Saskatchewan residents have been treated 
over the past 10 years. 
 
One of the great changes in the farm economy in this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that changed those factors of production, 
was the rescinding of the Crow subsidy for transportation of 
grain. It was thought historically by the federal government that 
as farmers we were so far away from the market that the federal 
government would pick up the cost of transportation for our 
cereal grains to the coast, whether it be to market at Thunder 
Bay or to Vancouver or for a short time at Churchill, Manitoba. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that from that — 
that was rescinded in 1995 — there was a small monetary 
payout to try to compensate some landowners. But since that 
time we have had variable freight rates and it has been a huge 
increase in the cost of production for our farmers. This in 
essence has become for cereal crop growers, especially in the 
Kindersley riding where we’re right on the division of the 
length between Thunder Bay and Vancouver, that it’s become 
as high as a third of the gross production. 
 
So hence we see that on top of the changing competitive nature 
over the last six or seven years, the NDP has also felt it fine to 
continually raise property taxes or force, rather, the local boards 

to raise property taxes, to raise the mill rates and make the local 
persons — a smaller tax base — shoulder more and more of the 
burden. 
 
We can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we should be really 
investigating the nature of the way that property taxes are 
levied, and they’re levied under legislation that allows the 
municipalities to — and the school boards — to set a mill rate. 
A mill rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being of course from the Latin 
. . . (inaudible) . . . coming from the one one-thousandth part. 
So essentially it is: a number is taken or a number is designated 
by the assessment board of a piece of property, and one 
one-thousandth of that is taken to determine that that would be 
the mill, what the value of taxation per mill should be. 
 
So if you have a piece of property that is determined to be 
valued by the assessment board at $40,000, one mill would be 
equivalent to $40. And we see that over the number of years, in 
the negative grant boards there’s been an increasing need to 
increase the number of mills to be able to meet the needs of 
running their school divisions because there’s been no help 
coming from the provincial governments. 
 
What’s as problematic as that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
mill rates — though they may vary across the province and 
sometimes they’ll be somewhat similar one to the other — does 
not mean that it’s an actual reflection of the monies being taken 
in. Because on the far, you could have a certain municipality 
that has very high property values and the mill rates levelled 
against them cause more monies to come out of a jurisdiction 
there; whereas on the other side of the province it could be quite 
a lower assessment rate, with the same mill rate fewer dollars 
coming out and the provincial government making up the 
difference. Which really gets down to, again, a question of 
equity and fairness. 
 
There is no one here, aside from the current administration, that 
thinks we should be expanding the methodology in which we 
collect taxes to be relative to property first and foremost. This is 
an anachronistic system that we’ve moved away from. We’ve 
moved towards the ability to pay. Ability to pay, as we all know 
from Revenue Canada, has been determined by seeing what is 
the gross amount that is claimed to have been made, and then a 
percentage tied directly towards that. 
 
Property tax does not reflect that. It does not reflect that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, specifically in a year where you’ve had 
back-to-back droughts. That makes it extremely difficult. 
 
And we see, we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sometimes absent of 
tax revolts, we see that local RMs have to put postings up of 
who haven’t paid their taxes. Often, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rural 
people have a sense of pride about them. 
 
I could tell you outright that when we are getting towards our 
centennial of this province, there are families — my family — 
there’s families in my RM that have lived there for nearly a 
hundred years. It’s their families, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that built 
those roads. It’s their families that sat on the local boards and 
built those schools. And it’s shameful that this government 
would pass the buck on funding of education, to see those same 
families, after having a few hard years, have to have their 
names go up because they haven’t been able to pay their local 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

 

taxes. That hurts them. It hurts them greatly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it fell on completely deaf ears from the other side 
of the House. 
 
These are families that have lived there for nearly a hundred 
years, and it’s their hope that their children would continue to 
do so. And when they’ve lived there for that long, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and paid taxes and been members of school boards and 
RMs and played on all the hockey teams, it hurts them a lot 
when it seems from no fault of their own, they’re unable, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to make their taxation payments. 
 
Now had this been put on, had this been put on an income-base 
system, a progressive tax system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, none of 
those people would ever have to suffer that shame. And their 
neighbours understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they 
understand that we’re all in the same boat. What they don’t 
understand — and this is reflected directly in the voting — is 
they don’t understand how for years and years and years they 
can pay into a system; how for years and years and years they 
can give to their country; how for years and years and years, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they provide food the world over; and 
their government federally and their government provincially 
can just turn their backs on them when they get a hard time, 
when they hit hard times, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it’s not just about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not just 
about the fact that their name might have to go on a list where 
they couldn’t pay their taxes. It’s also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 
about the fact that they’re going to close the local hospital — 
that hurts. The hospital that maybe they saw grandma pass away 
at — that hurts them a lot. 
 
To what end? Has their production gone down? Well it has in 
some cases, but only due to extraneous circumstances where 
you have one of the worst droughts in recorded history. And yet 
at the same time, the government can turn its back there and 
close a hospital. 
 
Or in the riding of Kindersley right now, three schools can be 
closed. Why? Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because at the very 
fundamental aspect of this, these people run their own 
businesses, they work hard, they want to get ahead in life. They 
want to be able to work hard and build their communities and 
they don’t believe — and they don’t believe fundamentally — 
that somebody can tell them how to do it better. That is the 
complete opposite mentality than what exists from the other 
side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The other side of the House, I believe — and I believe it’s 
reflected in the voting in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
believes in a horrible, horrible arrogance that they can run 
government better, that they know what’s better for individuals, 
and that money becomes public money; it’s not taxpayers’ 
money. It doesn’t matter who’s generating it, at the end of the 
day it’s for the common good. 
 
I know that the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld believes fully 
that monies should be referred to as public monies. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there’s no problem with that. But it begs the 
question then: why would public monies be squandered — as 
we’ve seen from this administration — in various fiascos where 
we have to keep coming back, we have to keep coming back to 

pick pockets of local taxpayers on property to be able to fund 
schools, schools like rural schools? 
 
Again I reiterate for the hon. member from Idylwyld that the 
schools of Denzil, the schools of Major, and the schools of 
Brock are all slated for closure this year. They’re slated for 
closure. They’re in good economic areas. They have lots of oil 
activity in this area. But the taxation and the taxation policies of 
this government have forced their kids 40 miles to the west into 
Alberta, to operate out of Provost, drive across; to operate out 
of Oyen, drive across; pound our roads into oblivion. 
 
The commercial . . . or the taxation that comes out of this area 
from the oil revenues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is horrendous. It’s 
very, very large. And yet nothing can be left locally. Instead 
because . . . And I would be as callous as to say that the 
members — the voters from that part of the province have voted 
the wrong way for too long, that they’ll be left hung out to dry 
— that their school, it’s all right to be able to say go ahead and 
close it. 
 
And the local members on the district boards are at their wits’ 
end because they realize what is necessary to give their 
children, and all the children in the area, the best education 
possible. But there’s not one penny coming from this 
government in either of the divisions where they’re closing 
these schools this year. 
 
Landswest Division is getting not one penny. They, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, voluntarily amalgamated two school divisions for the 
cost savings, and yet are they rewarded for this? No. It’s a 
complete failure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they go forward to 
save money, and what does the government say to them? Well 
the more you save, the less you’re going to get from us. Go 
back to your own local constituents and ask them for more. Ask 
them for more. There’s obviously more from where that came 
from. 
 
It doesn’t matter to the members opposite that if they close the 
school in Denzil, that those 150 houses in town, if they have a 
value now of 25 or $40,000, it goes down to $5,000 overnight at 
the best. It doesn’t matter that the whole . . . all the equity is 
wiped out in complete. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
property tax that was coming off those homes being valued at 
25 or $50,000 is gone, and it’s gone because there’s nobody 
lives there any more. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what about the teachers 
involved here? The teachers from these small schools, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are wonderful, wonderful teachers. They’re 
teachers that are dedicated. They put in hours of overtime. They 
coach volleyball; they coach everything. They run drama. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; they provide excellent, excellent education to 
these students. 
 
And many of them make the commitment first and foremost 
that this is going to be their community. And these teachers put 
equity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, into a home. And what happens to 
that teacher when they close that school? Well it’s not only that 
that teacher has to go and find another job, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
That home that they lovingly possibly built, possibly raised a 
family in, overnight has no value. It has no value. 
 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

If we look at our personal portfolios and what the members that 
live in the city and they take that their residential dwelling and 
see what a large aspect that is of their net worth, and they can 
say callously on the other side that it doesn’t really matter that a 
teacher in rural Saskatchewan who has the rug pulled out from 
under them when their schools close, they lose their job, and 
they lose all the equity in their home. It’s absolutely shameful, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what really is the answer here? Well 
the answer is to completely change this philosophy and get our 
province growing. The answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not have 
16 consecutive quarters of population loss because we’re 
overtaxed. The answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is make the pie 
bigger. Let’s grow the economy. From growing the economy, 
let’s expand our tax base by having people move here. 
 
There is only one correlating factor that shows increase in 
population and that is economic growth. The world over, from 
the Third World to India to China, it is economic growth that 
comes first and foremost to growing a population. 
 
We can see it in Calgary. We don’t see it in Kindersley. And we 
don’t see it in Kindersley due to the fact, first and foremost, that 
this government has tried for the longest time to have a 
centrally planned economy and tax us out of existence. 
 
We see it lately, we see it lately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we 
have possibly a half a billion dollars in investments in CIC III, 
and instead of having it in the private sector managed by the 
private sector, it’s going to be possibly passed over to 
hand-picked cronies who if they were any good at managing 
these things would be working on Bay Street right now. That is 
fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(16:30) 
 
What we need to do is we need to grow the province and grow 
the economy. And the way that we’re going to do is we’re 
going to lower taxation rates. And if we go right back to the 
motion, we recognize in this motion that high property taxes 
harm our province’s competitiveness. 
 
It’s interesting that we’re one of the few jurisdictions left in 
North America that has this exact kind of system. We know that 
Ontario moved away from this a number of years ago. We 
know that Ontario recognized there’s not an agrarian-based 
population that is driving the economy — it’s Mississauga, it’s 
Toronto, it’s Ottawa. And it’s these parts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which are first and foremost in driving the economy. 
 
This, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . I know that, I can hear the 
member from Saskatoon Idylwyld is wanting to, wishing to join 
in the debate. And obviously his ire is up about something with 
regards to the public money, which would beg me the question 
as how he feels when we see that the SaskTel foreign 
investment portfolio . . . $60 million gone, out of province, no 
recovery for it. How many teachers . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There are some private 
conversations that are going on across the floor that the volume 
has increased a little bit beyond the capability of the Speaker to 
be able to hear the person who has the floor. So I would ask 

hon. members to pay close attention to the member who has the 
floor. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — There is little doubt now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I think I should probably return to my earlier 
remarks on the history of taxation, because the member from 
Regina South I know is going to be moved when we really get 
into the nature of how the Crusades affected the nature of 
taxation of the feudal system. So if I may, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I will return to that aspect of taxation on property. 
 
Again, the first Crusade really saw the need for monies to come 
in primarily to Rome, to raise monies for armies to go and fight 
— as it was termed at the time — the Muslim hoard. And the 
way that these monies were raised was through the feudal 
system. It went down to the kings. The kings went to the 
barons. The barons went to the local lords and from the squires 
and whatnot, extracted the monies from the peasantry. 
 
And there was enough of a mercantile system in place at that 
point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that goods and services — goods 
specifically, whether they be animal produce or vegetable 
produce — could at some level on the way up the chain be 
transferred into hard currency, which could in turn be used to 
pay taxation and in turn used to fund wars. It’s no good to try to 
pull a goat all the way from Spain to the Holy Land in hope of 
bartering that. So a coin obviously makes a lot more sense. 
 
But as again, for the member for Regina South, I hope that he’s 
able to see how property is directly tied to taxation and that this 
is the historical root of it. 
 
From that, the problem exists, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
nature of property being of productive value really fell off by 
the time that we got to the Industrial Revolution. It had started 
to under the mercantile system for the 150 years before that. 
Trade started to take a much more important prominence in the 
world economy. But once we hit the Industrial Revolution, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, agriculture becomes a smaller sector. 
 
We see in our post-industrial economy that really intellectual 
property and services have become a much disproportionate 
aspect of the economy and hence they are being taxed likewise. 
The member from Regina Dewdney may feel that there’s no 
correlation here. But if we look at, in the late ’90s, the growth 
of the high-tech sector and all the monies that were made in it, 
this definitely had the right. It was the morally right thing to do, 
to tax it. So from taxing that, we see that a progressive tax 
system makes sense. 
 
It makes sense on the ability to pay. There was no ability to pay 
on the high-tech sector in the 1960s, what was a blossoming 
industry, and as it comes into its own and is able to generate the 
revenues, that’s the place to make it pay. 
 
Vice versa with regards to . . . With words to property, there 
isn’t a correlation necessarily to the ownership of property and 
the ability to pay. I’ve mentioned this before with regards to the 
drought. I mention this again with regards to the mad cow 
outbreak we have and the total collapse of the beef market for 
our farmers. We know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have 
individuals that are working hard to placate the Americans to be 
able to open up the beef market. But nonetheless, the hit that 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

 

this has taken has demonstrated once again that property is not 
necessarily demonstrative of the ability to pay. 
 
Hence what we need to do is we need to get the Saskatchewan 
economy growing. That means we need to attract investment. 
Attracting investment is going to be determined by what factors 
for productivity that we have here —whether they be natural 
resources, whether they be human resources, whether they be 
local market factors, the stability of government. 
 
But first and foremost, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is going to be at 
the end of the day what kind of profit can an industry or 
business make from locating here. And a large part of that is 
what environment does the government allow said company or 
entity or individual to extract that profit? And that’s determined 
first and foremost by taxation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We cannot have an ongoing system of high taxation with 
limited services or people will vote with their feet. And we’ve 
seen this for the last . . . excuse me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the 
last 16 consecutive quarters. And by and large we’ve had a lot 
of young people leave the province. And why? Because they’re 
looking for opportunities elsewhere. And those opportunities, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are first and foremost economic. 
 
And with all the abundance of natural resources that we have in 
this province that question should be, why aren’t those persons 
staying here; why isn’t that opportunity here? 
 
And that opportunity isn’t here. It isn’t here because we have a 
government that believes that public monies should be extracted 
from whichever aspect of the economy is chugging along, 
regardless of how under pressure it is. It’s like, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, wringing blood from a stone. And there is no end in 
sight to when this will cease. 
 
We know that the government currently on their party Web site 
still has a manifesto named the Regina Manifesto that calls for 
the complete eradication of capitalism. At the end of the day, 
members opposite in the fundamentals of their philosophy do 
believe that the state should be in control of the economic 
direction that the country, or in this case, the province is taking. 
 
And we believe that that is fundamentally wrong, that aside 
from it being fundamentally wrong, it’s been a failure and it 
doesn’t work. And we can see this, the direct correlation in our 
GDP and more importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our 
population. 
 
What my side of the House wants to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
my side of the House wants to grow the population base. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — We’re going to do this first and foremost 
through the private sector being the engine of the economy. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have businesses in this province that exist 
despite the taxation and oppressive . . . 
 
If — if — and when it comes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the 
election’s called and we get that change, we’re going to see a 
renaissance of business activity in this province. We’re going to 
see it in the ag sector. We’re going to see it in the value-added 

sector. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to see it in every 
sector. 
 
We’re going to see it in education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because there’s going to be more people coming in and rural 
school closures are not going to be the norm, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’re going to see school populations increase. And 
we’re going to plan for that. We’re not going to plan for 30,000 
fewer students and that many fewer teachers. We’re not going 
to plan for failure. The members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
don’t understand the term, business plan. And because they 
don’t understand the term, business plan, the government 
doesn’t operate all that well. It’s airy-fairy and at the end of the 
day, at the end of the day how do they . . . They just hope 
everything will work out right. 
 
What is, what is the . . . The purpose of government is first and 
foremost to provide the services that those citizens want. And 
the people across Saskatchewan are fairly clear on that. 
 
They want quality health care, not the longest waiting lists in 
Canada. They want smooth highways, not the ones that exist in 
a good part of our province, breaking people’s windshield and 
cracking people’s axles, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They want local 
schools. They want good, high-quality education. We have the 
students and the human resource potential in this province 
second to nowhere in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Statistically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Midwestern United 
States and the Prairie provinces in Canada, we have more CEOs 
and Fortune 500 and TSE (Toronto Stock Exchange) 300 
companies than any other, any other jurisdiction in the world. 
And the reason for that is a lot of these people come from 
farms. These are farm boys that understood the nature of getting 
up in the morning, working hard, and at the end of the day 
they’re the ones responsible for paying the piper. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen, we’ve seen for years and 
years how socialist mentality has barbecued the chance for 
investment in this province. We have seen foreign investments 
turn up their noses at the chance to invest here. They’ve looked 
at it. They looked at the proposals, and they’ve thrown them on 
the Hibachi, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And why is that? It’s basically because they recognize that the 
government of the day on the other side of the House wanted — 
wanted, Mr. Deputy Speaker — at the end of the day to own 
what they wanted to work for, what they wanted to work hard 
for. And that is the reason. 
 
I’m glad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have now got the attention 
of the member from Athabasca because we can hear . . . The 
member from Athabasca, I know, has without doubt been aware 
of the nature of the movement from taxation right from the 
Phoenicians up to the current day. I know that, I know that the 
member from Athabasca has been riveted by the extent of that 
historical analysis of a taxation system. And it’s important, 
because without that context the error of their ways couldn’t 
have been pointed out. 
 
It doesn’t matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as we have the most 
abundant natural resources of any jurisdiction in the world, it 
can be squandered time and again by a mentality that’s wrong. 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

And that mentality is derived first and foremost, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, from the Great Depression. In that Great Depression it 
saw the dust bowl. And at some point, and my family 
remembers of this too, it was hard up and someone came forth 
to tell them that they were poor because someone else was rich. 
And this wasn’t true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we know, we know which . . . we know which premier of 
this province was . . . preached right on that, a chicken in every 
pot. But the real purpose of his . . . the real purpose of his 
speech was to say your chicken is right now in somebody else’s 
pot. Your chicken is on somebody else’s Hibachi. Your 
chicken, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not . . . it’s not in your pot 
because somebody else has it. 
 
He didn’t understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the answer to 
the problem was just to make more chickens. And since that 
time the only real production in chickens that we’ve really seen, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, have possibly been our current Premier 
with regards to the upcoming provincial election which should 
have been held this spring. 
 
So what we saw from the 1930s and the dust bowl was a whole 
generation — and my grandparents included — that believed, 
that believed there was an answer through socialism; that 
collectively this was going to be the answer; that collectively 
we’d all be better off. And it’s taken a long time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for this to be proven completely untrue. 
 
The rest of the world understood it by 1991 when that wall fell 
down. When the Berliners crossed from the East to the West, 
they realized, you know, things on the west side of the wall 
were a lot better. 
 
But the people in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the vast 
majority of them, the majority of them haven’t voted for the 
socialists over the last 60 years. They’ve been very lucky 
splitting — in a three-party system — splitting that vote and 
holding ransom this province under a burdensome sector of 
state-controlled economy, and trying to have the engine of the 
economy be first and foremost the state, through Crown 
corporations investing directly against private enterprise out . . . 
at the end of the day . . . and then if there’s failures in that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we haven’t seen, we haven’t seen any 
accountability to that. 
 
And the reason for the . . . to derive why this happens isn’t all 
that difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because to run a state 
enterprise you’re going to want somebody that shares your 
socialist mentality. And you share that socialist mentality, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s a pretty clear bet that your successes in the 
field of private enterprise are fairly limited. 
 
So hence we’re left with, if we can say, the bottom of the barrel 
of the business managers to be running some of these 
companies. And at the end of the day if they’re not productive, 
you can always go back to the taxpayer to ask for more money. 
We’ve seen this time and again. 
 
And what does this directly relate to? Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it directly relates to the three rural school closures that 
are happening in the riding of Kindersley this year. Because it’s 
about priorities — people in this province, they want good 

health care. They don’t want the longest waiting lists in Canada 
and that’s what this government has provided for us. They want 
a local school. My constituents want a local school. They don’t 
want investment in cellphones in Australia. They want, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, they want safe 
highways and smooth road tops. 
 
(16:45) 
 
They also didn’t want, Mr. Deputy Speaker, every elevator in 
the province pulled down. They didn’t want the gutting of the 
rural economy but that’s what we’ve seen from this 
government. They’ve turned their backs on their heritage and 
it’s been shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the economy hasn’t grown to the extent 
that it ever should have. The natural resources that this province 
has been blessed with, we have been held back. And it’s going 
to be time for a change. 
 
And when it changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s going to change 
for the long term. Because Tommy Douglas — I happen to 
know who he is, but there’s a lot of people my age don’t; they 
don’t care — and he’s going to be gone. And the thing that is 
going to be brought up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, . . . and now, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the thing that is going to be brought up is 
probably not the socialist dream that this premier had for the 
province; it’s probably going to be his thesis on subnormal 
persons. This is what’s going to be brought up historically. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can see that the local . . . Again going 
right back to the nature of the unfairness of putting local 
property taxes up as the sole supporter in many cases, in three 
out of four of the school districts in the riding of Kindersley, for 
paying for education — these same persons that are having to 
pay this property tax are also having to pay income tax, in the 
years that they make it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think that 
they feel it’s very, very unfair. And they’re frustrated. 
 
And SARM has been calling for the changes to this for a long 
time. It is an anachronistic system. And at the end of the day, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the members opposite won’t . . . or 
pardon me, Mr. Speaker . . . at the end of the day what the 
members opposite won’t realize is that the children in rural 
Saskatchewan have a right to as fair an education as any other 
child in this province. 
 
It’s not right, Mr. Speaker, that a five-year-old child be put on 
the bus for an hour and a half one way to try to go to school 
because they had to close a perfectly good local school because 
this government thought it was necessary to put money in a 
dot-bomb in Tennessee. That’s not right, Mr. Deputy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our schoolchildren in the rural schools of this 
province and in all the schools have as much potential as any 
children anywhere in the world. It’s about priorities. It’s very 
difficult, Mr. Speaker . . . And maybe the member of Athabasca 
should go forth when they have to close a school and go and 
listen to those local communities and sit in on those school 
board meetings where the school board have been elected by 
their neighbours and they have to say, we’ve had to raise taxes 
so many times we can’t do it again; we don’t have a choice any 



June 10, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

 

more. And you see the look on the people’s faces. 
 
I attended two of these meetings last spring, Mr. Speaker. You 
see people that they went to school there, and in some cases 
their grandparents went to that same school, and now it’s being 
pulled out from under them. And why is this coming? Due to 
the fact that the farms have become less productive? No it’s 
been completely the opposite. These farms have become more 
productive. They’ve become more productive on a per capita 
basis but at the end of the day the prodigy raised from these 
farms, the sons and daughters, have had to find brighter 
pastures. 
 
And the reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is because this 
government and their predecessors have overtaxed; they’ve 
stripped the opportunities that this province deserves. And at 
the end of that day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s caused for 16 
consecutive quarters more people to leave this province than 
have come into it. 
 
Mr. Deputy . . . or, Mr. Speaker, rather, to change this around 
we’re going to have to be competitive. We’re going to need to 
be competitive in the oil and gas sector. The Mantario Marengo 
fields which is north of my home, this is an oil and gas field, 
was found to be as large as Leduc. And socialist mentality on 
the other side of the House meant that Tommy Douglas was 
happier to have that oil stay in the ground, no development 
come up around it, than somebody from Texas to make a profit 
on it. 
 
And so what do we have? On the other side of the border, 
we’ve got a Heritage Fund and here in Saskatchewan, in my 
constituency of Kindersley, we have people that have been on 
waiting lists for hip replacements for more than two and a half 
years. That’s because at the basis of their ideology the premise 
is wrong, the motives are wrong, and it hurts the citizens of this 
province and it’s way overdue for being stopped. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when it is stopped . . . After we have the 
next election and we get a change of government, it’s not going 
to be stopped just for four years or eight years. It’s going to be 
stopped for a generation and it’s not to return. The dirty thirties 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — The dirty thirties are going to be long gone 
and buried. They’re going to be left. We’re going to see, we’re 
going to see unprecedented growth. We’re going to see growth 
like we saw, we’re going to see growth like we saw, Mr. 
Speaker, in the 1920s. 
 
We have the records from our farm, Mr. Speaker. In 1919 my 
great-grandfather made $45,000. We didn’t have, we didn’t 
have, Mr. Speaker, at that time, we didn’t have, we didn’t have 
a government interfering in our marketing. We built — or rather 
he built and those buildings are still standing — he built a 
house, he built a barn, he built a bunch of shops and granaries. 
It was unprecedented growth. And since that time we haven’t 
seen the growth on our farms anywhere clear to that. 
 
What we’re going to see, Mr. Speaker, to be able to have rural 
schools not closing, is we’re going to see that second 

renaissance when socialism is finally out of this province once 
and for all; when we see, Mr. Speaker, when we see people 
being allowed to keep what they make, being allowed to see 
that opportunity isn’t something that should be punished; that 
hard work, innovation, is something that should be rewarded. 
We’re going to see people flock back here. We’re going to see 
the very best people in the world flock back here because it’s 
from hence that they came. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear again the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, and I think that he’s probably speaking again about 
the need for public monies as opposed to taxpayers’ monies. 
Public monies, it would seem to me that the member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld would be so outraged at things like 
SPUDCO when we have public money wasted in a fiasco that 
really could have been a lot better spent in keeping the Brock 
school open, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or maybe we have a situation where we have mega bingo, 
which not only could have been spent a little better at keeping 
the school in Denzil open but also could have been put back 
into the handicap bus in Kindersley that the Elks raised through 
their local bingo when they lost money because of this fiasco. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Speaker, the priorities need to be re-examined. 
Maybe they need to look to their own socialist roots and cross 
the pond and see what Mr. Blair sees; see what Mr. Blair says 
about the role of the state and the role of the state in the 
economy; see where Britain’s going on this direction. 
 
I think that Mr. Blair has a sincerity with regards to the kind of 
public education that he wants in that country, but he recognizes 
that the engine of the economy has got to be the private sector 
to allow that to be paid for. He’s understood that and the 
economy there is doing fairly well relative to the rest of the EU 
(European Union). 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s ironic the members opposite kind of put a 
roadblock on their ideological development in 1935. The 
Second World War came and we get the socialist, we get the 
expansion of the social welfare state, and the thinking on that 
side of the House hasn’t gone beyond that. It’s just trying to 
stay on how are we going to keep chugging along. It stopped 
everywhere else in the world more than 10 years ago. It stopped 
when the wall fell down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1991 the economy of the world was determined 
to be a free market system. In the global economy, and I will 
quote again Mr. Thomas Friedman of The New York Times: 
 

There’s only going to be two people. There’s going to be 
winners and losers. And the people that don’t get on board 
with the reality of the electronic herd, with the reality of 
capital moving the world over in the blink of an eye, 
they’re going to be the losers. And it’s their citizens who 
will be the losers.  

 
Mr. Speaker, as I was speaking there to the nature of 
competitiveness — that’s in the last line of the motion which I 
was happy to, which I was happy to second today — the reality 
of that is that this government, this government hasn’t, hasn’t 
recognized the global environment in which we live. 
 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2003 

 

They believe, perhaps along with Fidel, that there are these little 
pockets left where this centrally planned economy is going to 
work. And it doesn’t. It doesn’t work here. It doesn’t work in 
Cuba. It hasn’t worked anywhere in the Eastern bloc countries. 
It’s been an unmitigated failure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is that until that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’m glad, Mr. Speaker, that I once 
again have the member from Regina South’s . . . from the 
Regina South’s attention because I know that the member from 
Regina South has been thrilled again to hear about the linkage 
between metallurgy and coinage — metallurgy and coinage —
allowing us to get to the first level of taxations. 
 
So I’m also hearing that the member from Elphinstone is 
thinking to the years ahead. And there’s a possibility, Mr. 
Speaker, being from Elphinstone and being born in the same 
year that I am, here, that I was born, that possibly he’ll hear me 
a few years in the future discussing some of the same issues. 
And I know that he looks forward to that with or without 
earplugs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I see that . . . I’m quite surprised to see that 
I’ve actually been up and talking for some time. I know that it 
has been to the pleasure of the Assembly as a whole and I’m 
very happy for that. And now that I’ve got about everything that 
I thought needed to be said today, I would move that I adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1553 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1554 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1554 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1554 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1554 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1554 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1554 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1554 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1555 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1556 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1559 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1576 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Anna Mlazgar Celebrates 104th Birthday 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
 Views of Member of Parliament 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1557 
 Saskatchewan Resident Assists Orphans in Romania 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1558 
 Saskatoon Firm Wins Canadian New Media Award 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1558 
 Melfort 171 Squadron Celebrates 60 Years 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1558 
 Regina Transition House Fundraiser 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1558 
 St. Luke’s Lutheran Church 90th Anniversary 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1559 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1559 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1559 
 SaskPower Policy on Firefighting Expenses 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1561 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1561 
 
 



 

 

 Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan Investments 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1562 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1562 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1564 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1564 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1564 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1564 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 8 — Property Taxes 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1564 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1575 
 
 


