















































Hansard: May 02, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 853 
 May 2, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to read a 
petition from some of my constituents who are concerned about 
crop insurance: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Fosston and 
Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of citizens of 
Moose Jaw concerned about a lack of dialysis services in their 
community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

As you may suspect, Mr. Speaker, all the signatures on this 
petition this morning are from the community of Moose Jaw. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition, the prayer of relief of which reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister of 
Highways preserve the old bridges between Battleford and 
North Battleford on the North Saskatchewan River. 

 
Your petitioners are all residents of Ruth Whyte Manor in 
North Battleford. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine that 
are very concerned about the condition of their highway. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, 
Stoughton, and even Crosby, North Dakota. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the increase in premiums for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Alida, 
Colgate, Leroy, and Tribune. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with farmers 
opposed to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 2003 premium 
increases to farmers. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Davidson, Craik, Imperial, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are concerned with Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and to restore 
affordable crop insurance premiums to our struggling 
farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Leask. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
no. 18, 27, 35, 36, 40, and no. 100. 
 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation: for the fiscal year 2002-2003 what was the total 
amount of funding received from the Community 
Initiatives Fund by the Saskatchewan Science Centre and 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park; and for the fiscal year 
2002-2003 what was the total amount of funding received 
from the General Revenue Fund by the Saskatchewan 
Science Centre and the Wanuskewin Heritage Park? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I ask that same set of questions for the fiscal 
year 2001-2002. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 36 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: during fiscal year 2002-2003 
how much revenue did the province collect from its 
trucking partnership program? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the fiscal year ’01-02 
and 2000 and 2001. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: for the year 2002 (1) the total 
size of the labour force; (2) the Aboriginal people in the 
labour force; (3) non-Aboriginal members of the labour 
force; (4) the Aboriginal unemployment rate; (5) the 
non-Aboriginal unemployment rate; (6) average income of 
Aboriginal working persons; (7) average income of 
non-Aboriginal working persons? 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the minister of Liquor and Gaming: (1) who owns the 
copyright to the software developed for SLGA’s mega 
bingo and where is this software located currently; (2) does 
SLGA have any contract with David Innes Gaming 
Consultancy; if so, what specific services are being 
provided to SLGA through these contracts and at what cost; 
(3) prior to the implementation of mega bingo, did 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming explore using the 
satellite system used in Alberta to link bingos and did 
SLGA do a cost comparison between the system used in 
Alberta and the system put in place for mega bingo prior to 
mega bingo’s implementation; what was the cost 
comparison between the two systems? 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and to all 

members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce two prominent 
and well known municipal leaders in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have Mike Badham from SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and Neal 
Hardy from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) in your gallery. 
 
They were present this morning at the announcement we made 
with regard to the Education Financing Commission and the 
appointment of the commissioner, Ray Boughen, from Moose 
Jaw. And I would ask all members to welcome them to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with the Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming Neal 
Hardy, president of SARM, and Mike Badham, president of 
SUMA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, between these two gentlemen they represent 
everyone in the province. So I would ask you to welcome them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the Minister of Learning and myself, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of this House, the 
162 safety patrollers who are here with us today and their 27 
chaperones. They are also accompanied by Maureen Murray 
from the CAA (Canadian Automobile Association), who is 
sitting in your gallery, and Louise Houldsworth, who has been 
working with this group for years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I have done in the past, I would ask the 
indulgence of the House as I introduce these safety patrollers by 
their community and to their members who represent them here. 
 
And so to begin with, I would like to introduce from Unity. . . 
And all those students who are from Unity, if you could just 
stand for a moment and we’ll have members see who you are. 
And the minister for . . . or the member for Battleford-Cut Knife 
is unfortunately not able to wave to you today so . . . Well, 
welcome. 
 
There are also students here from Carrot River — Hudson Bay 
and Nipawin — and that is the Carrot River Valley 
constituency, and due to a very tragic death are not, 
unfortunately, are not represented by a member. 
 
From Cypress Hills, from the Maple Creek patrol — if you 
would raise your hands and your member is seated down in the 
opposition corner. Thank you. Just a little wave. 
 
And from Estevan — member opposite, if you would wave to 
your members of the safety patrol from Estevan, all the Estevan 
members up here. Okay. 
 
Members of the safety patrol from Kindersley — if you would 
stand and wave to your member from Kindersley. 
 
And Strasbourg, Last Mountain — the member from Last 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

 

Mountain-Touchwood, if you would wave to your safety 
patrollers. 
 
Lloydminster — the member from Lloydminster for students 
from Maidstone and Turtleford, if you would wave to your 
safety patrollers, please. Some behind you as well. 
 
And from North Battleford there are I believe nine safety 
patrollers. The member from North Battleford, if you would 
stand and wave to your members please. 
 
Rosetown-Biggar, unfortunately is not able to wave at his safety 
patrollers, but they are here as well. Welcome. 
 
From Martensville and Warman we have safety patrollers and 
we welcome you to this House as well. 
 
From Thunder Creek — from Gravelbourg and Rouleau — if 
the member from Thunder Creek would welcome his safety 
patrollers. 
 
From Watrous constituency — Lanigan, Nokomis, and Watrous 
— if you would wave to your member. There we go, some up 
behind as well. 
 
And Weyburn-Big Muddy, from the community of Weyburn, 
safety patrollers — there we go, member over there, and some 
behind as well. 
 
Moose Jaw — we have two MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from Moose Jaw, if you would wave to the safety 
patrollers from Moose Jaw. Thank you. 
 
And Prince Albert — Hon. Speaker and member from Prince 
Albert Northcote, if you would wave to the members from 
Prince Albert. 
 
And would the MLAs from Regina please join me in standing 
and wave to all the safety patrollers from Regina. And from 
Saskatoon, would all the members from Saskatoon please stand 
and wave to your safety patrollers. 
 
And thank you all. We welcome you to this Assembly. We hope 
that you enjoy your experience here. And we thank you for the 
good work you do as safety patrollers in this province. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members in the House, I would like to join with the 
minister in recognizing the group of very important people in 
our galleries today, the school safety patrollers. I won’t ask 
them to stand individually again, but I want you to know that 
every one of us are pleased to see you here today and I hope 
you learn a lot from today’s proceedings. And welcome to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure 
that I introduce to you in your gallery and to all the members of 
the House, Ms. Linda Wedman, who will be the keynote 

speaker for the 2003 Arts Congress being held this weekend 
here in Regina. If you could stand, Ms. Wedman? There. 
 
Ms. Wedman is the director of the Works Festival in Edmonton, 
North America’s largest visual arts festival, the longest-running 
arts festival, partnered with the Edmonton Downtown Business 
Association as part of their revitalization process. And take 
note, it helped change the downtown. She’s brought her 
expertise and experience, will be talking about the arts and 
community development. 
 
Accompanying her is Ms. Lori Green — if Lori could stand as 
well — president of the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance, also the 
executive director of Saskatchewan Society for Education 
through Art. And right now as we speak, in the basement of the 
legislature there’s a show in the Cumberland Gallery featuring 
60 pieces of artwork by Saskatchewan students. 
 
The 2003 Arts Congress organized by the Saskatchewan Arts 
Alliance brings together Saskatchewan’s diverse art community 
to discuss issues of joint concern. This year the theme is about 
community value of the arts. And with Ms. Wedman and Ms. 
Green is Jack Walton, a long-time person involved in the arts, 
and Wendy Campbell, from Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
So please join me in welcoming them today. Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join the minister in welcoming the guests she just 
mentioned — Linda Wedman, Lori Green, Jack Walton, and 
Wendy Campbell — to the Assembly this morning. 
 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings today and I hope you have a 
very enjoyable weekend. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to 
introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
Assembly, the Saskatchewan delegation for the Interchange on 
Canadian Studies, in your gallery. 
 
Every year the Interchange on Canadian Studies provides grade 
11 students from across the country with the opportunity to 
travel and meet with each other. This year it’s New 
Brunswick’s turn to host the conference and these 10 students 
and their chaperones will soon be in Moncton visiting with their 
fellow students from across the country. 
 
I’d like to briefly introduce the 10 students who are 
participating in the interchange: Blake Dornstauder from 
Lloydminster — just wave, stand — Heather Elliott from 
Candle Lake, Kyle Hamilton from Lucky Lake, Andrew 
Johnston from Maryfield, Maria McWilliams from Moose Jaw, 
Denae Nakonechny from Foxford, Danielle Schweitzer from 
Neudorf, Amy Smith from Abbey, Alan Williams from Regina, 
Lindsay Zehner from Humboldt, and Glenda Gosselin-Fowlow 
and Gary Gabel, their chaperones. 
 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I don’t think anyone would disagree that 
we live in interesting and uncertain times. Our leaders face new 
challenges and respond to new opportunities all the time. By 
participating in this interchange these talented Saskatchewan 
youth will gain valuable skills, skills that will help them 
identify and respond to the challenges and opportunities that 
face us today and into our future. 
 
I will meet with them after question period, and I ask all 
members of the Assembly to again welcome them to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join again 
with the minister to welcome people that are in the galleries 
today. There are education students, people that are looking to 
expand their horizons on Canadian studies. I understand you’re 
on your way to Moncton and I’m sure that you’d be great 
ambassadors for our province. Have a great time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

School Safety Patrol Week 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week in 
Saskatchewan we recognize the efforts of a group of very 
dedicated and responsible elementary school students. These 
young people act in the interests of the safety of their fellow 
students come rain or shine, sleet or snow. Numbering in the 
area of some 6,000 across the province, Mr. Speaker, these 
students are school safety patrollers. 
 
April 28 to May 3 was School Safety Patrol Week in 
Saskatchewan, and I’d like to take this opportunity to thank all 
of these students for their contributions to the safety of their 
peers and their community. The school safety patrol program 
not only teaches students about the safety and rules of the road, 
it also instills in these young people a sense of duty, purpose, 
and pride. 
 
For over 50 years these young people have helped their fellow 
students and at the same time have been helped themselves by 
police, teachers, and parents who work with them. We 
appreciate the work and the dedication of these people as well. 
 
Hats off to all school safety patrollers for their continued 
perseverance and enthusiasm. I’d like to take this opportunity to 
welcome the 162 school safety patrollers who are in Regina this 
week for the annual provincial safety patrol jamboree. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina YWCA Honours Women of Distinction 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Regina YWCA has been honouring the talents, achievements, 

and creativity of the women of southern Saskatchewan since 
1981 through their Women of Distinction Awards. 
 
These awards celebrate how women make a difference in our 
society and recognize those women whose qualities, 
achievements, and commitment are deserving of our admiration 
and our respect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipients of the Regina YWCA 
Women of Distinction Awards are: for the Arts, Tracy Houser; 
for Business and Trades, Detective Corporal Angela 
MacDougall; the award for Community Leadership and 
Enhancement went to Anita Medl; the recipient of the Cultural 
Heritage Award is Maxine McKenzie-Cox. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for Education the recipient is Marjorie Sinclair 
Butterworth, who, I might add, Mr. Speaker, celebrated her 
100th birthday recently. 
 
The Health and Wellness Award went to Sharon Huber; Donna 
Lindskog is the recipient of the Science, Technology and 
Environment Award; the award for Sports, Recreation and 
Active Living went to Lisa King; and Ashley Kasbrick is 
deemed to be this year’s Young Woman of Distinction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the winners in each category, but every 
woman nominated was nominated because she has displayed a 
sustained and significant commitment to society, whether that 
commitment be local, national, or beyond. 
 
I ask the members of this Assembly to join me in thanking all 
these women for their efforts and in congratulating this year’s 
Regina YWCA Women of Distinction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women of Today Awards and Luncheon 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Wednesday, April 30 I had the pleasure of attending the 
Women of Today Awards and luncheon in Estevan, attended by 
over 300 people. 
 
These awards are co-sponsored by Quota International of 
Estevan and SaskPower. Funds raised through this luncheon 
will be used to support the violence intervention program and 
also the placement of free field FM (frequency modulation) 
hearing systems in Estevan schools. These systems amplify the 
teachers’ voices to allow students to hear more clearly and 
consistently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a total of 15 nominees in three 
categories. Winning the Ida Peterson Memorial Award for 
Outstanding Entrepreneur was Stoughton veterinarian, Anne 
Kernaleguen. The SaskPower award for Outstanding 
Contribution to the Workplace went to Karen Beriault, office 
manager of CJ 1280 and SUN 102.3 radio station. And the 
Shirley Orsted Memorial Award for Young Woman of Today 
went to Danielle Haselhan, a grade 12 honours student from the 
Lampman High School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating not 
only the winners but all of the nominees. Thank you. 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon’s Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Last night at exactly the same time women of 
distinction in Regina were being celebrated, seven of my 
government colleagues and I joined in the celebration of our 
women of distinction sponsored by the Saskatoon YWCA 
(Young Women’s Christian Association). It was a good night 
for women in Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatoon, 43 women leaders in 11 categories were 
nominated, and of course each is a winner. These are women 
who, as the program notes, use their intelligence, their courage, 
and their insight to accomplish life-changing events. In both 
cities the proceeds of the evening help provide for the women’s 
shelters sponsored by the YWCA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 11 Saskatoon winners were: in the Arts, 
Marion Mills; for Community Development and Social 
Activism, Cheryl Dupuis; Belma Podrug in Culture and 
Heritage; Phyllis Fowler for Education; Entrepreneur Woman 
of Distinction was Arati Chattopadhyay; Flo Lavallie in the 
Health, Well-being, and Spirituality category; for Lifetime 
Achievement, Lois Morrison; Dr. Lillian Dyck in Science, 
Technology, and the Environment; Shelley Ballard-McKinlay 
for Sports and Fitness; Marilyn Poitras as Woman in the 
Professions; and, Mr. Speaker, Ellen Quigley is the, quote, 
“Young Woman to Watch.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that someday this young 
woman may very well be the first woman premier in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know all members will join me in congratulating these 
outstanding women of distinction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

A Taste of the Vanscoy Rural Municipality Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 
pleasure of attending the fourth annual A Taste of the RM (rural 
municipality) fundraiser gala. The fundraiser, an event put on 
by the Vanscoy and District Agricultural Society, showcases the 
many food products that is produced in the Vanscoy district. 
 
The menu includes, for starters, wild boar timberline sausage, 
lamb meatballs, wild boar salami, broccoli and cheddar, 
vegetable barley, potato salad, lamb with Moroccan orange 
sauce, barbecue lamb kabobs, sweet and sour emu balls, spicy 
Greek emu kabob, tasty bison meat loaf, and roast elk au jus. 
The dessert was saskatoon berry pie with whole wheat crust and 
ice cream. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the producers that supply these tasty treats were 
Delsa Food Producers, Riverbend Plantation, Saskatchewan 
Sheep Development Board, Buffalo Springs Ranch, and 
Avondale Elk and Bison Farm. 
 
The Vanscoy Ag Society not only were putting on this very 
wonderful event, also puts on the perennial exchange in May; 
May 23 to 25, the Vanscoy district rodeo; August 16, the 

Vanscoy district fair, and in November, volunteer appreciation 
night and turkey bingo. The society also sponsors school tours, 
provides student bursaries, and hosts many other worthwhile 
community activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating the Vanscoy and 
District Agricultural Society on a wonderful event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Art Showcased 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, because 
May is Art Education Month, an arts education celebration 
display showcasing more than 60 pieces of artwork from 
Saskatchewan students is being held in the Cumberland Gallery 
downstairs here in the Legislative Building. 
 
The exhibit is sponsored by Saskatchewan Learning in 
partnership with the Saskatchewan Society for Education 
Through Art. 
 
Mr. Speaker, arts education provides students with 
opportunities to express their ideas through visual art, dance, 
drama, and music. Research shows that students who study the 
arts tend to have higher grades, self-esteem, good attendance 
records, and are more active in community affairs and 
leadership than those who do not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this art exhibit reflects the excellent work being 
done by the provincial arts education curriculum, and it 
especially reflects the creativity and artistic vision of the 
students themselves. I may be biased on that point since 8 of the 
60 contributors are from St. Joseph High School in my riding of 
Saskatoon Meewasin, but I don’t think I’m biased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The arts community is a vibrant and essential part of 
Saskatchewan’s culture, economy, and way of life. I suggest 
that all the members of this Assembly take the opportunity to 
view the exhibit in the Cumberland Gallery and ask that they 
join me in commending the Saskatchewan Society for 
Education Through Art, and particularly these fine students for 
their dedication to cultural activities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Family Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured today 
to speak to the Assembly about a farm family from the Hanley 
area that has just recently celebrated its 100th anniversary on 
the farm. 
 
The Bohrson family is very proud to have farmed through four 
generations, beginning with Thomas and Guni Bohrson who 
had emigrated from Norway, purchased the land in 1902. 
Indeed they bought their quarter section located southwest of 
Hanley, sight unseen, and paid $7 per acre for it. 
 
The Bohrsons had seven children, including their fourth, 
Edward, who married Esther in 1916 and purchased a home 
quarter from his mother in 1928 after Thomas had passed away 
in 1915. Edward farmed this land until his son, Bob, and wife, 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

Leona, began farming it in later years. Now Bob’s son, Don, 
and his wife, Kim, are presently farming the same piece of land 
as part of their farming operation. 
 
Indeed the succession of family members looks poised to 
continue as Don Bohrson’s son, Nathan, along with his wife, 
Tracy, and grandson, Zachary, are faming along with them right 
now. 
 
It is a very remarkable achievement to have farmed in 
Saskatchewan continuously over the last 100 years. There have 
been so many hardships on the farm, which this family has 
clearly overcome and indeed has succeeded very well. This 
family remains a part of our proud Saskatchewan tradition of 
pioneering the prairies and succeeding in the past century and 
into this new century. 
 
I would ask the members of the Assembly join me in 
congratulating the Bohrson family and their historic 
achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Forest Centre 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
here we go again. Another week and once again the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) minister who covered up the truth about the 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) deal has been caught in another cover-up. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix is reporting on a 
feasibility study prepared for the NDP government last year that 
advised against proceeding with a new forestry centre building 
in Prince Albert at this time. 
 
That’s pretty interesting, because on January 28 the 
Saskatchewan Party submitted a freedom of information request 
asking for all feasibility studies conducted for the government 
on this project. The NDP never gave us this feasibility study. 
They never even acknowledged its existence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why did the NDP violate its own freedom of information Act 
by covering up this report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
the opposition knows the difference between a feasibility study 
and a consultant’s report. But I want to say to the members of 
the opposition that the problem with their position on every 
question that comes before this House is they’re opposed, they 
say, to any investment outside Saskatchewan. And guess what? 
They’re opposed to any investment inside Saskatchewan as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as the member noted in his question, Mr. Speaker, the 
consultant’s report said that we should not proceed with the 
building at this time until certain steps were taken and certain 
things were done. Those steps were taken; those things were 
done, Mr. Speaker. 

The consultant’s report said, Mr. Speaker, that what we should 
do is buy the land, announce the building but not build the 
building, put up a sign as a PR (public relations) exercise — an 
attractive sign it said, to say we’re building the building. And if 
we had done that, it would have been a disingenuous PR 
exercise which the opposition would have rightly complained 
about. 
 
But I put this question to that member who represents a 
northern riding. Is he opposed to the 8,000 new jobs and $1 
billion in new investment in forestry, Mr. Speaker? I’d like to 
know his position on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has been caught in a 
cover-up. The Saskatchewan Party submitted a freedom of 
information request asking the government to provide any and 
all feasibility studies conducted by or for the government 
regarding the Saskatchewan Forest Centre announced on July 
24, 2002. 
 
Today’s StarPhoenix story quotes from a feasibility study 
written by Focal Spectrum Concepts of Regina last year. The 
government never gave us this study. They never even 
acknowledged its existence. Mr. Speaker, this appears to be a 
blatant violation of the freedom of information Act. Mr. 
Speaker, why was the NDP covering up this report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want this House to know 
that the consultant’s report was commissioned for one purpose 
and that was to get the consultant to obtain sources of federal 
funding. The consultant was not successful in that regard, Mr. 
Speaker, and the report said that the federal government would 
not contribute toward the forest centre. 
 
Subsequently, Mr. Speaker, an arrangement was made with the 
federal government — and one of the proponents of the forestry 
centre was the Hon. Ralph Goodale who supported its 
development — that the federal government would agree to put 
$1 million extra into VIDO (Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization) institute in Saskatoon; the province would 
redirect $1 million toward the forestry centre. That arrangement 
was made, the project was downsized, private sector tenants 
were arranged, those conditions were met, and that centre is 
proceeding. 
 
But the positive story here, Mr. Speaker . . .Well the forestry 
centre itself is positive. But I want to say to this House, Mr. 
Speaker, that in the last five years there has been $1 billion in 
new investment in forestry in this province because of the 
strategy of this government, and 8,000 direct and indirect new 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. This is a good news story and only the 
doomers and gloomers over there would oppose it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, one source is describing the 
75,000 square foot building as, and I quote, “a legacy building 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

 

for Eldon Lautermilch and Don Cody.” Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know why that minister needs another legacy building. You’d 
think seven potato storage bins would be big enough to hold his 
ego. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that minister’s real legacy is going to be covering 
up the truth. He lost $5 million on Channel Lake and covered it 
up. He lost $28 million on SPUDCO and covered it up. Now he 
gets a report that tells him not to proceed with a new office 
building in Prince Albert and he covers it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party asked for this report in a 
freedom of information request in January. Why was it covered 
up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, there’s only one group of 
men and women in this province who would complain about the 
growth and development of the forestry industry, who would 
complain about a $1 billion new investment, 8,000 new jobs — 
and that group of individuals is sitting right over there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to that member, Mr. Speaker — who 
represents a riding that is in the forest belt, on the forest fringe, 
Mr. Speaker, where 8,000 new jobs have come about in the last 
five years — that he should get on board with the 8,000 people 
working in forestry in this province, Mr. Speaker. He should get 
on board with the fact that we’re building the world’s largest 
oriented strand board plant in the world in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. He should get on board with something positive for a 
change instead of just doing what they do endlessly, Mr. 
Speaker, which is complain about any positive development in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Hold it. Order. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Was this report shown to the cabinet prior to the cabinet making 
the decision to spend $12 million on a new office building in 
Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan 
and this government has a vision for the development of this 
province. That plan includes the city of Saskatoon having a 
research park for agricultural biotechnology — and we’re a 
world leader there, Mr. Speaker; that plan includes the city of 
Regina being a centre of excellence for research into oil and 
gas; and that plan includes the city of Prince Albert having a 
world-class forestry centre to build the forest sector in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And this government is moving forward 

with those plans in tax reform, in the oil and gas packages and 
the mining package and the forestry package. And the only 
people that are unhappy about the 12,000 new jobs in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, in the last year, and 8,000 new jobs in 
forestry, are sitting right there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, this is an important question. If 
the cabinet was shown the report, then it appears they ignored 
their own due diligence. If the cabinet wasn’t shown the report, 
as we’re led to believe by the minister, then we have this same 
minister withholding information from the cabinet just like he 
did with SPUDCO. 
 
So again to the Premier, will the Premier tell us which one is it? 
Did the cabinet ignore the report or, Mr. Premier, did the 
minister hide this report from the cabinet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to know from 
that Saskatchewan Party and that member over there is, do they 
support the construction of a forestry centre in the city of Prince 
Albert or do they not, Mr. Speaker? 
 
For the record this government is clear, Mr. Speaker. We do not 
support what the consultant’s report said when it said that the 
government could announce it plans to construct the building, 
buy the land, then erect highly attractive and visible signage 
announcing the future home. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, we’re not engaged in a phony PR exercise 
here; we’re engaged in building. We’re going to build the 
forestry centre and we’re going to work with Saskatchewan 
people to build the economy of this province no matter how 
much the Saskatchewan Party might complain about this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, this government is spending 12 
million taxpayers’ dollars on a new office building in Prince 
Albert . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll repeat, this 
government is spending $12 million on an office building in 
Prince Albert, taxpayers’ dollars. The original announcement by 
Ralph Goodale, the Minister of Natural Resources, stated very 
specifically they wanted to spend millions of dollars on a 
state-of-the-art research and development centre in the city of 
Prince Albert. 
 
This does not lead us to that conclusion. They have a feasibility 
study that questions the need for this building at this time. It 
says the functionality, purpose, and rationale of this building is 
not clear. It says there is no direct federal funding and no 
meaningful involvement of the Aboriginal community. It says 
there’s already plenty of office space in downtown Prince 
Albert. 
 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, did the cabinet have this information when it 
decided to proceed with the project or did the minister withhold 
this information just like he did with the SPUDCO deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, from that 
question we know the position of the Saskatchewan Party. The 
member says he would not spend taxpayers’ dollars to build a 
forestry centre in Prince Albert. And we join issue with the 
members opposite. We support the development of the forestry 
centre in Prince Albert. The member says he thinks there should 
be a research and technology centre in the city of Prince Albert 
in forestry. Well guess what? That’s what it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve been there. I’ve been there. And when I was there, Mr. 
Speaker, about six weeks ago, I talked to representatives of the 
federal government, I talked to representatives of the private 
sector, and I talked to representatives of the province. And what 
did they say? They said they were working together positively, 
collaborating on the technology so that they could build the 
forestry centre. That’s what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. The 
member says that’s what he wants. That’s what we’re doing, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to keep building the forestry 
industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP is saying they have 
secured $1 million in funding from the Western Economic 
Diversification Fund. But the regional director of Western 
Diversification says that’s not true, Mr. Speaker. He says 
they’re interested in funding research. They are not interested in 
funding a general-purpose office building. So the government 
says they have a partner but they don’t really have a partner. 
Now doesn’t that sound familiar, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Why is the NDP saying Western Diversification is putting $1 
million into this project when it is not true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll inform this House 
that originally there was an arrangement between the federal 
government and the provincial government whereby each 
would put $1.5 million into the development of VIDO in 
Saskatoon. And the member is correct. WED (Western 
Economic Diversification Canada) did not want to put money 
into the construction of the building. 
 
However an arrangement was made between the federal 
government and the provincial government whereby the federal 
government would put $2.5 million into VIDO, the province’s 
contribution would go from 1.5 million to half a million, which 
it did, and that $1 million would be directed to the forestry 
centre in Prince Albert. That was the arrangement that was 
made. 
 
And one of the proponents of this project — and we’re grateful 
for it — was the Hon. Ralph Goodale who helped us get past 
that log-jam. Because, Mr. Speaker, at least the Hon. Ralph 
Goodale and some federal government officials joined with the 
Government of Saskatchewan to say, we want a centre of 

excellence for forestry in Prince Albert. We’re building it, Mr. 
Speaker. And the simple fact of the matter is that anything 
positive that goes on in this province is opposed by the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP got a feasibility study 
telling them not to proceed with this project. They ignored it. 
The Saskatchewan Party asked for this study. The NDP covered 
it up. The minister may have hid this report from the cabinet, 
and the NDP is saying they have a partner, which the minister 
has admitted they don’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this movie before and it doesn’t have a 
happy ending. Why did the former minister not give all the facts 
to the cabinet, and why was this decision made on incomplete 
information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I have said already, I will say 
again for the benefit of that member, the consultant’s report, 
which was not a feasibility study, did not say, do not build the 
forestry centre. It said, we do not have federal government 
support at this time; do not build it at this time. We 
subsequently got federal government support in the way I’ve 
described. We did what we were going to do, Mr. Speaker, and 
what the report said we should do. 
 
We have done nothing inconsistent with that report, Mr. 
Speaker, except we thought it was just disingenuous to say 
we’re building something, put up a sign, but not build it. We did 
not want to do that, Mr. Speaker, because we want to support 
the development of the forestry industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And there are 8,000 new jobs in forestry, Mr. Speaker, 
just as there is an increase of 71 per cent in oil and gas drilling, 
Mr. Speaker, because while they’re opposing, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re building, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for workers’ 
compensation. Mr. Speaker, on page 2 of the 2001 annual report 
for Workers’ Compensation Board it says that the WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) lost $55.8 million. However, 
on page no. 4 of the WCB’s 2002 annual report it says that the 
WCB lost a whopping $87 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a $30 million difference from the two 
annual reports. Will the minister explain why the 2001 WCB 
annual report understated its loss by $30 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to be able to stand and address the concerns of the 
member, and also to straighten out a couple of his statements 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

 

that he made a number of times repeatedly in the House that are 
inaccurate. And obviously the member, the Labour critic for the 
Saskatchewan Party, has his report with him. And I would refer 
him to page 34, statement of operation and injury fund — that 
the loss, the shortfall in 2001 was $55.821 million and the 
shortfall in 2002 was $93.470 million, which adds up to 
$149.291 million. Mr. Speaker, that was 30 million different 
than what the member used yesterday over and over again. Page 
34, please. 
 
Also I’ll refer you to page 45. The member repeatedly yesterday 
made some statements dealing with future benefits that were 
also inaccurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would refer the 
minister, if she wants to start stating numbers from the annual 
reports, if she’d look in the annual report, the 2002 annual 
report, the difference between the 2000 statement of reserve and 
injury fund in millions was 137 million and if you look at the 
2001 it’s 50 million. That’s a difference of $87 million. 
 
Can the minister explain the discrepancy between the 2002 
report and the 2001 report because there is a $30 million 
discrepancy? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would refer 
the Saskatchewan Party to page 45. He repeatedly stated 
yesterday that there were salary increases at the WCB ranging 
from 4 to 6.5 per cent. Again, that was inaccurate. 
 
And if the member had of read the paragraph previous to the 
numbers instead of just looking at the bolded numbers, he 
would have known that they were significant actuarial 
assumptions were employed to determine the periodic pension 
expense and accrued benefit obligations, Mr. Speaker. So 
please, I’d like to clarify that. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer the member to page 48 
under administration expenses. Administration expenses, there 
is a line item that states, salaries. Now if the member opposite 
could do some simple math and deductions and calculations — 
I’m sure he has a calculator — it shows 3.1 per cent salary 
increases, in line with other departments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in 2001 the WCB, whichever 
number she wants to use — it could be $55.8 million or it could 
be the number that’s shown in the 2002 annual report at $87 
million — whichever number you use, Mr. Speaker, WCB 
jacked up the rates for employers across this province. In 2002 
they lost $93.5 million, Mr. Speaker, and she can’t argue with 
that loss. 
 
And what did the WCB have to do? They had to jack up rates 
further and further, Mr. Speaker. But does it really matter to 
that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, members. Order. I 
would ask the members to allow the question to be put in a 
manner that everybody can hear the question. 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does it really 
matter to the minister how high they jack the rates up? It’s not 
her money. It’s small business and large business that are 
suffering in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister and her NDP government have sat 
back and watched as her hand-picked WCB chairman, Mr. John 
Solomon, whose only qualification to run the board was a 
strong NDP pedigree, Mr. Speaker, has lost $180 million. 
 
How much is the WCB going to increase their premiums or 
rates for business within this province to sustain an incompetent 
manager like John Solomon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as we explained yesterday, 
there was a number of factors that had an effect on the outcome 
of the 2002 annual report. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to stress that WCB made some 
substantial improvements in administration and operational 
costs in 2002. And their investment portfolio, which is managed 
by a number of professional investment managers, has over the 
last three years outperformed WCBs to the east and to the west, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is 
simple here. What was the total value of compensation paid to 
the WCB chairman, John Solomon, in 2001 when they lost 
either 55.8 but more than likely $87 million? 
 
And what was the total compensation paid to Mr. Solomon in 
2002 when the WCB lost a whopping $93.5 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, when I first got in the House this morning, I spent 
some time looking through Hansard yesterday and the 
questions that we had had yesterday. And there was a comment 
from the Labour critic from the Saskatchewan Party and he said 
it’s quite a lineup that we have in the NDP benches over here. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is quite a lineup. And this government is 
committed to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would say — I would say to the member opposite — 
please, please, read the whole report before you stand and start 
asking questions or before you warm up your computer and 
start spitting out the corrections that you have been consistently 
over the last couple of weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to make all of her 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Don’t worry, 
Madam Minister, we’ve read the report, and it’s $93.5 million 
no matter which way you slice it. It’s a huge loss for WCB and 
a huge amount of compensation that small business and large 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

business are going to have to make up because of 
mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on page 48 of the 2002 annual report, it says the 
cost of employee benefits went up 52 per cent last year. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked to employees of WCB who tell us 
their benefits haven’t changed at all. 
 
Will the minister tell us why the cost of the employee benefits 
have gone up 52 per cent when employees of the WCB have 
seen no change in their benefits whatsoever? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we did make 
improvements to injured workers’ benefits last year under Bill 
72 — so another correction there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here again I urge the member, please take the 
weekend and read the complete report. You need to read the 
complete report. The changes in the 53 per cent that the member 
was quoting yesterday with employee benefits, the changes 
there are the IT (information technology) department, human 
resource strategy, which has replaced consulting contracts with 
permanent staff, and it’s also a change in accounting methods 
for recording payments to employees for unused earned 
vacation time and earned sick leave credits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I urge the member opposite, please read the 
whole report this weekend before you stand and ask questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The 
Cities Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2003 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 

to stand on behalf of the government and table a response to 
written question no. 154. 
 
The Speaker: — A response to 154 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 3 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great delight 
I stand in the House today to speak to Bill No. 3, An act to 
amend The Child and Family Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children are our hope for the future. There is 
nothing more wonderful than the birth of a child and they are 
the perpetuation of our species. They grow from helpless little 
individuals who are totally dependent upon another individual 
for their care to someone with very unique talents and 
personalities — no two are alike. And each of them will have 
their own unique strengths and weaknesses, and each will 
contribute to society in their own very distinctive way. 
 
For many of us it’s just incomprehensible to believe that anyone 
would harm a child, let alone a parent. We like to believe that 
all children are raised in a loving, caring environment. And 
we’d like to believe that nobody lives in poverty and that 
addictions do not have a major impact on family life. Mr. 
Speaker, we’d all like to believe that everyone knows how to 
control their anger and that no one is controlling. 
 
Unfortunately this is a very imperfect world, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re all very aware of situations where children must . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Apologies to the 
member speaking. I would ask members if they have some 
pertinent comments to make if they would make arrangements 
to make them in the forum that’s not interfering with the debate 
that’s taking place in the House. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately this is 
a very imperfect world and we’re all aware of situations where 
children must be removed from their family because their home 
environment is unsafe. 
 
In the past, the trauma of being removed from a family home 
has been exacerbated with the fact that they are placed with 
complete strangers. Children were uprooted from what they 
knew and placed in foster homes, and they were taken away 
from the support of their extended family and their friends. 
 
In some cases children understood why they were being 
removed and that it was in their best interests. 
 
But in other cases, Mr. Speaker, and in many cases, they were 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

 

young and they didn’t understand why strangers were taking 
them away from their mom and their dad and placing them with 
total strangers, often away from members of their family and 
friends that they had known all their life. They didn’t 
understand that they were living in an unsafe environment and 
that they were being neglected or abused — that’s all they had 
known. They just knew that this is something that was 
happening and they were going to be moved away from the 
people they considered family. 
 
While we all know that foster parents are generally loving, 
generous individuals who open their home to these children 
who are in need — and they are to be commended for their 
generosity — it’s a simple fact that they are strangers to 
children and add to the trauma that a child is suffering during 
this whole traumatic process. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to commend the minister and his staff for 
finally recognizing many of the concerns that have been 
repeatedly voiced by individuals and organizations and other 
MLAs in this Assembly; the recognition that placing children 
with kinship relationships is in the child’s very best interest, and 
it will go a long way towards making the transition less 
traumatic. 
 
The Hon. Landon Pearson, Senate of Canada, in the Canadian 
Child Care Federation 2001 report is quoted as saying: 
 

For those of us who work with young children, it is often 
difficult to know how to include their voices in our 
decision-making processes. It takes an extra active 
imagination to put ourselves in the shoes of four-year-olds 
so we can take their perspective into account. Yet if we fail 
to do so, our intentions may go awry. 
 
As children grow older, it becomes easier to involve them 
more directly but it still takes an effort to do so 
respectfully. This is not to say that children always know 
what is in their best interest or that we should burden them 
with heavy choices. But they usually do know what won’t 
work, and we should listen to them and learn what will. 

 
I think for a long time we have not listened to children. We 
have not put ourselves in their shoes when making a decision 
that’s about the placement for them. We have failed to 
recognize the importance of a family and culture and being 
raised in a familiar environment. We have believed that the 
state could become a substitute for a parent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the state has not done a good job of ensuring the 
children in short- or long-term care can receive the stability that 
is required for them to feel secure. In many instances they have 
been taken away from the parental home, placed in a strange 
foster home, and eventually placed back into the parental home. 
Unfortunately the stability in the family home often broke down 
a second or third or fourth time. And each time the child was 
once again taken from that home and placed into a different 
foster home because their previous foster homes didn’t have 
room for them then. 
 
While it’s commendable and preferable that a child be reunited 

with his or her parents as soon as they can be in a safe 
environment, in many instances the stability was only short 
term and the child was once again removed. A former youth in 
care in the Children and Youth in Care Review stated: 
 

I am an expert on foster. No one knows foster care better 
than a foster child. You can’t learn the feelings of showing 
up at somebody’s house for the first time and knowing that 
they’re going to be your parents.  

 
That statement says it all, Mr. Speaker. Try and put yourself 
into the young person’s shoes. Try and think what you would 
feel like if you had been taken from your parents and placed 
with strangers. It might be a feeling similar to the first time 
when you went on a sleepover or on a long trip from your mom 
and dad, or the first time you went to a summer camp. The big 
difference would have been no matter how much you feared the 
uncertainty, you’d have known in the back of your mind that in 
a very short time you’d be returning home or that mom and dad 
were only a phone call away and they could always come and 
get you. 
 
Children taken from their parents and placed into foster care 
wouldn’t have this assurance that they’d be returning home to 
mom and dad. Right or wrongly, in the past we have taken these 
children from an environment which they deem to be . . . which 
was deemed to be unsafe and placed in a strange environment. 
 
I’m quite sure that given a choice, a child would request 
placement with their grandparents, or an aunt or an uncle, or 
even a close friend, rather than having to stay with a complete 
stranger. 
 
With the kinship guardianship, if this situation occurred, the 
child would be returning to an environment that they knew. If 
they went back and forth between mom and dad’s home and a 
grandparent’s home it would be much the same as an extended 
holiday or a family visit rather than a total disruption of their 
life. It would be a return to something familiar rather than an 
uncertainty, and I’m sure that’s going to be a lot more 
beneficial to the child, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my years since I was elected, Mr. Speaker, I have had phone 
calls from grandparents who wondered why their grandchildren 
can’t be placed with them rather than in a foster home. There 
have been instances where the children have been placed . . . 
have to be placed in the care of a family member rather than in 
a foster home which would have been much preferable. Family 
members would want to have the child in many cases. 
 
This legislation is a step in recognizing the voices of not only 
the children, but of the grandparents and the aunts and uncles 
and other relatives — generally the people other than parents 
that are the most interested in the well-being of a child. 
 
This Bill recognizes that the practice of placing children with 
strangers is not in the best interest of a child. It recognizes that 
the best interest of the child is better met if they are placed in a 
kinship home, if they’re placed in a place where someone 
actually knows them, where they know the surroundings, where 
they know the people, where they know their own life within 
that family. Being placed in a kinship arrangement also ensures 
that they are placed with individuals who are familiar to them, 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

that they are not strangers with. 
 
This legislation also recognizes that children being removed 
from their family home may have special needs, and that the 
family they are being placed with must have access to resources 
to deal with these special needs. It ensures that the department 
will work with these families to meet the ongoing needs of the 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are very lofty goals, and in offering our 
support to this legislation, I am hoping that the minister 
recognizes the responsibility and the duties that he’s taking on 
by bringing forward this very important piece of legislation 
ensuring that the children’s voices are always heard, that they 
will always have the resources that are needed for special-needs 
children, that the voice of the child will always be heard. 
 
Placing a child with a kinship guardian can place stresses on the 
families as they deal with the adjustment of extra individuals in 
their homes. The availability of resources to deal with added 
stresses and this transition would ensure that not only the needs 
of the children in placement but the needs of the kinship family 
will be met and its home environment remains stable and 
supportive. 
 
This legislation also recognizes that kinship guardians may 
require financial resources to cope with the extra burden of 
additional members within the home. Mr. Speaker, I am 
delighted to see this recognition. In the past, I have had 
grandparents on fixed incomes who have taken in their 
grandchildren to ensure their well-being. They’ve called my 
office very frustrated because there was no financial support 
other than the child tax credit to address the financial needs of 
these individuals. In some instances, Mr. Speaker, they’ve had 
to turn to the food bank to ensure that there was sufficient food 
in the home to feed these children. 
 
Recognizing that potential kinship guardians would have a 
desire and willingness to open their homes to the child in need 
of stability but may not have the monetary option to provide for 
their economic well-being will ensure stability. It will give 
some peace and security not only to the child but to the family 
who is willing to take them in. 
 
In the Children and Youth in Care Review: Listen to their 
Voices, it was stated that Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction 
in Canada that does not provide children in care with a 
legislative right to express their views in welfare matters. 
 
This legislation would deal with kinship issues and the 
availability of financial and other resources as well as for their 
time frame for the placement. It is a good first step in ensuring 
that a child’s rights to personal safety and a secure home are 
met. The next step should ensure that, wherever possible, 
children should have a voice in that placement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation recognizes the value of kinship 
relationship and family responsibility. It looks beyond the 
common and everyday needs of a child. It looks towards . . . It 
looks inward to their heart and their homes and their needs for 
being loved and being cared for. It is a positive step in ensuring 
that children who require placement will have their needs met. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that this is a good piece of legislation. 
We are having individuals discuss it with us further. And, at this 
time, I would like to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 4 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 4 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to have 
the opportunity to speak today to Bill No. 4, The SaskEnergy 
Amendment Act, 2003. This Act deals with the proposed 
expansion to Saskatchewan First Call system. 
 
Presently a digging company would have to make a number of 
calls to make sure that no damage would come to existing 
underground gas pipelines and other buried service lines. The 
minister is now saying that he’s attempting to streamline the 
system by expanding the safety services to SaskEnergy. Then it 
would be SaskEnergy that would operate as a one-call 
organization. Of course it would be SaskEnergy that would be 
. . . exclusively benefit from the profits of this service along 
with SaskTel and SaskPower. 
 
And this is where the problem lies. I’m certainly not opposed to 
any safety issue, especially where safety concerns can be 
improved. Right now, however, there are several private 
companies which locate underground gas lines and other 
service lines. These companies could be increasingly shut out of 
the line location industry if they’re not included in the 
government’s legislation to move to a strictly one-call system. 
 
The minister seems to be walking along the same path so 
familiar with this entire NDP government. They’re not thinking 
about including the private companies in their one-call system. 
Rather they are again following their policy of expanding their 
Crowns while forcing private businesses possibly to go out of 
business. 
 
Make no mistake about it, our provincial economy needs to 
better facilitate the expansion of our oil and gas industry if our 
province is to survive and prosper. But the message that needs 
to be sent to this industry, an industry which thrives on private 
initiative, is that the government will present only the 
opportunities and the proper legislation to allow these private 
businesses to succeed. 
 
Streamlining this industry is vital, but not at the cost of sending 
the repeated message that big government will continue to get 
bigger. The sad part is that this NDP philosophy is preventing 
oil and gas expansion. 
 
We have seen the effects of the world events on the price of 
commodities like oil, gasoline, and even natural gas. We’ve 
seen the rapid fluctuation in gasoline prices at the pump upon 
the beginning, the middle, and now hopefully the end of the 
conflict in Iraq. This is such a competitive industry that direct 
government involvement or investment is extremely risky and 
completely . . . sometimes unnecessary. By providing a better 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

 

tax environment to the oil and gas industry, the expansion of 
this industry would directly impact the provincial government 
revenue in extremely positive way. 
 
Certainly this government cannot deny that oil and gas revenue 
is an important part of any provincial budget. If only this 
government could make the connection. Instead they borrow the 
revenue shortfalls from the Crowns. 
 
So what will we be looking at in the future with regards to oil 
and gas? Well we can expect the competitive environment to 
continue, Mr. Speaker. If the end of the Iraq war does bring 
increased stability to the Middle East and its oil production 
capacity, then we will have to provide more incentives to the oil 
and gas industry to keep it in competition with world barrel 
pricing. 
 
On the other hand, we need to look seriously to the possibility 
that real political stability in the Middle East may be some time 
in coming. Then it is all the more important that we secure and 
fully develop our own energy resources so we’re not so 
dependent on foreign oil resources. 
 
The United States, as we’ve seen these past few months, 
maintain what they call strategic oil reserves which essentially 
means they stockpile large quantities of oil and gas just in case 
there’s a disruption in the world oil economy. 
 
I would like to talk for a moment about the benefits to the 
Saskatchewan economy if we were to effectively expand the 
provincial oil and gas industry. Not only would government 
revenues be more stable, but we would finally have an area of 
industry which would give our young people an opportunity to 
earn better wages and look towards a better future right here at 
home. Certainly, the service industry that would revolve around 
the expanded oil and gas . . . (inaudible) . . . would also benefit 
employment numbers. 
 
What we need to be careful of is that the NDP government does 
not decide to compete directly with the service industry as they 
seem to be doing with the line locator legislation. As official 
opposition deputy critic of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) along with my colleague, the 
member from Swift Current, we’ve sat on CIC committee and 
reviewed many of this government’s dealings with regards to 
Crown corporations and investments. 
 
Over and over we see a consistent pattern of poor investment 
strategy, both inside and outside of Saskatchewan, as well as 
the cost and development of more treasury Crowns which have 
become largely money-losing ventures, such as the government 
expansion of the provincial land titles system, Information 
Services Corporation, which was supposed to cost taxpayers 
only between 20 and 30 million. It certainly would have been 
that much had they bought existing computer technology. But 
no, the NDP decided they would develop their own system and 
even try to sell this new system to other governments. 
 
Well it didn’t work, and now I think we’re in the 
neighbourhood of 100 million and counting — over three times 
what it should have cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. In fact 
it was recently announced that the new fee schedule for land 
titles was again going up and that means the people of 

Saskatchewan, not to mention our real estate industry, will be 
penalized for government mistakes and mismanagement. 
 
During second reading of this Bill, my colleague, the member 
from Redberry Lake, talked about the risk of putting yet another 
critical service into yet another possible Crown. The issue of 
Crown losses and poor investment strategy is just one of the 
many reasons that the NDP have dropped so significantly in the 
polls. In fact the losses of taxpayer dollars by this government 
have been so routine that it seems like every day the 
Saskatchewan people read in the newspapers about millions of 
dollars lost in scandals such as mega bingo. 
 
Amazingly, this NDP government seems content to avoid 
responsibility for loss of millions of taxpayers’ dollars. I think 
they are starting to believe that if the tax . . . If the people of the 
province compare these losses to such federal losses as gun 
control of $1 billion, then maybe people will forget about 
multi-million dollar losses right here at home. 
 
What a sad commentary on our present NDP government when 
they start to lose respect for $1 million loss, when the public 
clearly knows that we only have approximately $6 billion 
budget in which to work here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Premier Calvert needs to realize that most people still think that 
$1 million is a lot of . . . 
 
(11:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. I would 
. . . Order, please. I would just remind the member about use of 
members’ names. But I would also ask . . . Order. I would also 
ask the member to make note that we are now on second 
reading of Bill No. 4 and that all remarks should be directed 
pertaining to . . . should pertain to the Bill and he shouldn’t 
wander too far from that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I will try to stay to the Bill, but 
being it is an extensive Bill dealing with the Crowns, I feel that 
it affects SaskEnergy and a lot of the money-losing ventures. 
 
I must remind the government that this is only a partial list of 
the money-losing ventures and does not include the 100 million 
ISC (Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) costs 
which I spoke of earlier in this address. And it is very easy to 
see where these millions of lost dollars could have been spent 
and where they have been . . . and where they would have done 
a lot more good to the immediate benefit of taxpayers. 
 
Health care could have been a good start. When we look at the 
growing numbers of serious issues involved in the retaining of 
our health care system, even $1 million . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Now, order. Order. I’ve just asked the 
member to relate his comments directly, more directly to the 
Bill. The member continues to speak. I will give him one more 
opportunity to talk to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will 
talk a bit about the Bill when it comes to legislation on the 
Crowns. This is a Bill that possibly could do some good but it 
also could have some potential in the future, and same thing is 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

of the NDP always having to make a Crown, always having to 
run a business, Mr. Speaker. Why do they always have to 
compete with private business? 
 
We’ve checked with some people in this Bill and we’ve . . . and 
some of the response back has been, it could be favourable but 
they’re always worried when you’re dealing with this 
government. And there’s such — unfortunately, Mr. Speaker — 
such a distrust of this present government out there throughout 
this whole province that when a Bill like this comes forward, 
there is a lot of questions on it to be dealt with. A lot of issues 
on it. 
 
The companies that are out there employ people, employ 
taxpayers, people out there that pay taxes to this province that 
helps keep this province going. This is one of these . . . One of 
the big issues in this province is people leaving, of businesses 
not starting up, and this could be a possible reason why again. 
 
This government has . . . When they bring forth legislation, I 
hope they look at each piece and see how it will grow this 
province, not how it will just grow the Crowns. 
 
When this government, this government here, when we form, 
on this side when we form the government over there, that’s 
one of the things we will be looking at, how to grow the 
province through business, with people — not just how to grow 
the Crowns; not just how to grow your own corporations. 
 
We have some questions on it, on this Bill, but I think we will 
move it to Committee of the Whole. There we will address 
some questions. I hope that the minister has listened to the 
speech, and he will address some of the concerns under 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
With that, if nobody else wishes to rise to speak to the Bill, I 
will move it to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 8 — The Youth 
Justice Administration Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
this morning to say a few words about this Bill No. 8, The 
Youth Justice Administration Act. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, as we’re all aware in this House, 
there were changes made at the federal level in regards to the 
administration of youth justice in this country. They’re passing 
a lot more of that onus and load onto provinces as to where it 
more appropriately should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s going to provide provinces the opportunity to be able 
to provide continuity for justice right through from when the 
young offenders first start. And we’re going to be able to get a 
better handle on who they are and being able to put in processes 
. . . opportunities to be able to maybe help the young people 
understand that there is a better way in life rather than crime. 

And then we can maybe track them a little better right through 
into adulthood, to know that we’re going to have some . . . a 
great deal of success, Mr. Speaker, in reducing crime in this 
province. 
 
And this type of legislation by the federal government is going 
to help the province of Saskatchewan and all provinces in this 
country be able to do that. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP government always seems to have trouble with trying to 
be able to spell out to the people of the province what exactly 
they’re going to be able to do when they bring forward 
legislation. 
 
And certainly, as a quick example, Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Arm River was just speaking about Saskatchewan Energy, 
and of course there’s a new Act there and there’s some 
significant details missing. And the people that are involved 
with . . . in critiquing SaskEnergy are going to be able to want 
to speak to the minister on why these details are missing out of 
that Act. 
 
The same thing applies here, Mr. Speaker. We have an Act 
here, Bill No. 8, The Youth Justice Administration Act, that 
provides us with very clear definitions and nothing more. It’s 
just that we might as well have had a dictionary and that’s all 
this Bill is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What the people of Saskatchewan are going to want to know 
with an Act like this are what is the province, what is the 
province going to do with youth justice administration? They 
don’t want to know, you know, the definition of what a youth 
is. They want to know what’s going to happen. Well that’s not 
in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, this NDP government is going to leave that 
up to the bureaucracy which we’re going to have, on this side of 
the House, a lot of trouble with. The people of Saskatchewan do 
not have access to the bureaucracy in delegation of authority 
when it comes to things like youth justice administration. And 
that’s why, you know, in the past several days we’ve seen some 
significant distressing signs by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
And this Act is just a clear example of what I’m talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was two very senior civil servants that had to 
be released from their positions in this government because they 
were the ones looking after the details, the government having 
no idea what’s going on. And this Act is going to be exactly the 
same thing, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to have an Act here to 
deal with youth justice administration and they’re going to turn 
it over to the bureaucrats. Nobody’s going to know what’s 
going on. 
 
The workers in the field, those people that are going to have to 
deal with youth on a day-to-day basis, are not going to have 
clear and defined policy that could be outlined in an Act so that 
they could provide clear opportunity for young people to turn 
their lives around, to know that they are valued, and that the 
people of Saskatchewan want them to be productive, active 
citizens in this province. 
 
That is nowhere outlined in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. And that is a 
great concern to all of us that, without a clear direction, what 
are the youth of Saskatchewan got to look forward to? 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

 

Now we know, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan, that we are 
one of the . . . have one of the highest rates of crime in the 
entire country, one of the highest rates in the entire country, and 
yet we have no clear direction from this NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker, as to what’s going to happen in order to help young 
people stay on the straight and narrow so they may become 
upstanding, honest citizens in our society. 
 
Instead, what we have is a Bill that speaks clearly to definition 
and no direction. It’s direction, it’s direction, Mr. Speaker, that 
the people of Saskatchewan are asking for. And I guess we’re 
not going to get any of that until after the next election, should 
the Premier ever screw up his courage. And members on this 
side of the House are certainly excitedly and enthusiastically, 
Mr. Speaker, waiting for that day. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, that because there’s a great deal of 
work that needs to be done on this Bill, that a Bill such as this 
with no clear definition of where they want to go, no vision, no 
vision, Mr. Speaker, of outcome for youth justice, Mr. Speaker, 
in this province, with no clear vision of how we can bring a 
department with a single purpose to work with youth justice and 
adult justice in this province, that it’s probably more 
appropriate at this time that more work needs to be done on 
looking at this Bill. 
 
And I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
(Subvote FI01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask him to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. To my immediate right is Ron Styles, the deputy minister 
of Finance. To my immediate left is Kirk McGregor, assistant 
deputy minister, taxation and intergovernmental affairs. To 
Ron’s right is Len Rog, assistant deputy minister, revenue 
division. 
 
Directly behind Len is Terry Paton, Provincial Comptroller. 
Directly behind me is Glen Veikle, assistant deputy minister, 
treasury board branch. And just behind Ron is Joanne 
Brockman, executive director, economic and fiscal policy. 
 
And seated at the back we have Dennis Polowyk, assistant 
deputy minister, treasury and debt management division; Janine 
Reed, executive director, personnel policy secretariat; Bill Van 
Sickle, executive director, corporate services division; and 
Brian Smith, executive director of Public Employees Benefits 
Agency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, these are the officials of Finance here today 
to answer questions on the estimates for the Department of 
Finance. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister, and I understand that 
we’ll spend about an hour on Finance estimates this morning so 
I want to move into a couple of sections. 
 
And I first want to begin by thanking you and your officials for 
responding to the requests both here during the debate on 
interim supply as well as my written requests to you. And I 
guess, Mr. Minister, since your officials and you were involved 
in budget preparation and delivered on March 28 . . . Of course 
that’s well over a month ago and, as we know, in the world 
much has changed. We’ve had a war and it’s come and gone. 
And there have been many things that have changed the global 
impact on probably Canada and Saskatchewan to a degree. 
 
And I guess my first question, Mr. Minister — and it’s more of 
a general question — as you look at your budget and as you 
look at your forecast for the province of Saskatchewan and 
you’ve seen the kind of things that have happened in the world 
regarding Canada’s position on the Iraq war and the subsequent, 
you know, comments by Americans regarding trade, etc. . . . 
We look at the dollar and where the Canadian dollar is now 
moving. We look at the prices of natural products, both natural 
resources as well as agricultural products. We see the, I won’t 
say collapse, but the steady decline of markets like the canola 
markets where the farmers are really worried about whether or 
not the $6 canola is going to come back, even though last fall 
we had a $10 per bushel canola. 
 
(11:30) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, overall as you look at your budget, are you 
concerned about any revenue sectors that you see in your 
budget and how they have . . . how the events of the world may 
have impacted on those budget projections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
and to the Finance critic opposite. I think that we are one month 
since we presented our budget. There have been some shifts and 
I would agree that there is some volatility in the economy at this 
point in time. Certainly there is nothing there that we have any 
concern with at this point in time. 
 
Certainly we will be filing our quarterly update, which will take 
in the first quarter, obviously, in early July. And I think at that 
time we will have a better idea in terms of where the 
commodity prices fit in, where the projections are with regard 
to volumes of commodities, where the Canadian dollar sits at 
that point and the adjustments that might be needed to be made 
at that point in time. But certainly at this particular point in 
time, one month after our budget, we do not have any major 
concerns with any of our revenue projections at this time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
We’ve seen the rise of the Canadian dollar and we’re now 
sitting at, I believe, above 70 cents yesterday. What impact does 
a rising Canadian dollar have on the overall budget? Is it a 
positive thing or will it be a negative thing as we may move . . . 
There’s some economists that are predicting a 72-cent or in fact 
maybe a 74-cent Canadian dollar by the middle of summer. Is 
that going to have any effect at all or does the Canadian dollar 
rise or fall have any bearing on the Saskatchewan budget? 
 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 
think there’s competing interests when we look at . . . There’s 
some good things about a rising Canadian dollar and then 
there’s other impacts that might have a negative consequence 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our budget estimates had the overall average for the Canadian 
dollar at 67.4. And to the end of March, that’s exactly the 
average that we obtained. I think that likely, with the strength of 
the Canadian dollar, that we will see some improvements, for 
example, in the oil and gas sector because it’s market driven 
and we’re paid in Canadian dollars. So there’s additional 
revenue streams to be looked at there. 
 
The impact in terms of the averages, how that would apply to 
interest rates, how that would apply to our non-denominational 
debt, we will have a better idea of where that sits with our 
quarterly report. 
 
So I would expect that there’s some offsets here; there’s also 
the implications of equalization that will need to be factored in. 
So it’s a little too soon to know what that impact will be and 
we’ll have a much better idea as we get into our first quarter 
report. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could 
you explain to the people of Saskatchewan whether or not a 
rising Canadian dollar will have a negative or a positive impact 
on those people who are importing and those people who are 
exporting, okay? Obviously we’re an exporting province to a 
great degree. What will a 70- or a 72-cent dollar, what impact 
will that have on imports coming into Saskatchewan or exports? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, this is a difficult 
question, and I know Minister Cline was asked a similar 
question yesterday in his estimates. And his comment was that 
this is, really is a double-edged sword. When we have 
corporations that export as well as import, you’d have to look 
almost at the individual sectors when we look at where that 
dollar figure might go to. 
 
Certainly the impact is also driven by consumer confidence and 
volume. So the Canadian dollar does have an impact. I think it’s 
too soon for us to say what that impact might be. And we’d also 
need again to look at for the differential impact, also the offsets 
that might come from equalization. 
 
So it’s kind of like it’s easier to do the analysis once you have 
all of the figures in for a reporting time frame, such as a 
quarterly report, where we can look at that impact on a 
sector-by-sector basis and determine what the overall impact to 
the General Revenue Fund might be. 
 
So I don’t think we can provide an absolute answer at this point 
in time other than there is a differential problem here, and it is a 
double-edged sword, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I understand, and I’m asking more of a philosophical 
question, Mr. Minister. I’m sure your officials, as you’ve 
indicated, you’ve said that at the end of March you were 
looking at an average dollar of 67.4 cents, and that’s the way 
that you prepared your budget. 

I’m sure that your officials have looked at the concept and said, 
what if we have fall . . . the dollar falls to 63 cents? What does 
it do to the budget? And I’m sure the other projection would 
have been, what if it goes to 73 cents? 
 
I guess my question is, are you planning . . . not planning, I 
guess. Are you hoping for the dollar to continue to improve or, 
in light of your budget, are you hoping that it drops? What’s 
better for the province of Saskatchewan, I guess is my overall 
question, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, in a 
philosophical context, we are confident with the 67.4 that we’ve 
projected at this point in time. But I think that for the province 
of Saskatchewan an increase of a little bit is good; an increase 
of too much may not be quite as good. So that’s the 
philosophical approach on that one, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And I thank you and your officials for that 
comment, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, a lot has happened in the last little while right 
here in Canada as well that seems to have had a bit of a negative 
impact, especially on Ontario and the city of Toronto with the 
outbreak of SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome). And it 
seems that overall, the nation as a whole has shown some 
slowdown. We see that the amount of travellers coming to 
Canada, there seems to be a negative reaction to Toronto. And 
there is some indication that that might even happen to the rest 
of Canada because we’re sort of all painted with the same 
brush. 
 
Do you see that this will happen with regards to an impact on 
Saskatchewan? Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, that there 
has been considerable speculation on what the impact might be 
because of SARS on the Ontario economy. I think that when we 
look at the comments made by David Dodge from the Bank of 
Canada, that he has indicated that . . . and again speculation that 
there may be some impact initially but there would likely be a 
significant rebound. 
 
So if we look at the context of the entire year, we expect that 
the growth predictions that have been provided by the 
forecasters are fairly accurate for the yearly average. And at this 
point in time I think it’s a little too soon to really know what 
that impact might be — if it has an impact at all, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I agree that as 
we look for your quarterly report we’ll see what impact this has. 
And I think with proper education and with a positive response 
by, especially the tourism sector to the rest of the world, I think 
we can ensure that those people who are in the outfitting 
business or who rely on tourism dollars aren’t affected by 
something that I believe is very, very remote for the province of 
Saskatchewan. So I’m encouraged to hear you say that. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other effects on Saskatchewan or on 
Canada might be felt in the area of interest rates. With a rising 
Canadian dollar, we’ve had some reaction there but we’ve also 
. . . And you mentioned the Bank of Canada and the response to 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

 

interest rates. We’ve seen a slight increase in interest rates in 
Canada over the last number of months. 
 
Your officials, as they of course are in contact with Canadian 
officials at the federal level, do you see any increases in the area 
of interest rates? Or in light of the fact that the Canadian dollar 
has grown to 70 cents, will that be sufficient to Mr. Dodge to be 
able to keep the interest rates where they are currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, when we 
look at the comparisons, for example, right now between the 
Canadian economy and the US (United States) economy, 
interest rates in the United States are still comparatively lower 
than they are here. And as recently as last night there were 
reports from the Bank of Canada that because of the rising 
Canadian dollar — and I mean a significant rise in a very short 
time, to the point where we now have a dollar value that is close 
to what it was five years ago — that in reality that will dampen 
momentum for raising interest rates in the short term. 
 
So it’s our expectation that we may actually not see as much 
pressure on the Bank of Canada to look at interest rate increases 
and perhaps they will hold the line in the short term at least, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thanks very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, one of the areas of concern for all people in 
Saskatchewan is the area of debt. And we’ve seen, you know, 
11 billion to maybe a $12 billion debt. And a lot of that debt I 
know you’ve . . . I believe Mr. Cline — sorry, the former 
minister of Finance — had indicated that the breakdown of debt 
as far its, as how it was held both within Canada, within North 
America, and I believe outside of North America . . . As the 
dollar changes in value, will that have any impact on our debt 
held in the United States and anywhere else? Or do you feel that 
the debt, the total value of the debt, is not going to change 
dependent upon the value of the Canadian dollar? 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think that if we 
could refer the Finance critic for the Saskatchewan Party to the 
budget summary document, right at the tail end on page 53, and 
I’ll just quote: 
 

A one cent change in the value of the Canadian dollar 
compared to the US dollar from the level assumed in the 
Budget would change the estimated cost in 2003-04 of 
servicing government gross debt by approximately $2.8 
million. 

 
When we look at the overall debt that we have, we have 
currently in foreign debt, which is almost entirely United States 
denomination, debt of just about 2.3 billion. And with the rising 
Canadian dollar, that actual level of debt will decline. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I think it indicates also the interest rate changes on 
page 53 as well. 
 
You just indicated a number of American debt. Could you, for 
the benefit of people in the province who don’t have access to 
that green sheet, could you indicate the Saskatchewan debt as 

far as the sectors that contain both within Canada and the 
United States and abroad? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — For the benefit of the public, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, from the green sheet, if we look at gross debt 
maturity schedule as at March 31, 2003, Canadian dollar debt, 
the entire quantum, would be $10.1 billion; foreign debt would 
be just under $2.3 billion; for a gross debt of $12.398 billion. So 
most of the debt that we have is Canadian dollar debt. We have 
a proportion of foreign debt to the tune of roughly $2.3 billion. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for putting that on 
the record for people to have a better understanding of where 
our 12 billion debt, $12 billon debt is held. 
 
Mr. Minister, you responded to a question that I had about the 
General Revenue Fund in interim supply debate. And my 
question was, or dealt with, the Provincial Auditor’s report, 
where the 1994 debt of the province was listed in his report 
differently than it was listed in the budget. And your 
explanation dealt with the guaranteed debt, and sinking funds, 
and the like. The final comment on that information sheet that 
you sent to me, Mr. Minister, was, the effect of these 
differences varies from year to year. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is that in 1994 you have a difference 
between your number and what the Provincial Auditor has 
stated in his document. Yet in the year, I guess the year that 
would end in 2001, your number matches the number that’s in 
the auditor’s report. Can you explain, is that due to the fact that 
the guaranteed debt — I’m assuming that it would have 
something to do with the guaranteed debt — that indeed that 
number has changed to the point where your numbers are 
matching the auditor’s numbers? Or can you just give a better 
explanation as to why in one instance it doesn’t match and in 
one instance it does match? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think that if we 
look at the comparisons between 1994 and 2001, in 1994 there 
was considerably more guaranteed debt than in 2001. And the 
Finance critic is absolutely correct that that does have an impact 
on the analysis and the final number. 
 
With that guaranteed debt having come down dramatically 
since 1994, the offsets in adjustments with regard to the 
fluctuations are considerably smaller and that’s why that 
number is now reflected in both the Provincial Auditor and in 
the GRF (General Revenue Fund) estimates. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
auditor prepares the summary financial statements which 
includes the interest costs of all government debt. The one point 
. . . I believe it’s around $1.2 billion in total costs where we see 
the full interest rate costs. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, my question is specific to the Estimates, 
where we’ve noted in your document that you indicate that the 
cost of debt servicing for this year will rise from last year’s 
estimate. I believe last year’s estimate was 633 million, and 
your forecast for year-end, that’s March 31, was 618 million. 
And now we’re expecting that for this fiscal year we will see a 
debt servicing cost of 650 million. That’s a substantial increase 
from the 618 forecasted of about $32 million. 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

Mr. Minister, is that due to factors like an increasing debt, in 
that you’re expecting that the debt of the province will rise to 
above $12 billion? Is it a change in debt that becomes due and 
is now being renegotiated at different interest rates? Is it a 
change in, you know, projected interest rates as we’ve seen a 
slight rise? 
 
Could you explain all of the factors that will contribute to the 
growth in actual debt servicing costs rising by about $32 
million from last year’s year-end? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to 
the member opposite. In the ’02-03 estimate, debt servicing 
charges for the GRF were set at 633 million. The forecast for 
’03-04 is 650 million, which is a $17 million increase. 
 
Most of this would be due . . . Well I guess it’s a combination 
of two things. One, there has been some increased debt, there’s 
no question about that. But also the interest rate charges are 
higher than they were. We’re expecting to refinance 
approximately 1 billion to perhaps 1.2 billion this year, and of 
course that refinancing will be at those higher rates and does 
have an impact. 
 
I might note also that the estimate from ’02-03 of 633 actually 
came in at 618 which is our ’02-03 forecast; and about 5.8 
million of that reduction was due to the strengthening Canadian 
dollar. The ’02-03 estimate had the Canadian dollar at 63.7, this 
year’s estimate has it at 67.4. What we will have at the end of 
the year, we don’t know at this point. But the member is 
absolutely correct that the combination of increased debt 
servicing charges is part of increasing debt, and also increasing 
interest charges. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, that 
poses an interesting question of our discussion about you know, 
10 to 15 minutes ago, as we’ve talked about the change in the 
Canadian dollar. You’ve indicated that the strengthening dollar 
resulted in maybe a $5 million lessening of the costs last year, 
and that’s why the projected cost dropped to 618. 
 
If we see something significantly better than a $67.4 million, 
are you expecting then that 650 million anticipated projection is 
indeed going to be rather high and that will drop significantly if 
we are at 70 million? Is that a correct assumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think the, Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s 
two factors to consider. If we have a strengthening Canadian 
dollar and we also have stagnant or decreased interest rates, 
then that’s very good. So there’s two factors there that need to 
be considered. 
 
And last year I think there was a combination of, one, we did 
have interest rates that were relatively low. We had a 
strengthening Canadian dollar. And I think we’ll need two, both 
factors to look at adjustments on our debt servicing costs. 
 
We don’t know that at this point in time. And as our earlier 
discussion in terms of where the Canadian dollar might go to, 
what the average might be, and also what the interest rates 
might be, I think we’re confident now that we’re likely not 
going to see any short-term interest rate increases. But where 
that is six months from now we really don’t know. 

So all we can say at this point in time is that in last year’s 
estimate there was a reduction to the ’02-03 forecasts. There 
was some savings in debt servicing charges. It’s too soon to say 
whether we’ll have the same impact this year. And we’ll have 
to wait and see whether that 650 will be reduced when we 
provide our forecast. 
 
And in our quarterly updates, and mid-term and third quarter 
reports, if we have enough information at that time, we will 
make adjustments. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, still sticking to that debt topic, your Estimates book 
on page 17 is what I’m referring to. You indicate there that the 
Crown corporation debt and the government debt before 
adjustments for guaranteed debt and the equity and sinking 
funds, we see those values for the Crown corporation debt to be 
at about 3.654 estimated in the previous budget, and moving to 
about $3.776 billion, and likewise an increase in overall 
government debt. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Last week — I believe it was last week; it may be already two 
weeks ago — we saw the Crown corporations annual reports of 
CIC and many Crowns which indicated, you know, the overall 
position of Crowns at the year-end December 31. One of the 
values that was indicated in CIC documents was the sale of 
Cameco shares and the realization of a significant amount of, I 
guess I’ll refer to it as a profit, a net surplus overall. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at last year and look at that debt, is 
that number, was that value used to lower Crown corporation 
debt overall or was it used, you know, for expenditure? Because 
we still see a continued increase in Crown corporation debt. Or 
is this total Crown debt that increased minus the sale of Cameco 
shares? 
 
Could you explain the overall picture of Crown debt, because 
we don’t have a series of Crown estimates in this Legislative 
Assembly, so that is the reason why I’m posing that question to 
your officials, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would refer the 
member opposite to actually page 14 of the document, and the 
page title is schedule of lending and investing activities, and at 
the very bottom it has investment receipts. And the third line, it 
has equity investment in Crown Investments Corporation. So 
there is an investment receipt of $61.3 million in ’02-03, which 
would have been the equity repayment from the Crown to the 
GRF based on the Cameco share sale. 
 
And if you would refer to the Estimates book from last year, 
you will see a similar amount which would have been, over the 
two years, the full amount of Cameco share sales in terms of 
equity repayment to the GRF. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are 
there other expenditures — I guess I’ll refer to them as capital 
expenditures — in the area of Crowns that will require 
significant borrowing to increase the debt of the Crown 
corporation debt overall from an expected 3.71 to 3.77? We’re 
going up another $60 million. Is that a capital investment in 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

 

some project? Are those just normal borrowing requirements? 
Because you know, it’s not a huge amount of money but it’s 
still a significant amount that we are indeed going to have to 
pay more interest costs on. 
 
Could you explain the reason why Crown debt is increasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And the Finance critic has hit it right on, exactly. The increase 
in the Crown debt by that amount is due to increased borrowing 
from all of the Crowns for capital investment for projects within 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would suspect that if we were to look at that total amount, 
we would have to go into the details of each individual Crown. 
And we don’t have that information to come up with the 
composite. So all I can say is, that is additional borrowing for 
capital projects within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I still 
want to stay on the debt for a few more minutes. And one 
specific Crown that is probably . . . the questions probably 
should be asked of the Minister of Learning but I know that you 
have that background, and that’s dealing with the Crown 
corporation called the Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation, the EIFC. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year the government created EIFC and was 
expected to have an expenditure of about 89.2 million, if I’m 
looking at your documents on page 16, and overall the forecast 
was going to come down to 54.3 million. 
 
And I remember the former minister of Finance standing in this 
House and indicating that there was going to be construction of 
schools. There were going to be renovations at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
campuses and the University of Saskatchewan and the 
University of Regina because the government was committed to 
the $89.2 million amount that you see in the government 
Estimates book from last year. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you explain why the change took place that 
removed an anticipated expenditure of about $35 million to 
lower it to $54.3 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think the simple answer, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, is that it really amounts to the timing of the 
projects. So the dollars for the Education Infrastructure 
Financing Corporation that were indicated last year have been 
spread out over a couple of years, and that’s based on the timing 
of the projects. So we had an estimate overall I think last year 
of 89.2 million. Part of that was dispensed last year and the 
remainder will be dispensed this year, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe I heard 
you right that you were indicating that your anticipated balance 
in that fund of 32.4 million in the EIFC will be an expenditure 
for this current fiscal year. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes, he’s correct that that would . . . 
because it’s a financing corporation that that’s the borrowing 
requirement to meet the commitments of the projects that have 
. . . most of which have been already announced, Mr. Deputy 

Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, your 
budget document begins a process of repayment of monies that 
were borrowed under the EIFC. I note that in the estimates for 
Learning in both the K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) system 
and the post-secondary system you have I think listed in one 
case $4.714 million of repayment to the EIFC and in the other 
case 2.440. 
 
Could you indicate whether you have determined the projects 
that received funding last year under that expenditure of $54 
million and the projects that you anticipate in the future for both 
of those sectors? Have you determined the amortization period 
for all of the projects? Is it consistent across the board in 
relationship to the K to 12 system or the post-secondary 
system? 
 
And the other question, Mr. Minister, is: as we look at interest 
rates and fluctuations there, will you continue to have a 
commitment from the actual estimates of each of the 
departments to continue to pay back the debt that was incurred 
last year when those monies were borrowed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I think that if we look at 
the detail of the projects, I won’t be . . . I can’t provide that. 
That’ll have to come from the Department of Learning in terms 
of what that detail would be. 
 
I can say though that the policies with regard to the EIFC and 
the dollars that are borrowed and dispensed that . . . for specific 
projects, that the amortization schedules closely match the debt 
repayment schedules. So the reality is that if it was a capital 
investment with regard to equipment, that perhaps could have 
been amortized over five years and debt repaid over that length 
of time. 
 
If it was a large project like a school, the debt repayment 
schedule, amortization schedule, would be more in the 20-year, 
25-year range. 
 
So that sort of detail would need to be provided by the 
Department of Learning in their estimates, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
would any of your officials have the breakdown of the $54.3 
million that was borrowed through the EIFC regarding the 
portion that was K to 12 funding and the portion that was 
post-secondary funding? Or is that a question that I have to 
have one of my colleagues pose to the appropriate ministers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, we don’t have the actual 
breakdown here with us. That could be provided through the 
Department of Learning in their estimates. Or if the member 
wishes, we could provide that information to him separately as 
well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — No, Mr. Minister, in light of efficiencies I’ll 
have my colleagues ask the appropriate ministers and we’ll get 
the information through the minister responsible for Learning. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the comments though that you did make 
was that the 32.4 million is available for this year’s expenditure 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2003 

 

for projects that I think you’ve already said, you know, are on 
the go. Is that also determined by your department as to the split 
in that $32 million for Learning, for post-secondary education 
and for K to 12? Or is that a hit-and-miss kind of thing as far as 
the percentage of the 32 million and how it will be divided 
amongst the two departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think, Mr. Chair, that again when 
we look at the potential breakdown of the entire amount, the 
dollars have been allocated to projects. I don’t know what the 
allocation is. For example K to 12, universities, your SIAST 
institutes, federated colleges — that breakdown could be 
provided and certainly would be provided by the Department of 
Learning. That’s the level of detail that is not available to the 
Finance officials with regard to the Department of Finance 
estimates at this point in time, Mr. Chair. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I will have my 
colleague do that, Mr. Minister. 
 
But this year as well as last year, and I understand of course that 
you weren’t the Finance minister last year so you weren’t 
around when the EIFC was created, but your officials were. 
Was the original allocation of $89.2 million, was it determined 
. . . When that amount was looked at, was the breakdown of that 
amount determined by a percentage? That is, K to 12 was going 
to get 50 per cent and post-secondary was going to get 50 per 
cent of that amount and then the projects were worked on. 
 
Or was it determined by the project submissions and then 
saying well, there’s a whole lot of money needed in 
post-secondary with the expansions at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) and the U of R (University of Regina), etc., and 
therefore a larger portion may have gone one way or the other? 
Do you know from your officials how that money was to be 
allocated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I don’t because I don’t 
have the Department of Learning estimates in front of me from 
last year, of the breakdown, the detail. 
 
But I can tell him that when we looked at the creation of the 
EIFC last year and we looked at the capital requirements, we 
felt that here was an opportunity to build infrastructure 
providing additional capital dollars for building schools in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I can give him the rough 
breakdown in terms of where we were at. 
 
The previous estimates had been for K to 12 roughly in that $24 
million range which the allocation was increased to 40 million. 
And on the post-secondary side the previous estimates had 
indicated a rough allocation of roughly 30 million which was 
increased to 50. So we’ve got that kind of range of 90, with the 
K to 12 being 40 and the post-secondary being 50 — one an 
increase from 24 to 40, and one for an increase from 30 to 50. 
 
The actual numbers in terms of the breakdown of the 89.2 
available will have to come from the Department of Learning, 
but I can give him the rough estimates that I recall from having 
had this discussion in estimates last year with regard to 
Learning. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. We’ll 
follow up on that through the Minister of Learning. I appreciate 
your comments. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the Throne Speech — well actually I believe it 
was the budget speech — you indicated near the end of the 
address that the government will provide a summary financial 
plan as part of next year’s budget. 
 
There’s been tremendous discussion about summary financial 
budgeting in this Legislative Assembly, at Public Accounts 
Committee, of which your officials have been present for that 
discussion. And I note that, you know, you say next year, and 
I’m assuming that is going to be for the budget year ’04-05. 
 
At the same time we see Crown corporations of course that 
operate on the calendar year and their year-ends are December 
31. So I guess they’re going to . . . January, February, and 
March of ’04 those Crown corporations will have some effect. 
 
Will you be looking at a summary financial budget that will 
encompass the calendar year for Crown corporations and the 
government’s fiscal year for government, which will be ’04-05? 
Is that your intentions as to when you will introduce summary 
financial budgeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite is 
absolutely correct. It’s our intention to roll in those estimates on 
a calendar year basis, so when we do provide our summary 
financial plan that there is matching and obviously a greater 
transparency and accountability in the overall picture of 
government at that point in time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, this is 
a follow-up question that I asked of you and your officials 
during the motion on the interim supply. The Provincial Auditor 
has proposed a model and has made reference to a number of 
models that are followed across the country, some different than 
others regarding summary financial budgeting. 
 
Have your officials and your department come up with a model 
as to how you will be looking at this? Or are you presently 
investigating a number of models? Or are you copying the 
model that has been suggested by the Provincial Auditor? 
 
What are the plans and how are they going regarding the actual 
implementation of a summary financial budgeting model? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the department officials 
have had a number of discussions with the Provincial Auditor. 
And I can provide the member, with some certainty . . . In fact I 
can state that the model that will be used for our summary 
financial plan satisfies the recommendations of the Provincial 
Auditor in his 2002 Fall Report. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before I recognize the member, I just 
would advise all members that food is not permitted in the 
Assembly. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials, I have a question on a PST (provincial 
sales tax)audit. I have a constituent who was audited. He has a 
logging business. 



May 2, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

 

First of all he wasn’t aware that PST had to be paid on used 
logging equipment that he had purchased in Alberta. But I 
understand when they expanded the PST base a couple of years, 
three years ago, that used equipment, logging equipment, is 
actually now subject to PST and has to be submitted even if it’s 
brought in from out of province. Before I go on, I guess I’ll just 
ask for confirmation of that statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite is 
correct that there would be PST payable on the used logging 
equipment purchased in Alberta. That change occurred with the 
announcement of personal income tax reform and the expansion 
of the PST to used goods in the year 2000. 
 
But I would also wish to point out that regardless of that 
change, if that equipment had come from Alberta, 
Saskatchewan PST would never have been paid. And even prior 
to the expansion, PST would have been required to have been 
paid when that equipment was brought into Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you for that confirmation, Mr. Minister. 
My question then is, when the gentleman was audited for PST 
and he was charged the PST on the equipment that he had 
brought in, but at the same time he had sold a piece of 
equipment to someone else, hadn’t charged the PST on that. So 
he was actually charged the PST for the piece of equipment that 
he had sold to someone else as well. 
 
Now to me that doesn’t seem to make any sense — where he 
has to pay the PST on the one hand on something that he had 
purchased in Alberta, and he was also charged because he had 
not charged on a piece of equipment that he had sold. So he was 
dinged both ways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think, Mr. Chair, that the principle 
of collecting the PST on the sale and then remitting that to the 
provincial government is a principle. But if the member 
opposite would be willing to provide information with regard to 
the detail of the individual case, I will certainly have the 
revenue branch look into that case and see if everything was 
done correctly or whether there might have been a problem or 
an adjustment that would need to be made. 
 
It’s difficult to know the exact details in a lot of these 
transactions, but the principle is that PST is collected at the time 
of sale and remitted to the provincial government. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me 
how many PST auditors are on staff now within your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The actual number is 59 PST 
auditors. There may be a component of some clerical staff, but 
59 is the number that’s recorded. And all of those positions are 
filled, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know if you have the 
numbers available to you now, but I’m wondering how many 
audits were actually performed last year and what percentage of 
them actually have resulted in a refund and what percentage 
resulted in the clients owing money to the Department of 
Finance. 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite 
actually asked the same question last year. And the answer is 
that we still don’t have the exact numbers in terms of the 
number of PST audits and the amount of recovery from those 
audits. As soon as we have that information we will provide 
that information to the member opposite. 
 
And I see, Mr. Chair, that we are at the prescribed time for 
estimates for the Department of Finance, so I’d like to thank my 
officials who are here today providing answers to the questions 
from the members opposite, and I’d like to thank the Finance 
critic and the Education critic for their fine questions today. 
 
And I would ask that we report progress. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. The member for Canora-Pelly 
would like to say thank you to the Minister of Finance and to 
the officials for assisting in understanding some of the things 
that are before the people of Saskatchewan when we look at the 
interest rates and the Canadian dollar and the Iraq war and all 
the other things. And I want to extend my appreciation to your 
officials as well, Mr. Minister. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:32. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................853 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................853 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................853 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................853 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................853 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................853 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................853 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................853 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................854 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................854 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................854 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................854 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................854 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................854 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................854 
  Draude ...............................................................................................................................................................................855, 856 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................855 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................855 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................855 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 School Safety Patrol Week 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................856 
 Regina YWCA Honours Women of Distinction 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................856 
 Women of Today Awards and Luncheon 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................856 
 Saskatoon’s Women of Distinction Awards 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................857 
 A Taste of the Vanscoy Rural Municipality Fundraiser 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................857 
 Student Art Showcased 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................857 
 Farm Family Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................857 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Forest Centre 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................858 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................858 
 Workers’ Compensation Board 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................860 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................860 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 23 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................862 
 Bill No. 24 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2003 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................862 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................862 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................862 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................862 
 Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................864 
 



 

 

 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................866 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Finance — Vote 18 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................867 
  Krawetz..............................................................................................................................................................................867, 873 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................872 
 


