















































Hansard: May 01, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 823 
 May 1, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of Saskatchewan 
residents concerned about the effect of the high tax on property. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Wadena, Rose Valley, Lintlaw, and the fine 
community of Buchanan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people who are really concerned 
about the high cost of the education tax: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 

Everyone that has signed this petition is from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw who are 
concerned about the lack of dialysis services in their 
community. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Signatures this afternoon on the petition are all from the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
And I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition, a 
prayer of relief, which reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister 
of Highways preserve the old bridges between Battleford 
and North Battleford. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
unacceptable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose 
Jaw. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition from people in my constituency worried about 
the Kindersley Hospital and asking for its expansion. The 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from 
Coleville and Kindersley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition opposed to 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 2003 premium increases to 
farmers: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Davidson and Chamberlain. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition today on behalf of constituents concerned with a 
portion of Highway 22. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey and Earl Grey. 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan concerned with the government’s handling of the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
good centre of Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 12, 18, 27, 36, 40, and 90. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 35 
move the first reading of The Water Quality Recognition Day 
Act. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 30 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many Saskatchewan 
producers have made application to the livestock drought 
loan program announced on July 29, 2002; how many of 
these applications have been approved; and how many have 
not been approved; are any applications left to be 
processed; and if so, how many? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

(1) How many subscribers did SaskTel’s Max have on 
April 30, 2003; (2) how many subscribers was SaskTel 
Max supposed to have had on April 30, 2003 according to 
its business plan projections? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give I notice that I shall on day no. 35 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: how many acres of Crown 
land in the province is deemed critical habitat wildlife land; 
and further to that, has any critical habitat wildlife land 
been sold to resolve TLE claims; if yes, what are the land 
parcels and which band or reserve has claimed them; if no, 

is the government looking at selling such land to resolve 
TLE claims? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 35 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: in this 2003-2004 
fiscal year, of the fire towers that were condemned in the 
fiscal years 2000-2001, 2001-2002, 2002-2003, what is the 
number that will be rebuilt; and which organizations and/or 
private companies and/or government entities will build 
these fire towers in the province of Saskatchewan in the 
fiscal year 2003-2004? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the CIC minister: what taxes in lieu of grants did the 
Crown Investments Corporation pay to the RMs of Rudy 
and Canaan and the town of Lucky Lake; further to that, 
what was the assessment on the tax notices and did the 
Crown Investments Corporation pay; if not, why did they 
not go through the appeal process? 

 
And a second question, Mr. Speaker, that I also give notice I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government: 
 

Also to the CIC minister is: what taxes in lieu of grants did 
Sask Valley Potato Corporation pay to the RMs of Rudy 
and Canaan and the town of Lucky Lake in the year 2002; 
further to that, what was the assessment on the tax notices 
and did the Sask Valley Potato Corporation pay; if not, why 
did they not go through the appeal process? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Behind the bar this 
afternoon we have a member, a sitting member of the Estevan 
City Council and former member of parliament for 
Souris-Moose Mountain. 
 
And I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming a 
long-standing servant of this province and a friend of this 
House, Bernie Collins of Estevan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a very good friend of mine seated in the west 
gallery, Gunnar Passmore — Gunnar with the Sheet Metal 
Workers Association. 
 
But I want to share that I’ve known Gunnar and his wife, Dee, 
for some more years than either of us want to remember, 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

 

Gunnar. But it’s indeed a pleasure. From time to time Gunnar 
comes and blesses us with his presence and I’m glad that you 
have chosen to do so again today. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Gunnar Passmore. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join with the member from the Battlefords in welcoming a 
former colleague of mine, Mr. Bernie Collins, to our Assembly 
today, sitting behind the bar. 
 
Mr. Collins has served the province of Saskatchewan as the 
mayor of Estevan and also as a city councillor in that fine 
community. And he and I had the opportunity to sit together in 
parliament — not always on the same side on issues, but often 
on the same side on issues. Mr. Collins also served on the 
Agriculture Committee and I had the pleasure of working with 
him in that regard as well. 
 
And I think that the members of this Assembly should not only 
join in welcoming him, but also thank him for his service to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Ceremony 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, in a ceremony held in this 
Chamber this morning, Lieutenant Governor Lynda Haverstock 
presented the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal to seven citizens 
in recognition of their outstanding volunteer service or 
exceptional community involvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal are: Mr. Norman Beach of Swift Current, who 
recently volunteered thousands of hours with the Southwest 
Crisis Services donation program; Mr. Dave Cameron of 
Lumsden, who among other volunteer activities was one of the 
original organizers of the Lumsden Duck Derby; Mr. Kelly 
Chase of Porcupine Plain, who in 1998 was honoured for his 
charity work by the National Hockey League and presented 
with the King Clancy Award. 
 
Ms. Louise Fisher of Tisdale founded and coordinated the 
Tisdale Authors Event. Mrs. Jackie Groat, Mr. Speaker, who I 
am proud to say is from my home riding of Saskatoon 
Sutherland and who has established many programs and 
activities for the continued independence of disadvantaged 
people. Ms. Renu Kapoor of Regina, who has helped Regina 
fund raise for numerous local and international charities. And 
Ms. Marie Léa Mathers-Ross who’s well known for her 
volunteer efforts with the Boy Scouts of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating these seven Saskatchewan citizens and thanking 
them for their selfless efforts and hours of service. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Maple Creek Celebrates 100 Years 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
community of Maple Creek hosted a noon hour event to 
celebrate the 100th anniversary of the incorporation of the 
town. And although I was unable to attend the birthday party in 
person, I wanted to share this news with my colleagues in the 
legislature today and to extend our joint congratulations to the 
town of Maple Creek on this auspicious occasion. 
 
The history and spirit of this southwest community runs deep, 
as indicated by its slogan, Where Past Is Present. While 
incorporation happened 100 years ago, it was some 20 years 
earlier that a hardy Canadian Pacific railway crew spent its first 
winter camping on the banks of Battle Creek amongst some 
overhanging maple trees, thus giving the community its name. 
And even prior to that, Fort Walsh, situated 30 miles from the 
present town site, was home to the first permanent police force 
in Western Canada. The presence of the detachment encouraged 
settlers to ranch in that region with original operations still 
being run, often by third and fourth generations of cowboys. 
 
Much of the region’s history has been preserved in two 
museums and its spirit is displayed proudly throughout the year 
at many local events. Two of the most popular are the ranch 
rodeo and the annual Cowboy Poetry Gathering and Western 
Art Show. 
 
The community of Maple Creek offers a wide variety of 
services and amenities, and supports an assortment of thriving 
businesses within the agricultural, tourism, and oil and gas 
industries. 
 
Homecoming week, Mr. Speaker, is scheduled for August 1 
through to 3 and that’ll offer an opportunity for old and new 
friends to gather in celebration. 
 
So I ask that you please join with me in offering congratulations 
to the town of Maple Creek — a community with great roots, 
lots of activity, and an enthusiastic outlook for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Working Persons’ Day 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the first of 
May. The warmth outside, the green on the trees, and sufficient, 
for the moment, soil moisture in most of the province are all 
good reasons for us to feel good and optimistic as we spring 
into spring. 
 
This is a red-letter day for another reason, Mr. Speaker, and I 
use the word advisedly. May Day is a special day for working 
people around the world — the International Working Persons’ 
Day, a day that many believe is a European holiday co-opted by 
the former soviet empire. But that perception is wrong. 
 
(13:45) 
 
The celebration of May Day began right here in North America. 
It recognizes a 19th century workers’ struggle that led 
eventually to the establishment of the eight-hour working day, 
the benchmark in the ongoing improvement of workers’ rights; 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

an achievement that I would have thought that is securely 
entrenched in contract, in law, and in practice. Unfortunately 
that’s not entirely true. 
 
Tommy Douglas said, “Ground gained must be maintained.” 
 
On this May Day we can note with some worry that in the 
country that gave us the eight-hour workday, there are now 
efforts by the current Republican administration to undermine 
this time-honoured practice. There are two Bills before 
Congress that would, if passed, repeal the 40-hour work week 
and end overtime protection. And as everyone knows, what 
happens south of the border can influence us. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on a day of celebration, let us take a moment 
to renew our never-ending efforts for equal rights, fair play, fair 
pay, and social justice. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Aboriginal Diabetes Awareness Day 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
inform the Assembly that tomorrow is National Aboriginal 
Diabetes Awareness Day. 
 
In 1999, then national chief of the Assembly of First Nations, 
Phil Fontaine, proclaimed the first Friday in May as a day to 
raise awareness of diabetes prevention among Aboriginal 
people. 
 
Diabetes is a major cause of kidney and heart disease, 
blindness, strokes, premature death, and other significant health 
problems. The incidence of Type 2 diabetes among people of 
Aboriginal descent is reaching epidemic proportions in a 
number of communities in Saskatchewan. Studies have shown 
that 8 per cent of Aboriginal people between 19 and 39 years of 
age have diabetes, while a shocking 50 per cent of Aboriginal 
people over the age of 60 have the disease. 
 
Although there is yet no cure for diabetes, Mr. Speaker, 
diabetes doesn’t have to be fatal. It can be controlled with 
regular exercise, a healthy diet, and abstinence from alcohol. 
 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in wishing 
success to all of the individuals and organizations who are 
working diligently to fight the diabetes epidemic among 
Aboriginal people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Aboriginal Curling Championships 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the National Aboriginal Curling 
Championships were held at the Hub City in Saskatoon over the 
Easter weekend, and I am pleased to say that Saskatchewan 
rinks distinguished themselves, winning three of the four 
Canadian titles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Nadine Obey rink of Cowessess defeated the 
Tanny Yole foursome from Ile-a-la-Crosse to win the junior 
women’s title. 
 

The Loren Stewart rink, including Emile Bouvier, Jonathon 
Favel, and Shane McKay defeated the Brennan Merasty team 
from Ile-a-la-Crosse to take home the junior men’s title. 
 
In the women’s championship game, Renee Sonnenberg of 
Beaumont, Alberta was victorious over Loon Lake’s Makwa 
Sahgaiehean. 
 
And the men’s championship went to Rod Wuttunee; the Rod 
Wuttunee rink, including Chad Sayese, Tavio Morin, and Sam 
Wuttunee. They defeated Marv Aubichon of Regina to claim 
the title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Martin Aubichon, Maynard 
Whitehead, and the many sponsors of the National Aboriginal 
Curling Championships, including the provincial government 
and Crowns, as well as the staff of the Hub City, all of whom 
helped to make this event the huge success that it was. 
 
I ask this Assembly to join me in congratulating all the 
participants of this event, in particular those who played their 
way to the National Aboriginal Curling Championships. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Biggar Teen Joins Saskatchewan Express 
 
Mr. Weekes: — For one Biggar teen, the summer of 2003 is 
going to be busy, performing on the road with the province’s 
top-notch musical act, Saskatchewan Express. 
 
Kristen Sehn was selected to perform with the popular troupe 
for the upcoming summer season. For Sehn, learning of her 
selection was exciting. It was especially thrilling learning that 
she would be singing and dancing with the high-profile 
Saskatchewan musical ensemble — an icon of the province that 
has been entertaining across North America for over 20 years. 
 
“You can audition for dancing or singing and can do basically 
one. They told me that I could do both of them,” she proudly 
beams. Sehn, who auditioned in Regina about a month ago, will 
be performing every weekend starting this June. 
 
The commitment required by the professional level musical 
company will have the grade 10 Biggar Central School 2000 
student missing some classes. She’ll start travelling to Regina 
for rehearsals every weekend this month as Saskatchewan 
Express polishes its act for a June start in the summer tour 
season. 
 
Sehn says people she knows who have been in the 
Saskatchewan Express have told her to expect the experience of 
a lifetime. For Sehn, who has been on the stage for most of her 
young life, there is another more important reason — the simple 
joy of entertaining, putting a smile on someone’s face, getting 
their toes a-tapping. “It’s nice because I’ve always been into 
dancing or singing, it was never both — now it’s both.” 
 
Please join me in congratulating this very talented young lady. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

 

thINK Food Program 
 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the high-tech revolution is great. 
Ink cartridges are a problem though when they come out the 
other end of that. The resulting environmental hazards require 
our attention. Literally thousands of ink cartridges and out of 
date cellphones have wound up in our landfills, Mr. Speaker. 
This is not only environmentally hazardous, it’s also wasteful. 
 
These hazards have been turned into opportunities to create new 
sources of funds for food banks and that is thanks largely to a 
partnership that Petro-Canada and the Canadian Food Banks 
Association have put together. And it’s a program called thINK 
— I’m not sure how to say it because it’s a small, lower case t-h 
and then higher case or capital I-N-K Food — so thINK Food 
has been put together by that partnership. 
 
I’m very pleased to report that in Regina this program has got 
support from SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corp, and, very importantly, the Regina 
Girl Guides. To date the program has generated the equivalent 
of 110,000 pounds of food and diverted more than 65,000 
cartridges from landfills. 
 
I congratulate all involved in this win-win program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the Provincial Auditor raised serious 
concerns about the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) 
mismanagement of the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board). 
The result of that mismanagement was that the WCB lost $56 
million in 2001, Mr. Speaker. And when we asked the minister 
about this massive loss in the legislature last June, she said 
steps were being taken and things would change for the WCB in 
2003. Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the NDP released the 2002 
annual report for WCB and guess what? Things did change 
because in 2002 the WCB managed to lose a whopping $93.5 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what actions is this minister taking to stop the 
tidal wave of red ink for the WCB? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to stand to answer this question. 
 
As the members opposite and the Saskatchewan Party may not 
be aware, there’s a number of issues that affect the WCB which 
were released in the annual report yesterday. Part of that was a 
weakness in the markets and a lower-than-anticipated 
investment earnings. Mr. Speaker, and all I have to say is, check 
your pension statements. It’s happening all around us and to 
WCBs across the country. 
 

Also part of the $93 million shortfall was an actuarial 
adjustment that was made because of Bill 72 last year. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to remind the members opposite that they 
all voted for this Bill last year. There is no dissenting votes on 
the record. They agreed that there was a time to increase 
benefits for working people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the big concern out of the report yesterday 
was the increase in injury claims that the board has received. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the WCB lost a whopping 
$93.5 million in 2002. And according to the WCB’s annual 
report, $36.7 million came as a direct result of legislation to the 
WCB. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those changes were introduced in this legislature 
by the NDP government last spring. And the WCB should have 
been fully aware of the changes and the impact that those 
changes would have on their financial statement this past year. 
 
How can the minister and her NDP government possibly blame 
their own legislation for a whopping $36.7 million loss that the 
WCB should have known about had that government informed 
them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And if the 
member of the Saskatchewan Party opposite, who’s the Labour 
critic, had have taken the time to attend the annual meetings 
held last fall, this shortfall was announced — the $36.7 million 
that was booked for Bill 72 which those members voted in 
favour of. Mr. Speaker, if he had attended a meeting and read 
any of the reports that were released from those meetings, he 
would have known that there was a shortfall that was projected 
by the board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago the NDP 
performed an exhaustive cross-country search for a chairman 
for the board, to find the best person to serve as chairman of the 
WCB. Who did they find, Mr. Speaker? Well they found the 
former NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 
MP (Member of Parliament), John Solomon. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the big question is, how is this old NDP hack 
doing with the WCB over the last two years? Well let’s review. 
 
In 2001, Mr. Speaker, the WCB lost $87 million — the first 
year that Mr. Solomon was in charge. This past year in 2002, 
the WCB has lost $93.5 million, Mr. Speaker — the second 
year that Mr. John Solomon was chairman. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
$180 million of losses in the past two years that Mr. Solomon 
has been chairman of the board. 
 
When is the NDP going to do the right thing and fire their 
hand-picked chairperson? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the WCB retains highly 
qualified management companies to invest on their behalf and 
to manage the investment portfolio. 
 
The opposition members are taking a very simplistic view. And 
I would ask the member opposite, when he’s calling for the 
resignation of the chairperson, is he also calling for the 
resignation of the chairpeople and civil servants across this 
province who manage investment portfolios and insurance 
portfolios on behalf of all of us, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I can’t believe she’d stand in her place and 
justify an NDP patronage appointment for losing $180 million 
and saying, it’s perfectly fine; he’s the right guy for the job, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It doesn’t matter that the NDP cabinet operates under the motto, 
ignorance is bliss, Mr. Speaker. And it doesn’t matter that the 
Labour minister of the WCB has lost $180 million in the past 
two years. After all, she doesn’t have to pay for those losses, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
People across this province that own businesses, large business 
and small business, are going to have to pick up the bill for the 
incompetence of that government’s leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — How much will the WCB rates be going up 
in the next year? How does the NDP plan on paying for this 
ninety-three million, point five million dollar loss this past 
year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it’s tough to explain in the 
short period of time that we have. This is a shortfall, and a 
portion of it is because of an actuarial adjustment that needs to 
be made to accommodate the benefits that will extend into the 
future for injured workers. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, the best way to reduce costs 
and reduce premiums is to reduce the injuries that are 
happening in workplaces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the WCB may be pouring out 
red ink and the NDP may be driving the WCB rates through the 
roof, but that didn’t stop the WCB from increasing its own 
wages from between 4.5 and 6 per cent last year, it says right in 
the WCB’s 2002 annual report. And it didn’t stop the WCB 
from increasing the cost of its employee benefit by a whopping 
52 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the WCB has lost $180 million in just two years. 
Its liabilities have increased $178 million while its investment 
portfolio has shrunk by more than $23 million. 
 
Why is the minister allowing the WCB to increase its own 
salary by as much as 6 per cent, and increase the employee 

benefits by more than 50 per cent, while the WCB is losing 
hundreds of million dollars and WCB rates are going through 
the roof for small business and large business in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here again is a prime 
example of how the Saskatchewan Party just picks and chooses 
which they wish to talk about. They don’t have the ability to 
look at the big picture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was some tough news in the annual report. 
But, Mr. Speaker, you have to look at a 3 per cent decrease in 
administration costs that’s been achieved by the board, and also 
a major decrease in operating expenditures over 2002. 
 
The investment portfolio that the Saskatchewan Workers’ 
Compensation Board has, has outperformed both of our WCB 
investment portfolios on either side of us — in the provinces on 
either side — consistently over the last number of years This is 
a well-managed board; it operates quite well. And I say again to 
the members, if your concern is the cost and rates that are 
charged the businesses, the best way to reduce that is to reduce 
the injury rate that happens in the workplaces in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s quite a 
lineup we have on those NDP benches over there. You’ve got 
the minister responsible for bingo that’s lost $8 million on a bad 
bingo game. We’ve got the minister responsible for potatoes 
who’s lost $28 million on a bad batch of potatoes. We’ve got 
the SaskTel minister who’s lost $70 million on a boatload of 
foreign investments that’s gone bad. We’ve got a land titles 
minister who’s blown $107 million on a land titles system that 
doesn’t work. We’ve got a Labour minister whose patronage 
appointment has cost the WCB $180 million. 
 
But none of those ministers hold a candle to the Premier, who’s 
racked up a whopping $1.1 billion of new debt in less than three 
years. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier do the right thing today 
and call an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite there 
ought not tempt me. He ought not tempt me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this member should not 
tempt me today. 
 
The record, Mr. Speaker, of governments, are clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan. When that group of men and women 
occupied these government benches, they ran this province in 
debt on average $1 billion for every year they were in 
government. They ran this province into a deficit, debt situation 
that made us the basket case of economies in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

 

This government, in the last 10 years, we have taken the debt to 
GDP (gross domestic product) ratio in this province from the 
worst in Canada now to the second best in Canada. That’s what 
we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the member opposite standing there 
from Indian Head today had a fair number of questions about 
the Workers’ Compensation Board and the policy surrounding 
the Workers’ Compensation Board. Because his leader now 
says we’re all going to be very accountable over there and 
answer questions, I want him to answer this question in this 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member of Indian Head said to the 
press that the trouble at the Workers’ Compensation Board was, 
quote, “labour-friendly laws.” That’s the problem, he said — 
labour-friendly laws. Mr. Speaker, will that member stand in 
the House today and tell us which of these labour-friendly laws 
he is proposing to get rid of if they form government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rate Review Process 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today is the first meeting of the Saskatchewan rate 
review panel to consider SaskEnergy’s request for a 33 per cent 
gas rate hike. 
 
The problem is, the problem is that the government, the NDP 
government has pretty much declared that the review process is 
meaningless by already approving the increase. Mr. Speaker, 
this seriously undermines the independence of the rate review 
panel. And it’s not just the Sask Party saying that. The former 
Chair of this panel, Bob Lacoursiere, said, and I quote: 
 

By having cabinet make the decision ahead of time like 
they have just done . . . It makes it really tough for the 
committee to proceed in an independent manner. 

 
The question to the minister responsible is simple: why has the 
NDP government undermined their own rate review process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reassure the 
member and reassure the people of Saskatchewan that this 
government takes the rate review process very seriously. It was 
this government that put this process in place. It was that group 
of men and women when they were in government that took a 
rate review process, put it in place, and the first time the rate 
review process said no to them, they killed the rate review 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the party, this is the government, this is the 
government that respects the rate review process. And we will 
of course respect the decisions made by the rate review process. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, since we have engaged ourself in this 
discussion about the future of the Crowns, since we have 
engaged ourself, it is now time for the Saskatchewan Party and 

its leader to start speaking definitively to their policies 
concerning the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan. I want to 
hear — this government, the people of Saskatchewan want to 
hear — precisely what are the policies of the Saskatchewan 
Party regarding the Crown corporations. 
 
So I ask the Leader of the Opposition, I ask the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party this question. In the last election campaign 
which we fought against them, he committed that any 
privatization of asset from the Crown corporations in this 
province would be preceded by a referendum of the people — 
the people will be asked. Mr. Speaker, does the Saskatchewan 
Party support that position today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this particular Premier is all too 
anxious to become the leader of the opposition. It’s going to 
happen in due time, Mr. Speaker. It’ll happen in due time. He’s 
got all of these questions. 
 
And by the way. Mr. Speaker, the answers are there. The 
answers have been provided in clarity. The answers are there 
and all that needs to happen now is for that Premier to screw up 
the courage and call the election and let the people decide, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s all that has to happen, all the bravado 
aside. 
 
The question was simple. In fact, Mr. Speaker, right now the 
very first hearing is happening of the rate review panel process. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order, 
members. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We understand that the 
very first hearing of the rate review panel process is happening 
now, right now in Saskatoon, and under a dozen people have 
shown up for it. That meeting is occurring right now. Now the 
reason they are not showing up for it, of course, is because the 
rate hike, the reviewing has already been approved by the 
government. 
 
So again, to the Premier — if he’s answering the questions now 
— what is he intending to do to restore people’s faith in his own 
rate review process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my view the 
people of Saskatchewan have a great deal of respect and support 
for the rate review process, as does this government, Mr. 
Speaker. There is no doubt about that. And the process will 
unfold and this government will take very, very seriously the 
recommendations of the rate review panel. 
 
I’ll tell you what the public doesn’t support and doesn’t trust, is 
the notion that somehow that group of men and women would 
ever be in charge of their public utility. That’s what they don’t 
support. 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I want to make a little prediction 
here today, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a little prediction 
today. The member from Swift Current will be the leader of the 
opposition far before I ever am. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well instead of all the 
bravado and all the rhetoric from the Premier, if what he wants 
is this vigorous debate like he apparently wants to have today, 
all he has to do is muster the courage, get in his car, drive over 
to the Lieutenant Governor’s residence, and ask for the election 
writ and drop the writ. Drop it, we say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re inviting the 
Premier to do. We’ll gladly go out on the campaign trail and 
talk about $85 million in out-of-province losses by the NDP 
government. We’ll go on the campaign trail and talk about 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), the loss of $28 million and a cover-up for six years. 
We’ll talk about the land titles debacle, $107 million loss, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll talk about the longest waiting lists in 
Saskatchewan. All he’s got to do is call the election. We’ll talk 
about all of those things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, today we learn that while the rate 
review panel is hearing about a $7.25 price per gigajoule this 
government’s proposing, the Alberta rate . . . the Alberta 
customers are going to be looking at a new rate decrease that 
will bring their rate down to $4.80. 
 
Now I’m sure lots of people in the province will want to talk a 
little bit about that, and maybe they’d go to the rate review 
panel hearings except, Mr. Speaker, that the decision by the 
government has been made. 
 
So to the Premier once again: will he tell the Assembly what is 
he going to do to restore people’s faith in his own rate review 
process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, for the third time in this 
question period, let me say again, we respect the rate review 
process and we’ll take extremely seriously any 
recommendations that are brought to us by the rate review 
process. That has been the pattern; that will be the pattern — 
unlike the pattern they used with the rate review process when a 
rate review process told them they couldn’t do what they 
wanted to do. 
 
Now let’s have some further discussion, therefore, about the 
issue that is of concern to some Saskatchewan people. 
Yesterday I happened to meet 40 . . . 35 new immigrants to our 
province. And interestingly, they wanted to know what is the 
position of this opposition Saskatchewan Party in 
Saskatchewan. They asked me — they asked me — what is the 

position? Is this group of men and women prepared to sell off 
our public utilities? I tell them the answer is, yes. Because while 
I am in Saskatoon and the Leader of the Opposition’s asking 
questions to an empty chair — while I’m in Saskatoon at the 
immigration ceremonies, he’s asking questions to an empty 
chair — I understand that the critic of the Crown corporations 
over here is not willing to commit that they will not privatize 
the Crowns in Saskatchewan, our public utilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is time for the Leader of the Opposition, as he says he will, to 
come forward, come forward in the House. Will they have a 
referendum should they form government? Will he have a 
referendum before any sale of any Crown public utility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of North Battleford Residential Facility 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 3, I asked 
the Minister of Public Safety what was going to happen to the 
men in the North Battleford halfway house who were in the sex 
offender treatment program when the halfway house was 
closed. The minister said, and I quote: 
 

We are going to make sure that every single person affected 
. . . are dealt with appropriately. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now we find that arrangements were not 
made for the men. The men on conditional sentence were 
kicked out of the house and told to go home. They were also 
told that they were to continue to come to their sex offender 
treatment program three times a week. One of the men lives 
nearly 500 kilometres from North Battleford. That’s a round 
trip of nearly 1,000 kilometres. He has no money. He’s been 
given no help. He knows no one in North Battleford. So far he’s 
living in his car. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the chances of these men on conditional sentence 
fulfilling the sexual treatment offender program is almost nil. 
While I realize that a slavish adherence . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member . . . Order. I would just 
remind the member that he should get to the question. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — While I realize the slavish adherence to the 
truth is not a priority with this government, why did the 
minister say arrangements were going to be made for the men 
when in fact they were not being made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I made a commitment 
that we would deal with each of these cases individually. I am 
not aware of the case the member raises. I will look into it. 
 
But let me say this. The first thing that we know when that 
member asks a question, and the thing that his constituents tell 
us to do, is check the facts. Because when he asked the question 
in this House, he said that they were going to lose their 
program. That was not true, Mr. Speaker. They did not lose 
their programming. He said that there was not space to deal 
with them in Battlefords. Also not true, Mr. Speaker. There 
were additional beds at the Battlefords correctional centre. 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

 

I will endeavour to check the facts. I will take a look at this 
specific case if the member wishes to provide me with more 
details, and I will return with an answer on that issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
promised the men would complete their treatment. Now we find 
out it’s not just this man; there are others who have been turned 
out on the streets. They’re bunking in with friends and relatives. 
They’re living on the street. They don’t come from North 
Battleford. If these men do not complete their treatment, that 
poses a risk to the community. 
 
The men can’t be charged with breaching their conditional 
sentence if they don’t attend because it was the government that 
kicked them out of the house the judge ordered them to stay in. 
 
My question for the minister: why did he not keep his promise 
that all of the men in the house would be looked after to ensure 
they completed their treatment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think it’s unfortunate when we have to explain to a member of 
the bar how conditional sentences work. He should be aware 
that the conditional sentences are that they must complete their 
program. He understands that. 
 
We have said that in each case we would go back to the courts; 
we would deal with an appropriate case plan for these 
offenders. 
 
What that member needs to understand is that if the conditions 
are in place that they need to complete the treatment, they need 
to complete the treatment. If the conditional sentence was that 
they need to be kept in custody, they would be kept in custody. 
 
This is something dealt with by the courts, not dealt with by the 
elected officials, and for a lawyer, he should know better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — You’ll need dental records to identify your 
candidate after the next election if you don’t keep your promise 
about help for North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we learned over 
SPUDCO that the word partnership is an old NDP mining term 
meaning that they waste the gold and the taxpayers get the 
shaft. 
 
Now we’re told that the partnership with Broe to build ethanol 
plants in rural Saskatchewan is evaporating. CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) is on the hunt for 20 
million for an ethanol plant in Belle Plaine promised with great 

fanfare and children from the school in October — construction 
to start in May 2003. 
 
Well it is May 2003. Despite the CIC’s promises of 
construction, nothing is happening. 
 
Is the government going to go on the hook for the entire equity 
investment? My question for the CIC minister: will he 
categorically agree . . . guarantee this Assembly that the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan will not be 100 per cent on the hook 
and on the hook for more than the 20 million already 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, the answer to 
the member from Battlefords’ question is yes. The answer is 
yes. We will assure that member, and we will assure this House, 
and we will assure the people of Saskatchewan that the 
arrangements we have struck to work with the Broe group of 
companies are the arrangements that will exist. There will be no 
100 per cent equity or anything like that from the Government 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I had to get on my feet because I was in the 
member’s hometown just last night. I was in the member’s 
hometown just last night and a fellow by the name of Mr. Len 
Taylor won the nomination for the New Democratic Party. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you the member of the Battlefords had better 
brush up on his legal books because he’s going back to work in 
the law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Additions to Saskatchewan Health’s Drug Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
advise the Legislative Assembly of two significant additions to 
Saskatchewan Health’s drug plan. This government wants to 
ensure that our residents do not suffer financial hardship in 
order to receive the health care they need, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to support them so they can manage their care properly 
and avoid serious complications. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
announcing today that we are expanding coverage of diabetic 
supplies under the Saskatchewan drug plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The drug plan already covers the cost of 
insulin, Type 2 diabetic drugs, and blood glucose test strips. 
About 15,000 people currently benefit from this coverage. 
 
Beginning July 1, 2003, people with diabetes will be eligible for 
increased coverage of diabetic supplies under the drug plan for 
such necessary items as needles, syringes, lancets, and swabs. 
Mr. Speaker, we are dedicating approximately $3.3 million to 
cover the cost of these items during this fiscal year, increasing 
to $4.8 million in 2004-05. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second announcement is that the drug plan 
will be expanded further to include specialized nutritional 
products. On September 1, 2003, coverage will be available for 
specialized nutritional supplements for people who need these 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

products to manage complex medical conditions. We estimate 
that 120 people rely on these products as their primary source of 
nutrition and will be eligible for coverage. 
 
While these specialized products are not required by many 
people, for those who need them they are a necessity which is 
very expensive to purchase. Coverage of specialized nutritional 
products will cost approximately $200,000 annually. These 
additions to the Saskatchewan drug plan are part of our 
government’s commitment to the Action Plan for Saskatchewan 
Health Care announced in December 2001. We are proud to say 
that we are meeting the goals and commitments of this action 
plan and will continue to implement initiatives. This 
government has invested 155 million in the drug plan for the 
2003 fiscal year, an increase of $34 million from last year. 
 
Providing additional drug plan coverage is also a commitment 
from the first ministers’ health accord of February 2003 to 
improve access to primary health services, home care, and 
catastrophic drug coverage. And in the coming months, our 
government will be announcing details of our plan to allocate 
8.5 million in the areas of primary health care and home care as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that we are able to respond to issues 
raised by our partners in the health sector, among them the 
Canadian Diabetes Association. We appreciate their support of 
this initiative. We share their views about the tremendous 
benefits of early detection, prevention, and effective disease 
management for the treatment and prevention of diabetes. 
 
I’m also pleased, Mr. Speaker, that we are able to meet the 
specialized needs of other families in this province as they care 
for people with complex medical conditions that require the use 
of nutritional supplements. 
 
Today’s announcement, Mr. Speaker, is a positive step towards 
an improved quality of life for people with diabetes in our 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, this funding supports our 
provincial diabetes strategy which has an important emphasis 
on diabetes education, care, and treatment. 
 
This government is very proud of its commitment to health care 
in this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave to reply 
to the ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise today to reply to the initiatives 
announced by the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us in elected office, since we’ve become 
MLAs, I’m sure, have been approached by people who are 
suffering from diabetes and had their concerns expressed to us 
about the cost of diabetic supplies. 
 
And over the years it’s been possible to include some of the 
diabetic supplies, and I am pleased to hear that the minister is 

announcing today that virtually all of the diabetic supplies that 
are required for Type 2 diabetes are going to be covered under 
the drug plan. And I’m sure that this is very good news to the 
15,000 or so people of the province who are afflicted by this 
condition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, diabetes is a disease that with our sedentary 
lifestyle is increasing in its severity and its spread across the 
population. As people age, it certainly is something that is an 
onset that we experience in many instances. And so it’s going to 
be good news indeed to see to it that the people affected by 
diabetes are going to be supplied with the necessary supplies 
that they need. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to say that diabetes is also 
something that can be managed in many, many instances by 
proper adherence to activities, to exercise, and to proper 
nutrition. 
 
And it is important for us to continue to stress to people of the 
province the necessity of a healthy lifestyle that will help them 
prevent the onset of Type 2 diabetes. And we can never forget 
when we provide these necessary supplies to people who are 
affected, that we encourage our citizens to take positive, make 
positive changes to their lifestyle so that this condition doesn’t 
affect them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also positive to hear that the people — and 
although they are very few in number — are very severely 
affected by the necessity to have very specialized nutritional 
supplements and indeed sometimes very complete nutritional 
medications or diets that are prescribed for them in order to 
maintain their lifestyle. 
 
And while there’s only 100 or 120 individuals in the province 
affected, I know I have been approached by these people to 
solicit on their behalf the great, severe hardship and costs that 
these nutritional supplies are creating for these individuals. And 
so it’s good news that the government as well is including these 
things under the drug prescription plan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are good initiatives today, to the 
government. And I think every member of this House on both 
sides realize that they have had people that have requested these 
initiatives, and it’s good to hear that the government and the 
drug plan and the Department of Health have listened to these 
requests. And so we are supportive of the announcement made 
by the minister today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 201 — The Oil and Gas Industry 
Recognition Week Act 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
201, The Oil and Gas Industry Recognition Week Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 
2003 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21, 
The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2003 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and respond on their 
behalf to written question no. 153. 
 
The Speaker: — 153 has been submitted. 
 
(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 15 — The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 
privilege to spend some time speaking on Bill No. 15. And as 
we deal with this one . . . and as The Insurance Act, we’re going 
to be going at length into the detail, the background, and exactly 
where this government is going with this whole situation. So 
this is an important piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
probably spend a fair bit of time discussing it. 
 
One of the things that’s in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that insurers 

need to have a deposit on hand with the provincial government 
in case of financial insolvency, if that’s needed. Now that has 
been deleted in other provinces and so that’s part of the 
background to this particular Bill. 
 
It’s ironic, Mr. Speaker — it’s very ironic — that this particular 
concept that I just discussed coming out of Bill No. 15 would 
come from this particular government. Because part of this, as I 
said, is brought about by the events that have taken a part out 
. . . have taken place outside of the province. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, this government’s reacting to that. 
 
I think what we need them to do is to react to what they’re 
doing out of the province. We need to look at that, and that, Mr. 
Speaker, will explain why I use the term the irony in it. We 
have, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, some 10 or more 
out-of-province investments by SaskTel. And we’re just laying 
the background to how come this government would be 
bringing forth this piece of legislation at this particular time and 
how come that’s so ironic. 
 
And on those 10 pieces, Mr. Speaker, those 10 investments, the 
philosophy that the NDP had was: we’re going to invest money 
abroad, outside of Saskatchewan; we’ll invest it in other 
provinces; we’ll invest it in other parts of the continent; we’ll 
invest it on every continent in the world. They’d invest it in the 
universe if they possibly could, Mr. Speaker. Fortunately, they 
can’t do that as yet. But they’ve invested it all over the world. 
 
The purpose was . . . And the purpose sounds good, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll give them a point for purpose. It’s when the plan 
comes into effect that they’ll get a zero. The purpose was that 
this was supposed to make money, so that all of those who have 
SaskTel in our homes, we’d be able to have lower rates. 
 
It has backfired, Mr. Speaker. These NDP have messed up those 
investments totally; those 10 investments, those 10 pieces I 
talked about. The total loss to date, Mr. Speaker, on those alone 
is over $40 million and growing. 
 
As a plan, Mr. Speaker, that was supposed to go ahead and help 
all of us in Saskatchewan have lower rates, has totally 
backfired. It has backfired in every single one of those ten — 
every single one. It’s not that one just lost a whole lot and the 
rest all made some money. Every single one of those has lost. 
 
And maybe, Mr. Speaker, for the record we need to look at this. 
Because if we don’t take this carefully and look at the record of 
this particular NDP government, then we look at The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act, we may actually think that they’re 
going to accomplish something in this Act. But we need to 
know what their record is. 
 
We’ve got Craig Wireless. They stuck in $10 million; they lost 
$10 million. Now, Mr. Speaker, that creates a very interesting 
question. If you invested 10 million and you lost 10 million, 
what’s it worth now? Nothing, absolutely nothing. So here we 
have the people of Saskatchewan hoping that this investment 
was going to come back and benefit us on our telephone rates, 
and they’ve lost every single cent they’ve put into it. The value 
of that company is now zero — zero. I’m using their particular 
report, Mr. Speaker. They use the term nil, which I believe is 
very close to zero, very close to zero. 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

Now on top of that, Mr. Speaker, here’s where it gets really 
frightening. This particular company is now worth zero, but it 
still exists and losing money. So what’s the NDP doing? 
Pouring more of our money into it. This is SaskTel now, Mr. 
Speaker, this is SaskTel; this is SaskTel. Where are they going 
to get that money from? It’s going to come from your rates, Mr. 
Speaker, and my rates. Every single person that has a telephone 
in this province is going to have to pay more to keep Craig 
Wireless going, not to provide a service in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, but to provide services elsewhere. 
 
So someone else is getting some service that we’re paying for 
because our telephone rates are higher than they would be if the 
NDP had, as the member from Swift Current said so eloquently 
on many occasions, stuck to their knitting. If they’d kept to their 
knitting, done what they did well — provide telephones to each 
one of us, to our neighbours, to our families in Saskatchewan — 
things would be fine. But now they’re not. That’s just one. 
Remember, we’re paying for that. 
 
We’re going to go down all ten of these, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re going to indicate that our rates in Saskatchewan are as 
high as they are in order to give other people throughout the 
world service. We’re not the United Nations, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
not SaskTel’s job to try and give good telephone service around 
the world. It isn’t. Not in Australia, not in the United States, 
nowheres but here in Saskatchewan. That’s particular . . . their 
idea. 
 
The NDP like to tell stories about Tommy Douglas flying over 
Saskatchewan and seeing SaskTel and SaskPower getting its 
tentacles into every home. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure right 
now he’s spinning in his grave. He’s done this for years when 
he sees how this NDP government raises the rates to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
They raise the rates to the people of Saskatchewan to provide 
service elsewhere. If it at least was to the poor and the 
impoverished, but it isn’t, Mr. Speaker. It’s to the Americans 
and to the Australians, all of those kinds of people who could 
well afford to go ahead and pay for their own rates and their 
own services. 
 
That’s the kind of NDP we have who would take money out of 
the hands and the pockets of the people of this province and 
spend it elsewhere. 
 
That was one, Mr. Speaker — Craig Wireless — 
tappedinto.com, tappedinto.com. They invested this time, 
thankfully, only half what they put into Craig Wireless. They 
invested 5.4 million, but they’ve lost 2.4 million, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve lost 2.4 million. The value has gone down by that 
amount. 
 
We’ll keep going through these, Mr. Speaker, because I have a 
lot to say on this one particular issue about expecting this 
government to do anything reasonable when we’re talking 
about The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, when we look at what 
their record is in handling money around this country. 
 
Retx investment, 21.7 million. 
 
Oh, and here in the NDP books, Mr. Speaker, in the NDP 

books, they have a little double asterisk, a little double asterisk. 
And I’ll read what that says from their books. It says it is 
impossible to determine the current value of these investments 
and losses incurred by SaskTel because they are accounted for 
by using the consolidated method. And they go into a lot of 
accounting verbiage in an effort to hide the fact that they don’t 
want to tell the people of Saskatchewan what the value is. 
 
You ask any business person in this province what the value of 
his business is and he’ll be able to tell you. None of them are 
going to say, well I don’t have a clue what it’s worth; I’ve got 
an accountant, he could probably tell you. You go to a farmer 
and you say what’s your land worth, and he’ll tell you within 
probably $1,000 per quarter what it’s worth. 
 
But you ask the NDP what’s their business worth? We don’t 
know, we don’t know. The last thing the people in the world 
should do is ever trust a socialist to handle their financial affairs 
— the last thing they should ever do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s a prime example. They take $21.7 million but they have 
no idea what it’s worth, none whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, none 
whatsoever. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member from 
Moose Jaw North on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — To raise a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member of Moose Jaw North state 
his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I ask you to make a ruling 
regarding member’s relevance to the debate. I have before me 
Bill No. 15, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, 
and I have to admit I, like the masses in Saskatchewan, I 
haven’t been paying 100 per cent rapt attention to the remarks 
that the member for Rosthern . . . But as I’ve been listening 
these last few minutes, I have been trying and I have been 
looking through the Bill — it’s a fairly lengthy Bill; there’s a 
number of subjects here — and I have been trying to find 
somewhere in this Bill one of the clauses that remotely relates 
to the musings of the member for Rosthern. 
 
Now the fantasy musings of the member from Rosthern may be 
entertaining to some but, Mr. Speaker, relevance to the piece of 
legislation that is before us right now is a stretch at best. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask . . . I am sure the hon. member, given 
the opportunity, has some thoughts related to the Bill, and he’d 
like to bring them and make comment about them and we’d be 
happy to listen to them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would therefore ask that you would find 
the member to be out of order regarding debate being relevant 
to the Bill and ask him to keep his comments to the issue before 
us at the time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was listening with rapt attention to the member from Rosthern’s 
comments. And, Mr. Speaker, he was talking about The 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act and the fact that the 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, Mr. Speaker, is one of 
the NDP’s family of Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

 

And he was talking about the relationship of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and the family of 
Crown corporations to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker; Mr. Speaker, the impact that the Crown corporations 
have on the people of Saskatchewan, the impact that this piece 
of legislation is going to have, Mr. Speaker; and, Mr. Speaker, 
the impact that the losses at the family of Crown corporations is 
going to have on the insurance rates, Mr. Speaker, for the 
individuals, for the families, for the drivers, for everyone who 
has to buy insurance in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the member was being very much on the topic, Mr. Speaker, 
in dealing with the costs imposed on the people of 
Saskatchewan by this NDP government. 
 
The Speaker: — Well excuse me. Order please. I thank both 
members. I thank both members for their exhaustive advice to 
the Speaker and to the . . . and what they want to add to the 
debate here. 
 
In this Assembly, on second readings, we have customarily 
allowed a very wide range of debate. However the rule of 
thumb that I would ask members to use that at least 50 per cent 
of what they say should deal with the Bill at hand. And topics 
that are adjacent, I encourage members to bring them in. 
 
Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
I encourage them to bring them in but I would think that we 
should make the debate under . . . that’s at hand to at least 
occupy 50 per cent of the comments. So I invite the member for 
Rosthern to bear that in mind and to continue with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as we note I do 
have the Bill No. 15 in hand here so we will deal with that. We 
must, Mr. Speaker, when we deal with No. 15, as the point of 
order said, it is an exhaustive piece of legislation. It goes on for 
pages and pages, and it will take a long time to go through this. 
 
The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, Mr. Speaker, and if we deal 
with particularly part 2.1(a) dealing with accident insurance, 
2.1(b) accidental death insurance; aircraft insurance — I’m 
down to (e) — then over to (f) approved securities, automobile 
insurance. It’s a very lengthy piece. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we deal with that, one of the key 
components of Bill No. 15 . . . And I’d hope the people in 
government would have read their own piece of legislation. It 
always concerns me that they have some bureaucrat way out in 
the dim, dark halls of this place writing a piece of legislation, it 
comes on this table, and then they do not fully understand what 
they themself are doing. And the reason that’s scary, Mr. 
Speaker, if we look at item no. 15 or Bill No. 15, we will find 
that there are a substantial number of provisions that are put 
into regulations, Mr. Speaker, that are put into regulations. 
 
And as the point of order was being discussed, there was a 
discussion as to whether this has any interest to the people who 
happen to be watching. Well I suggest, Mr. Speaker, it does. It’s 
of interest to those of us sitting here on the floor of the House. 
It’s of interest to those people sitting in the gallery. It’s the 
interest to those people watching on television, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Because the dealing with regulations, this is the part where 
government can take a Bill, can take Bill No. 15 and willy-nilly 
change it without it coming to the floor of this House, without it 
being debated in front of the people in the gallery, without it 
being brought to the attention of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:45) 
 
They can hide in those same dim corners of this beautiful 
building and change it because it’s in regulations, where the 
cabinet basically sits down and they make those changes as they 
see fit behind closed doors, not even allowing all of their caucus 
in on it. This is a very reclusive and seclusive group, Mr. 
Speaker, that make these decisions. 
 
Now we can debate this. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
lengthy Bill and we will debate it. And as we go into it, it 
always becomes frightening, Mr. Speaker, when major parts of 
these Bills go to regulations. Because when they go there, the 
people of Saskatchewan, the citizens, have no way of knowing 
what’s being discussed. They have no way of having any input 
in what’s being discussed. And then they’re usually not 
informed afterwards on what has been discussed and what 
decisions have been made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We find that very much in Bill No. 15, that things are being 
moved into the regulations. And that’s frightening when we 
have this particular government. 
 
And I just have the member from Prince Albert talking about 
being on the opposition side. Well I don’t think he plans on 
running again, Mr. Speaker, so he may never be here. But if he 
does run again, he will be here. He will be here. 
 
Because all we have to do is check on what’s happening in 
Prince Albert. And we’ll just check the political climate in 
Prince Albert as it is now with reference to that MLA, with 
reference to that MLA. That, Mr. Speaker, explains why that 
particular individual will be sitting on this side looking at the 
changes we’re going to be making. I would suggest it would be 
nice to have him come to my riding sometimes during election. 
We’ll have a nice debate. 
 
Anyways, back to Bill No. 15, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 15 dealing 
with the insurance Act. It is, as I said, a lengthy Act. And one of 
the things it does, it harmonizes deadlines with federal 
regulations, with federal regulations. And you sometimes 
wonder why it takes this government so long to do that. Like 
why wouldn’t they have done this last year or the year or the 
year before that? 
 
I’ll suggest to you very definitely why we have a lot of the 
legislation we’re having in this term, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
unfortunate. They could have passed this in previous years of 
their reign, in previous years of their reign. But they’re doing it 
now in the dying hours, in the dying hours of their reign. 
They’re finally deciding to harmonize the deadlines that are 
given in various insurance pieces of legislation, federal and 
provincial, trying to harmonize those. They’re doing it because 
it’s the final hours and they want to go ahead and create certain 
situations that will be of their benefit. 
 
There are also other items in here, Mr. Speaker. It deals with 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

mutual benefit societies are exempted from the Act, and that we 
support. And as I said, we’re dealing with the harmonization. 
There are aspects we support. We question why some of those 
things took so long, and that’s what we’re doing right now. We 
also question why so much of it was put into regulations. 
 
There are also disclosure requirements put on licence insurance 
salespeople to ensure what is occurring and who is actually 
dealing with the public in these situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve contacted the Insurance Brokers’ 
Association of Saskatchewan regarding this piece of legislation. 
We’ve done, we’ve done that. And the first thing they usually 
say is, can I buy membership in the Sask Party so that when you 
get to be government we’ll have these things that ought to have 
taken place a long time ago occur in a much more timely 
manner than waiting till your dying days. 
 
It is the dying days of this government. We’ve seen that in the 
way that they’ve answered questions. We’ve seen that in the 
way they’ve answered questions. 
 
And speaking of that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll just have to relate very 
briefly to Leader-Post, Thursday, May 1 and there’s an editorial 
there entitled, “To answer or not to answer questions . . . .” And 
the question there, or the statement there, and I quote, is what’s 
happening is, and I quote: “That’s not democracy, that’s 
dictatorship,” relating to questions that are being answered and 
questions that are not being answered. 
 
That’s why we’re so concerned about Bill No. 15. That’s why 
we’re so concerned about Bill No. 15 because, once these 
things become legislation and we want to go ahead and try and 
get answers, this is not a government that we can answer from, 
or get answers from. It’s frightening, it’s disconcerting, and the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker, want some changes. 
 
There’s a good deal of detail regarding this Act and that’s being 
moved, as I said, out of the Act into regulations. There’s 
another very critical point, Mr. Speaker, because part of this 
particular Act . . . And had the government read this before they 
presented it, we wouldn’t have had the member from Moose 
Jaw go into a long dissertation on SGI and how SGI relates to 
this. And I’m sure he should have known this, but he didn’t. 
 
This is not a Bill, Mr. Speaker, as the member for Moose Jaw 
intimated, that has anything to do with SGI. This is a Bill that 
deals a whole lot more with the credit unions. The particular 
changes that are contemplated deal with how the credit unions 
will be able to interact with insurance companies, with banks 
and insurance companies, independent insurance companies; 
can they sell it within the business, with . . . outside the 
business, can they own those kinds of companies. That’s what it 
deals with. 
 
Those are major issues, Mr. Speaker. Major issues that each one 
of us in this House have had addressed to us by businesses, by 
credit unions, by individuals in our constituencies back home. 
That is one of the specifics in this particular Bill that is being 
moved to regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said earlier on, this is not a government 
that you can really trust with a piece of legislation in this extent. 

And we wonder where else this is going to go. 
 
And I basically pick up an article by Randy Burton called 
Straight Talk, this is Thursday, May 1, StarPhoenix. Headline, 
Mr. Speaker, is “NDP content to watch SaskTel squander.” And 
we’re dealing with the kind of government this is. And I want 
to, I want to read for the record, Mr. Speaker, only six lines. 
Only, only six lines: 
 

This is how the government handles what it insists are . . . 
good news stories. It’s no wonder it has . . . (so much) 
trouble with the embarrassing ones. 

 
And how they deal with this particular Bill, and how they don’t 
understand it, as I’ve just discussed, is one of those 
embarrassing ones. Last paragraph: 

 
At this rate, Lieutenant-Governor Lynda Haverstock may 
wind up having to call . . . (an) election herself when . . . 
(the Calvert) five-year term expires. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone through year after year with pieces of 
legislation like Bill No. 15. We’ve raised concerns about it 
because government either doesn’t understand it or turns a deaf 
ear. 
 
Bill No. 15, in spite of many of its foibles and the things that 
are in there that we have some concerns about, is an Act that 
does address some of the concerns that are out there in the 
insurance business. And I listed those at the beginning — the 
accident insurance, accidental death, aircraft insurance, 
approved securities, automobile insurance — just to list a few 
of those. 
 
And as a result, Mr. Speaker, we find that this is a Bill that, 
although we have discussed it at length at this position in the 
House, we would like at this particular point to move it on to 
committee, Mr. Speaker, where we can deal with it in more 
detail. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 16 — The 
Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 
16 is The Coroners Amendment Act and it deals only with a 
few specific things in that particular area. 
 
But as usual, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask some of the similar 
questions that we ask on so many pieces of legislation. Why has 
it taken so long? Why has it taken so long? There’s nothing in 
here that’s new. There’s nothing in here that’s new. 
 
It’s sort of the same question, Mr. Speaker, we probably would 
have asked, or did ask even when the Minister of Health got up 
and made his statement that they’re going to cover a few more 
things under The Health Act. We were glad to hear that. 
 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

 

But the question was, why so long? There wasn’t a single thing 
listed in what the minister said in that particular statement, Mr. 
Speaker, that dealt with any new technology, any new 
discoveries under health care. The question is how long . . . why 
so long? 
 
Here we have it again, Mr. Speaker. Some of the things that are 
being dealt with in The Coroners Amendment Act deal 
specifically with when inquests are required and when inquests 
are not required, Mr. Speaker, and we support the changes that 
are being made. These changes should have been made a 
decade ago, because the technology, the directions, the abilities 
of the coroners was well enough advanced a long time ago that 
we could have passed this, as I said, a decade ago. 
 
This will remove the requirement, Mr. Speaker, for mandatory 
investigations into the cause of death if individuals die in 
institution but they have a terminal illness at that particular 
point and have had it and it was a matter of record. That’s fairly 
straightforward. It’s a clear piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
and we support that as well. 
 
Now there’s another part to this legislation and that deals with 
the fact that, in the past, health facilities have been very 
reluctant to allow coroners access to samples that they may 
have had from some of their medical testing on individuals in 
the past, because specific legislation did not exist in order to 
allow that. 
 
And so understandably, our health facilities wanted to maintain 
and work within the legal framework that they found 
themselves in. Unfortunately the legal framework that has been 
put forward by this particular government is very seldom 
adequate, usually highly inadequate. 
 
So this particular Bill, Bill No. 16, addresses that so that the 
health facilities can now share with the coroners the information 
that they have, the samples that they have, in the investigation 
that coroners may want to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill is essentially a housekeeping 
Bill and should make a coroner’s job much more effective and 
more efficient. 
 
We encourage this kind of activity and action and direction, 
initiative, from this particular government. It’s not one that 
we’ve had, Mr. Speaker. It’s not one that has been 
demonstrated. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, very often we find 
that people in this province lose confidence in a government 
when they don’t take the initiatives that are out there. 
 
And on that issue, Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a . . . take a 
quotation and put it on the record. And I will supply where it 
comes from after I’m finished. And I’ll start the quotation: 
 

. . . in any democracy or . . . any nation, in any nation when 
a government has lost . . . confidence of its people, when a 
government is stripped of its credibility, when a 
government has no vision, then it is time to defeat that 
government and give another group of men and women the 
opportunity to govern. 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, was spoken on March 27, 1990 by our 

present Premier, by our present Premier. 
 
Now if we look at this piece of legislation that should have been 
passed a long time ago . . . It could have been passed, it should 
have been passed — it wasn’t. It’s that sort of thing, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s that sort of thing that causes the people of this 
province to lose faith in this NDP government. And then, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s time to give another group of men and women the 
opportunity to govern. 
 
We will have opportunity soon. As the Saskatchewan Party, we 
will be given the opportunity. We will take it and we will do it 
well. 
 
Bill No. 16, The Coroner’s Amendment Act, as I said, Mr. 
Speaker, does have a number of initiatives that we support and 
therefore we will be moving this on to committee. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(15:00) 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
into the debate on Bill No. 17, The Land Surveys Amendment 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill is symbolic, I think, of a slow, dawning 
recognition on the government side of the House that the land 
titles automation process that began back with this NDP 
government in 1996 has been an unmitigated disaster and has 
left the province, not only with a bill for $107 million, but has 
also left us with a system that doesn’t work. A system that has 
far too many bugs in it, frankly, for one that was purported to 
cost 19.7 million in 1996 in a NDP cabinet document; the bill 
now 107 million. Far too many bugs in it really for a system 
that came in on budget, much less one that’s five times — fully 
five times — over the original budget. 
 
Because what this Act intends to do is implement obviously 
some input that the government has received — I assume that 
ISC (Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) has 
received — during consultations with stakeholders with respect 
to the LAND (Land Titles Automated Network Development) 
project and our land titles system . . . the land system in the 
province. 
 
And there are some specific measures in the Bill to do that. It 
provides, they say, certainty with the definition of the 
expression, legal description — this was the minister actually, 
his words. And secondly it will provide flexibility in requiring a 
surveyor to conduct a field inspection on a survey that’s older 
than two years. And also it will require, in some circumstances, 
surveyors to restore lost monuments. 
 
Now the first element of the Bill is particularly interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, and goes to the heart of a huge problem with the new 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

land titles system, one that the government seven years later — 
fully seven years later — is finally turning its mind to. And 
that’s the whole issue of the certainty of the definition of the 
expression, and the legal description. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell you how many constituents 
of mine and how many people across the province have 
contacted myself, as the critic for Crown corporations and 
therefore the critic for the LAND project, ISC, and have also 
contacted my colleagues in the Saskatchewan Party in the 
opposition, to highlight — to highlight — their significant 
difficulties with this system. Highlight specific concerns that 
. . . I mean there’s some attempt here by the government to 
address some of those concerns, but there are others that aren’t 
addressed. 
 
But some very, very basic omissions I would call them. We 
would characterize them from this system, this $107 million 
system, basic omissions in terms of how land is described and 
how it’s defined and the ease with which people can use the 
system, the ease with which lawyers can use the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, imagine this. Imagine the government announcing 
in 1996 that they were going to automate the land titles system 
in the province of Saskatchewan and the cabinet item that was 
approved by the cabinet of the day — I think the sponsoring 
minister would have been the current Minister of Health — and 
it budgeted the land automation project at $9.2 million. 
 
Well then they got into that a little ways, Mr. Speaker, and 
realized it would cost a lot more than that, a lot more than that. 
And they changed the budget over time. They expanded the 
role, something that Janice MacKinnon actually highlighted as a 
major concern. They expanded the role of ISC far beyond — far 
beyond — just automating land titles and into areas where 
Minister MacKinnon at the time was very concerned about this 
company thwarting the development of our IT (information 
technology) sector and competing, in fact, with the IT sector 
already paying taxes here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But the budget and the scope of the project increased to almost 
$60 million. And so you would think, Mr. Speaker, that seven 
years later — well at that time, at the time the budget was 
approved it would have been two or three or maybe four years 
later — that the system would be well underway to being 
designed to address even the things we’re addressing here in 
Bill 17, seven years later. 
 
But also that it would provide basic elements of a land system, 
like an efficient description of land. We’ve always had a pretty 
efficient description of land in the province of Saskatchewan. 
The legal description has served us very, very, very well. 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, imagine if you will, a government, any 
modern government, deciding to automate a land titles system 
and neutralizing, virtually neutralizing the benefits of that legal 
land description system that we have always had. 
 
Bill 17 begins to address that problem, but it’s seven years later 
and 107 million taxpayers’ dollars later. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 
important to point out and to make sure that everyone in this 
legislature and that everyone in the province understands that it 
is $107 million. 
 

It started off as 19.7. They increased the budget to 60. The bill, 
the tab is 107. And here’s why. The minister, current minister 
takes great exception with that. I’ll hopefully not be . . . I hope 
he’ll be generous with his sentiments, but I believe he’d take 
great exception to characterizing the Bill for this at 107 million, 
this system that Bill 17 seeks to fix. 
 
The fact of the matter is he claims that 30 to $34 million can’t 
be counted into the overall costs of ISC because — if you can 
believe this — because it is the money that ISC has paid back to 
the government as a dividend. 
 
You see with the old system, Mr. Speaker, the old land system 
when it was within the Department of Justice, there was an 
annual dividend that came. The land users of the system paid 
for the costs of the land system and in fact built into that was a 
small profit. And that profit was transferred by the Department 
of Justice, rightfully so, to the General Revenue Fund, 
estimated 10 to $12 million; the last number of years closer to 
$12 million. 
 
So again quite rightly the government, when it decided to set up 
a Crown corporation to do this — and we would argue that it 
ought not to have done that — but it decided to set up a Crown 
to do this thing and quite rightly it told that Crown corporation 
when you’re all set up and running, by the way we’re going to 
need that $12 million. The old system provided it. The new 
efficient, automated system will have to provide it. We’ll need 
the dividend from ISC, the Information Services Corp, back to 
the General Revenue Fund. 
 
But of course, Mr. Speaker, what happened, what became very 
apparent is not only were there all of these problems with the 
land system — problems that we’re dealing with now in this 
Bill, Bill 17 — there was also the fact that the system couldn’t 
support itself. It was hemorrhaging money; it was losing 
money. Not only was it taking more money than they thought to 
get going, but operationally it was losing money. So how in the 
world then could it pay a dividend back to the General Revenue 
Fund? 
 
Well it couldn’t, not in and of itself. So what did the 
government do, Mr. Speaker? Well they passed orders in 
council. The government approved money at the cabinet table, 
gave the money to the Information Services Corporation so that 
the Information Services Corporation could pay its dividend 
back to the General Revenue Fund. And they say, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
Against my better judgment I have been paying rapt attention to 
the remarks of the hon. member for Swift Current. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the Bill before us, Bill No. 17, An Act to amend The 
Land Surveys Act, is a very, very short Act with very, very 
limited and precise references. 
 
I’m sure you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, it referred, and I don’t . . . I 
suppose I could take about 40 seconds and just read the Bill into 
the record; I mean, we’re not talking lengthy here, Mr. Speaker. 
And although again, once again, some may be enjoying the 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

 

mystical musings of the member for Swift Current, relevance 
again is the question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand the hon. member may have an agenda to attack the 
ability of Crown corporations to provide good service to the 
people of Saskatchewan, but his ability to draw those remarks 
into this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I suggest are not in order. As you 
will note as you look at the Bill, it makes reference to things 
like markings related to land surveys and the like. This is a 
housekeeping Bill, to describe it I think in a nutshell, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in the interest of appropriately carrying out the business of 
the House, I would ask that you would direct the hon. member 
to make his remarks relevant to the Bill that is before us. And 
we’d be happy to listen to the debate, informed debate that he 
would like to bring to the House in that regard. 
 
I’d ask that you would find him out of order and direct him to 
make his remarks to the Bill before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To address the 
point of order. And I think that point of order was definitely not 
well taken because if I listened carefully to what was being 
said, and there was a key phrase, Mr. Speaker, there was a key 
phrase that went through the discussion that took place and that 
is, the Bill seeks to address. And Hansard will show that phrase 
came up many times, which means that all the discussion that 
was taking place comes back to the Bill itself. 
 
Now it’s quite, it’s quite acceptable for individuals as they 
discuss what the Bill seeks to address to move somewhat off to 
the side, but it does have to come back. This Bill did that, this 
Bill . . . or the discussion did that very well. When the 
discussion deals with what the Bill seeks to address, and I’m 
sure very shortly, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current 
is not only going to deal with what the Bill seeks to address, he 
will be dealing with what the Bill does address, and then he will 
be dealing with his opinion on how well it does address that. 
 
So we’ve had a very good discussion so far on this particular 
Bill, and I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to you finding this point 
of order was not well taken so the member from Swift Current 
can continue with his discussion. 
 
The Speaker: — Well thank you both, the member for 
Rosthern and the member from Moose Jaw North, for your 
intervention. 
 
I have been listening to the remarks made by the hon. member 
for Swift Current. I find that he was talking to land surveys. The 
title of the Bill is An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act. And 
within the limits that we have provided traditionally in this 
House, I would find that his comments were largely in order. 
He may have strayed occasionally, but I find that he was largely 
in order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I mean the Bill is 
important. 
 
And I began my remarks by reading the speech of the minister 
in charge. The minister in charge in his second reading speech, 
what does he say, Mr. Speaker? He says: 

The Land Surveys Act, 2000 was passed in part to 
modernize rules respecting (the) surveying of provincial 
land and in part (wait a minute, here we go, in part) to 
facilitate the implementation of the new LAND (Land 
Titles Automated Network Development) system. 

 
Well that’s ISC, for members opposite who may not be in on 
the minister’s briefing. That’s what ISC is; it’s the LAND 
project. And more to the point, more to the point for the 
member for Regina Elphinstone who is very interested in debate 
— and I commend him for that — more to the point, in the last 
number of years, this is the minister saying this, the minister 
saying this about this Bill: 
 

In the last two years ongoing consultations with 
stakeholders have led to some suggestions for 
improvements (for improvements). 

 
Well why in the world, Mr. Speaker, would there need to be any 
improvements if everything was fine. 
 
And what we’re doing today is talking about the things that are 
not fine, that are not fine with the LAND system and things that 
need to be addressed. The Bill begins the process. 
 
And what we also need to be doing — and that’s what this place 
is all about — is to hold the government to account for the fact 
that after seven years and a $107 million, there are all of these 
problems still with the system that we’re fixing still today. 
These changes presumably aren’t going to be a big cost to the 
corporation; other changes may. 
 
There have been other problems that have been fixed over at the 
corporation and we’ve given those officials, the new officials at 
ISC, credit. One of them was the new official, the new 
management ending the practice of ISC officials travelling all 
around the world to sell a LAND system that, as Bill 17 points 
out, doesn’t work here in the province of Saskatchewan. They 
went to Australia and they went to Hong Kong and they went to 
Albania to sell a system that Bill 17 says doesn’t work. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But the good news is that there’s some management in place 
now that said look, $200,000 a year for needless travel is crazy 
and we’re going to put a stop to it. And we’ve commended that 
official over there, as we commend, at least in part, the 
government for introducing this Bill. 
 
There are some specific questions that members also want to 
ask, and that later on that we’ll want to ask in committee, 
regarding the nature of the certainty in terms of the definition of 
the expression and legal description that the Bill purports to 
offer the new system. That’s a very important question, one 
close to the LAND users. And surveyors we know have been a 
part of this consultation, the surveyors in this province. And it’s 
our understanding that they’re quite supportive of it. 
 
There are some questions of clarification that need to be asked 
and I know members, colleagues of mine, who wish to speak to 
this Bill. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d move adjourned debate at 
this time. 
 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR01) 
 
The Chair: — And I would recognize the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m very pleased to 
introduce my officials today. To my left is Mr. Larry Spannier, 
the deputy minister of Industry and Resources. And to Larry’s 
left is Debbie Wilkie, the executive director of corporate 
resources. To my right is Bruce Wilson, assistant deputy 
minister of petroleum and natural gas. And seated immediately 
behind me is Jim Marshall, assistant deputy minister of resource 
and economic policy. To Jim’s right is Denise Hass, acting 
assistant deputy minister of industry development. To the left of 
Jim is George Patterson, executive director of exploration and 
geological services. And to George’s left is Hal Sanders, 
executive director of mineral revenue and investment services. 
 
At the back of the Chamber are John Treleaven, president and 
CEO (chief executive officer) of the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership, or STEP as it’s commonly called, and Roy 
Anderson, who is the president and CEO of Tourism 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And just very briefly, Mr. Chair, I appreciate the chance to 
speak to the Assembly today about the mandate and activities of 
the Department of Industry and Resources of which I’m very 
pleased to be the minister. 
 
We’ve had a very busy and productive year in this department, 
its first year as a new organization. We’ve brought in new 
incentive packages for our oil and gas and mining industries, 
initiatives that are sparking new investment, new exploration, 
and new jobs in these key industries. 
 
We’ve launched The Future is Wide Open campaign to 
celebrate our province’s successes and promote our strengths to 
national audiences. We’re telling people the truth about 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. 
 
We’ve continued to make key investments in research 
infrastructure through our Innovation and Science Fund and 
Strategic Investment Fund. And through our partnership for 
prosperity economic strategy, we’ve continued to strengthen the 
foundations of Saskatchewan’s key sectors. 
 
Mr. Chair, highlights from our department’s budget for this 
coming year include $3.3 million for an ethanol fuel tax rebate 
to distributors, $1.6 million to encourage further exploration 
and mapping of our mineral deposits; finalizing a new Western 
Economic Partnership Agreement with the federal government 
and a commitment of $25 million over the next five years as our 
portion of the costs; and $8 million in the Innovation and 
Science Fund this year to match federal research funding of 
projects at our universities, colleges, and research institutes, 

along with a commitment to renew the fund for another four 
years. 
 
We’re also increasing our transfer payments this year to both 
Tourism Saskatchewan and to STEP. And we’re maintaining 
our existing funding to regional economic development 
authorities and neighbourhood development organizations, and 
to programs for co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Chair, through this budget and through the hard work of our 
staff we will continue to build on Saskatchewan’s current 
economic momentum. And we will continue to invest in 
infrastructure that supports our key sectors — sectors that create 
prosperity for Saskatchewan and jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
We’ll continue to seek out new investment and new business 
from both within and beyond our borders, and we will continue 
to build for our future — a future that we believe, Mr. Chair, is 
truly wide open. 
 
So thank you very much and I look forward to questions from 
the opposition. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And if I 
could, Mr. Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials here this 
afternoon as well. There is a lot of focus on economic 
development, a lot of focus on where the province should be 
going, where it has been going, and I’m looking forward to 
some of the questions and the responses that I’m sure will 
follow. 
 
And thank you, Mr. Minister, for outlining some of the 
highlights of the budget that is before us and some of the things 
that we should be talking about. 
 
First off, Mr. Minister, it would appear to me that the Industry 
and Resources budget overall is up about 12 per cent from last 
year. And with that in mind, and in relation to what the 
government is projecting in their budget this year, which was 
actually the revenues are declining, could you give me a 
justification why you are expanding the overall budget for 
Industry and Resources by a 12 per cent factor when in fact . . . 
when revenues are declining? To me that would be a 
non-sustainable situation. Can you explain that to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Actually I’m very proud of the fact 
that we’re committing resources in some areas to help build the 
economy of the province, because the things we’re doing 
actually I think are working. 
 
I’ll give the member an example. In the oil and gas field, we 
have seen drilling up 70 per cent over what it was last year — 
drilling up 70 per cent. And that is because we have come up 
with some new policies in the oil and gas sector. And my point 
here is that we’re doing some other things which we believe 
will build the economy in Saskatchewan. And I want to give the 
member the details here. 
 
Part of our new funding enables the department to implement 
major royalty and tax changes and incentives, to stimulate 
increased oil and gas and mineral exploration and development 
in Saskatchewan. I mentioned that we had an oil and gas 
package. We also have a mining package. And in the mining 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

 

package is included incentives for prospectors to go out and 
find new base metals and gold, for example, in the North. 
We’re assisting with that because we think it’s important to 
invest today to expand the mining sector in the future. 
 
I’m very happy to report that Saskatchewan has become the 
third largest mining jurisdiction in Canada. We used to be 
number four. British Columbia was number three, but now 
we’ve moved up to number three only behind Ontario and 
Quebec. But we want to do more. We want to build the mining 
sector. And to do that we’re investing in prospectors’ grants and 
other incentives to the mining sector. 
 
We want to provide additional funding this year to the trade and 
export partnership, STEP, and to Tourism Saskatchewan. We 
believe that if we invest in STEP this year and hopefully in 
future years, they will increase the customers we have around 
the world for Saskatchewan products. And our economy is very 
export oriented so we should invest in seeking more trading 
partners because that helps employ people here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Similarly, tourism is big business. We’re increasing the budget 
of Tourism Saskatchewan because, quite simply, we want to 
bring more people to visit Saskatchewan and we want more 
Saskatchewan people to tour Saskatchewan as their travel 
option. 
 
We are providing an ethanol fuel tax rebate to help build the 
ethanol industry in Saskatchewan, and that is a rebate to 
industries that will be selling ethanol to consumers, as we 
mandate the use of ethanol as part of motor vehicle fuel. 
 
There will be additional funding to enable the province to 
participate in a new WEPA — that’s Western Economic 
Partnership Agreement — with the federal government. These 
are funds that are used to establish economic development 
projects in Saskatchewan which contribute positively to the 
economy. 
 
We’re setting aside funds to establish a climate change fund to 
enable the province to participate in federal-provincial climate 
change cost-sharing agreements. And of course we’re providing 
funding for The Future is Wide Open campaign, which is a 
marketing campaign designed to foster a positive attitude 
towards Saskatchewan. 
 
And the people I talk to, not only in Saskatchewan but across 
the country, say that’s what we should be doing. We should be 
telling people about the world-class people and the world-class 
things that we have in this province, such as the only 
synchrotron; the third largest mining sector; the world’s largest 
oriented strand board plant; new sawmills; 8,000 more people 
working in forestry; 12,000 more people working than a year 
ago; the fact that half of the province is covered with forest, that 
a lot of people don’t know; the opportunities that exist in 
Saskatchewan and which are being taken advantage of. 
 
So all of those things require a commitment of funds and we are 
willing to commit the funds to ensure that there is continued 
economic development in this province. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Chair, and I’m sure that the members of 

the opposition will be very pleased to hear this, that all of the 
private sector forecasters say that we are poised this year to 
have good economic growth, and also in 2004. We’re seeing oil 
and gas up by over 70 per cent; 12,000 more people working 
than a year ago; 47 more . . . 4,700 more young people working 
than a year ago; one of the lowest unemployment rates in the 
country; a growing record . . . size of the labour force; more 
people working in Saskatchewan. 
 
So there’s a lot of positive things happening and we’re going to 
build on that momentum through the activities that I’ve 
described because we want to build oil and gas sector, mining 
sector, forestry sector, and manufacturing, information 
technology, to name some. 
 
And along with our personal income tax reform, which has 
made our personal taxes very competitive and amongst the 
lowest in Canada, Saskatchewan is poised to take off and is 
taking off, and we’re supporting that and we’re investing in it. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, that sounded very much like 
an election platform. Is that . . . Are you giving us a little 
heads-up that there’s something very imminent here? Because if 
that’s the case, Mr. Minister, how do you square that with 
what’s happening in the last, the last year, in 2002 and years 
previous that you and I have discussed in this legislature? 
 
The people in this province are not staying here. There is a 
population exodus from this province. Where’s the confidence 
that you have been trying to establish over the last little while? 
That’s not happening. 
 
And you know very well in my part of the country, that’s seen 
every day. Decisions are made on economic development on 
the basis of what is in front of them, and they will decide 
whether it is a glossy brochure approach or if it is downright 
fact. 
 
I do give you certainly the benefit of the doubt and actually 
kudos, Mr. Minister, for the royalty incentives that was put in 
place recently. That, in my area, certainly has helped, and as an 
example the drilling for oil and gas in my area has increased. 
 
So you’re right. The point is right that if there are proper 
incentives in place and proper signals, things will happen. 
 
And also I noticed that in the budget there was a corresponding 
tax revenue increase in those areas where there was a tax 
decrease. 
 
The point, Mr. Minister, is if you want to attract economic 
development, don’t talk about glossy brochures and 
partnerships and strategies that sound good. Put those incentives 
in place. Don’t pick one or two areas that are obviously doing 
well anyway, because I think in petroleum $35 a barrel might 
have had something to do with the incentive to drill for oil. 
 
Those are the signals that we need. And those are the signals 
that your department particularly needs to put forward, and not 
just rhetoric. 
 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

So with that in mind, Mr. Minister, I would like to expand a 
little bit on some of the things that I found in the budget that 
were a bit troublesome. 
 
The economy in 2002 actually contracted. After all the things 
that were put in place and your government bragged about, the 
economy actually shrunk. And like I said, population has left. 
 
We need to build confidence in the people. We need to give 
them positive signals. And I struggle with what you’ve told me 
so far, Mr. Minister, that will make a difference when it comes 
time for people to either stay here or to look at Saskatchewan as 
a positive investment opportunity. Those are the things that 
economic development is built on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in answer to the member’s first 
comment, yes, ultimately over the next year and a half there 
will be an election in Saskatchewan. And yes, we will be going 
to the people and telling the people the truth about what is 
actually happening in the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And I want to say to the member that the statistics he refers to 
in terms of the economic growth in 2002, which was negative, 
that is a figure that was published by the government in the 
budget itself. It wasn’t any kind of surprise. It’s been well 
known to everybody that Saskatchewan suffered two years of 
very serious drought. I was surprised to read in the paper that 
the member of the . . . the Leader of the Opposition . . . 
 
Mr. Chair, I see that the member from Saskatchewan Rivers 
wishes to introduce guests, so I’ll continue this after he’s done. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
Minister for Industry and Resources for kindly giving up his 
time that I may introduce some guests. 
 
Mr. Chair, seated in the east gallery are 29 students from 
Redwing School. Mr. Chair, they are accompanied by their 
teacher, Ms. Elchuk, and by their principal, Ms. Hanson. 
They’re accompanied by five parents this afternoon. 
 
And they’ve come all the way from just north of Prince Albert, 
Mr. Chair, so that they can spend some time in Regina and see 
our fair city and see some of the opportunities that students can 
enjoy, and one of them today is the legislature. They’re 
spending about a half an hour here, Mr. Speaker, just being able 
to observe some of the proceedings of the House. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Assembly, 
Mr. Chair, join with me in welcoming the students from 
Redwing School, north of Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
(Subvote IR01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well as I was 
saying, I was quite surprised the other day to read the Leader of 
the Opposition was saying in the media that he didn’t think the 
government should use drought to explain why the economy of 
Saskatchewan had negative growth in 2002. 
 
And I just will make this observation that there aren’t too many 
people in Saskatchewan that don’t know that agriculture is very 
important to our economy. There aren’t too many people in 
Saskatchewan that don’t know that if you have a drought, that’s 
going to have a negative impact on the economy. And I’m not 
going to dwell on that because it is so basic. I was just surprised 
to hear the Leader of the Opposition say that. 
 
But I want to say to the member from Lloydminster and to the 
House, Mr. Chair, that we’re not looking in the rear-view mirror 
and talking about what happened last year. We’re looking 
toward the future and we’re taking steps to make sure that 
Saskatchewan will have a prosperous future. 
 
And we have a plan, Mr. Chair, and that plan is working. And 
we see that plan working because what we see in the province 
of Saskatchewan today is not the gloom and doom that the 
member from Lloydminster was referring to as if nothing was 
going on in our community. 
 
This is what we see and these are the facts. Employment, year 
over year — March, this March, versus last March — was up 
11,400. In other words there’s 11,400 more people working in 
the province today than there were a year ago. 
 
It’s not a matter of bragging about anything as the member said, 
Mr. Chair, it’s a matter of stating the facts. Because when the 
opposition Saskatchewan Party says everything is bad in 
Saskatchewan, I think people have to know that there are 
11,400 people working in this province more than last year. So 
things can’t be that bad. And that’s not withstanding a drought. 
This year we’re going to have much better economic growth 
than last year. 
 
And our employment growth has taken us to the second highest 
record for the month of March. We have more people working, 
practically, than we’ve had in any time in our history. It is the 
11th straight month of solid job growth, and full-time jobs were 
up 18,300. 
 
In other words, not only are there more people working in the 
province of Saskatchewan, there are more people that have 
full-time work as opposed to part-time work, and that’s 
something we should all be happy about whether we’re on the 
opposition or government. We don’t need this doom and gloom 
and going around saying everything’s bad. We should recognize 
that many things, many things are good. Nothing is ever perfect 
but there are many good things happening. 
 
And I’m very pleased to say, as I said in my first answer, that 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

 

for young people there are 4,700 more young people — those 
are people aged between 15 and 24 — working in 
Saskatchewan today than there were a year ago. That’s good 
news. And we should celebrate that good news. 
 
I want the member to know, because with the doom and gloom 
over there they apparently don’t know, that our unemployment 
rate has gone down to 5.9 per cent from 6.2 per cent. It’s the 
third lowest in Canada. So we’re doing better than most 
provinces. And that’s good news. 
 
Our youth unemployment rate is the third lowest in the country. 
We have more young people employed as a percentage of 
young people. That’s good news. 
 
And I know that the opposition likes to get up and they’ll say, 
oh well that’s because so many people have left. Well I’ve got 
news for the members opposite. No, it’s because more people 
are working. The numbers are up — 4,700 more young people 
working in Saskatchewan today than there were a year ago. And 
they can get up and complain all they want and go into their 
doom and gloom, but those are the facts. 
 
I want the members opposite to know that the retail sales 
increase for Saskatchewan over the last year — these are 
actually February numbers — were up 7.7 per cent. They were 
up 7.7 per cent, which was the highest percentage increase in 
Canada. In other words, retail sales went up more in 
Saskatchewan than any other province. This can’t be evidence 
that things are all bad in Saskatchewan; it’s got to be evidence 
that people have confidence. There’s consumer confidence. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite that they have never 
apologized for what they said after I introduced the budget of 
2002 where I indicated that retail sales would be at a certain 
level and I was optimistic about it. They got up and said that I 
was making it up, that retail sales would never be as high as I 
said, and that retail sales tax would never bring in as much as I 
said. Well it turned out it brought in more than I said, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
And that’s the sort of thing that they do. They get up and say 
that nothing is good in Saskatchewan; this won’t happen. But 
when it does happen, they never acknowledge that something 
good has happened. And I think we should start doing that. 
 
I could go on and talk about department store merchandise 
being up 6.4 per cent. That’s a big increase of department store 
sales. The fact that natural gas production is up 6.5 per cent and 
so on. Motor vehicle sales are up. Business and corporations, up 
17.4 per cent. In other words, people are starting businesses in 
Saskatchewan because they’re optimistic about the future. Not 
everybody shares the doom and gloom of the opposition. 
 
But I do want to say specifically as well, the member says: what 
are we doing to foster a competitive economy? I want the 
member to know, if he doesn’t know already, that we have . . . 
our personal income taxes have gone from the second highest in 
the country in the early ’90s, right after we took office from the 
members opposite over there, to the third lowest. We have 
lower income taxes than most provinces. 
 
We have improved business tax competitiveness by expanding 

the corporation capital tax exemption. Now that exemption used 
to be $10 million, that the first $10 million of capital was not 
taxed. Now that went up to $15 million as a result of last year’s 
budget and that is going to go up ultimately to a higher figure 
than that, to $20 million, by January 1, 2005 for 
Saskatchewan-based businesses. That will be the biggest 
exemption for business of the nine provinces that have a 
corporate capital tax. 
 
We have reduced the small-business corporate income tax rate 
from 10 per cent, which it was when we took office, down to 6 
per cent today, and it’s going to go down to 5 per cent by 2005. 
So there are many things being done to foster a competitive 
economy. 
 
The members opposite should know, Mr. Chair, that oil and gas 
drilling is up — I don’t know if I mentioned this before — more 
than 70 per cent over last year. Oil and gas drilling is up more 
than 70 per cent over last year. Mr. Chair, that is a phenomenal 
increase. And when you have oil and gas drilling up over 70 per 
cent over last year, a 70 per cent increase, that means that 
you’ve got service industries working, you’ve got transportation 
working, you’ve got people in restaurants and hotels. So it’s 
very good. 
 
And the member says well, you know, you need more than 
glossy brochures. Well I’ve explained to the members, we put 
together a competitive tax regime. We put together an oil and 
gas package to get oil and gas moving. We have a mining 
package to move mining forward. And these things are 
working. We have a forestry policy that has resulted in 8,000 
new jobs over the last five years or so in forestry and over $1 
billion private sector investment. And these things taken 
together — with the lowest manufacturing and processing taxes 
in the country, I might add, so we’ve got more manufacturing 
— mean that we have more people working. 
 
And I say to the member, we need to convince ourselves that 
Saskatchewan is a positive place — and I’m convinced 
Saskatchewan is a positive place to live; I love living in 
Saskatchewan — and not just say everything is negative and 
bad all the time. 
 
And I want to just before I sit down say, you know, you look at 
some of the headlines that there are. Here’s one from the 
Whitewood Herald where it says, “Saskatchewan business 
optimistic about 2003.” “Economic turnaround seen.” We’re 
seeing it already. “Big year for commercial building activity” 
— that’s from The Melfort Journal. “Strong year for 
construction,” also from The Melfort Journal. And finally, the 
Leader-Post which says, “More Sask growth predicted.” 
 
(15:45) 
 
And you know, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, every 
time you talk about good news she says, well it’s boring. Well 
I’m sorry to bore the member from Kelvington-Wadena but I do 
want to say this province is a great place to live. It’s a great 
place to do business. It has a great future. 
 
And you can get up and you may think it’s more exciting and 
popular to just be negative about everything that’s happening, 
but I’ll tell you there are a lot of people, Mr. Chair, that are very 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

positive about Saskatchewan’s future. And I’m one of them and 
I invite the opposition to join Saskatchewan people and also say 
something good about the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, you’re dead right. It’s a great 
province and I’m proud to be here. And just wait until we have 
another election, and there’s going to be a lot of people coming 
back to this province to celebrate what this province has in 
potential. And that’s the . . . And if you feel that it’s going over 
so well now, I suggest that either you read the polls or you call 
an election then so that you can continue on with this great plan 
that you have. 
 
I gave you credit, Mr. Minister, for talking about putting the tax 
incentives in the right place, and I gave you credit for directing 
them for instance to the oil and gas sector, and I told you that 
those are the areas that have responded well. From my 
perspective, from my constituency, that was the right thing. 
 
Now the activity that spins off from that, the servicing industry 
that you talked about, those are all increasing. But I haven’t 
seen a new company initiate a new business, Mr. Minister, in 
my town on the Saskatchewan side. And I’m not sure why that 
is, if it’s so pleasant and so positive from the way you describe 
it. 
 
When I think about the economic advantage that we have here 
in Saskatchewan, you’re on the right track. And we have to be 
as certainly at least competitive if we’re going to attract the 
investment that is so desperately needed. Not government 
investment. I mean private enterprise investment in this 
province. 
 
And to get that investment in this province you need confidence 
of that investor. And that confidence at this stage is still starting 
. . . still standing back and wondering if this government is 
going to continue to invest in the economy and to keep driving 
the economy, with the investments that Crown corporations and 
the government have been so prominent in the recent times. 
 
I’d like to get down to another more specific question, if I 
could. You talked about the agricultural base of the economy 
and Saskatchewan. It’s been critical. I was involved directly in 
farming for 20 years and in the grain industry for a number of 
years after that. I won’t tell you how many because you’ll start 
adding up the numbers and that’s maybe unfair. 
 
But just so that it’s on the record, could you tell me what . . . 
and maybe this isn’t the economic development but we keep 
talking about why the economy has been sluggish and you keep 
referring it to the two-year drought. What percentage of the 
economy is attributable to the agriculture sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I’m happy to answer that question, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
It does vary somewhat depending upon the year, obviously, 
because . . . whether you have a drought or not. For example, 
production on the farm in 2002, I think, was down about 23 per 
cent from what it would normally be. So production was quite 
down and so in 2002 the farm sector would be a smaller part of 

the GDP. I would estimate in 2002 the farm economy must 
have been 7 . . . somewhere between 6 and 8 per cent of the 
GDP. 
 
Oil and gas was the largest and I believe it was 8 per cent. 
Farming would be about, let’s say, 7 per cent. I mean we don’t 
have the final figures yet. And then mining would be next at 
about 6 per cent. So you can see they’re all very large as a part 
of the GDP. 
 
And farming, if you had a very good year, you can see that if oil 
prices went down, for example, and farm commodity prices 
went up, the farm could become 8 per cent of the economy and 
oil could become 7. But for 2002 I believe oil and gas was 
about 8, farming was about 7, mining was about 6. 
 
Now if you looked at it another way, if you looked an 
non-renewable resources of oil and gas and mining, they now 
account for about, you know, 14 per cent of the GDP, which 
would be roughly twice as big as farming was last year, if you 
look at it that way. So they’re all very big, they’re all very 
important, and we want them all to do well. 
 
And before I sit down I do want to thank the member for 
indicating in his last question that having looked at our 
economic development plan, I think the record will show the 
member said we’re on the right track. And the member and his 
party had not acknowledged that before, and I’m gratified to 
hear that the opposition acknowledges we are on the right track. 
And I thank the member for that comment and the honesty with 
which he made that. And so that’s the answer and I hope those 
figures are helpful to the member. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. If I could have the attentions of 
members. There seems to be a lot of private conversations 
going on, including the east gallery. And I would ask hon. 
members to please come to order and if they have conversations 
to take them behind the bar. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There’s no doubt, 
Mr. Minister, that to encourage economic development the right 
stimulus has to be in place and we’re talking generally taxation 
and other kinds of royalties. That’s a common element through 
any economy that’s been lagging and I certainly have admitted 
and agreed that you’re going in the right direction — but only 
in the right direction. 
 
We have to be vigilant of what we’re competing against. 
Provinces just don’t exist by themselves. We are a global entity 
and we have to make sure that we can be competitive with other 
jurisdictions. Agriculture in Alberta was experiencing the same 
difficulties. Agriculture in Manitoba, maybe not to the same 
extent. I’m not sure that either one of those economies shrunk 
during 2002 using agriculture as the main culprit in that 
particular case. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Minister, I have another question 
that is maybe . . . it’s very apropos right now because of the 
Canadian dollar showing such a strong relationship to the 
American dollar. And my question would be, when I read 
through the budget, it was projected that the dollar would be 
approaching about 70 cents but not by about 2004-2005. Now 
it’s approaching or past that, I think, yesterday or today. And I 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

 

heard Mr. Treleaven this morning on the radio — and I have to 
admit at 6:30 in the morning I wasn’t listening very carefully — 
but I’m sure I heard him discussing this issue about the 
Canadian dollar. 
 
I want you to explain or give some confidence to the people 
watching that this in fact is . . . Is it a good sign, is it a bad sign? 
Is this going to affect the overall economic development of 
projections and plans based on the budgetary documents that 
were presented to us? Is this going to affect both the 
productivity that we’re going to have to see to meet the rising 
dollar? Because the lower the dollar, the less focus needs to be 
placed on productivity. 
 
And also, supplementary to that, how is that going to affect the 
investment potential of what we want to draw into this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well it’s a very controversial subject when 
the value of the Canadian dollar is going up, because on the one 
hand some will argue that it makes it more difficult to sell our 
goods to the United States. But on the other hand the reason the 
Canadian dollar goes up relative to the American dollar is 
because the Canadian economy is seen as stronger, as getting 
stronger. And Saskatchewan, of course, is part of the Canadian 
economy. 
 
So it’s positive from an investment point of view that it’s an 
indication that investors would want to invest in Canada. And 
that will therefore positively impact Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s a double-edged sword. It means that it may be more 
difficult to sell commodities. But on the other hand, it means 
that our economy is strong, people have confidence in it, 
therefore they may invest in the economy. And that is the view 
that we take, that our economy is strong and that we’re going to 
see more investment in the economy and more jobs. 
 
And we’re seeing that this year for sure. I won’t go over the 
figures I gave before. I don’t know if I mentioned that oil and 
gas drilling was up 70 per cent, for example. And I won’t go 
over all of them. But those figures show there’s more 
investment in our economy. And so I think it’s good from that 
point of view. 
 
It also is interesting to note that the American economy is not 
doing as well. Most of the governments in the United States, 
and especially the government of George W. Bush federally, 
have very, very big deficits — something that we don’t have to 
the same extent in Canada. 
 
And many of the problems that Canada came through in the 
’90s, the US (United States) seems to be going into now, which 
is interesting because a lot of those places tend to have 
conservative-type governments like the administration of 
George W. Bush — which is kind of an irony because one 
expects that the conservatives are supposed to be fiscally 
responsible but often we see governments like that going into 
very big debt. 
 
So that’s our view on the Canadian dollar. We know that it may 
pose challenges to some people that are exporting, but on the 
other hand we believe it reflects that our economy is 

fundamentally getting stronger than it was before and that’s 
being recognized by investors. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think it’s 
important to remember that the budgetary numbers and your 
projections were based on a certain anticipation, and that I see 
the anticipation in the budget items would indicate that there 
would be an increase in the value of the Canadian dollar relative 
to the US. 
 
Unfortunately or fortunately as the case may be, to be able to 
remain competitive and market into a global, i.e., US-dollar 
economy, our economy or our businesses have to become much 
more productive in the same relation that the dollar is different. 
 
With that in mind, I’m wondering if I could ask you and 
through you, to the STEP organization, how does the 70-cent 
dollar, how does that affect the relation then between what we 
are manufacturing and what we are exporting, the productivity 
of that, and the confidence of our people to be able to keep up 
to that kind of a change in the dollar value? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I did, Mr. Chair, as the member 
suggested that I consult with the president of STEP, and I have 
done so. And he advises me that basically their view of the 
Canadian dollar is as I have described it in the previous 
question. 
 
But in answer to this specific question, I’m advised that five 
years ago, for example, the Canadian dollar was where it is now 
and that we were able to export very well. And our feeling is 
that Canadian, Saskatchewan businesses are able to adapt to the 
higher dollar, that they deal with challenges on a daily basis, or 
a yearly basis, that it’s something they can adapt to. 
 
I should say — I don’t have the figures in front of me — but I 
believe that in the 1990s Saskatchewan I think on a per capita 
basis was the jurisdiction that increased its productivity more 
than any other province. Our people are very innovative and 
productive and so we think that the Canadian dollar, while it 
will be a challenge to exporters whose product is totally 
produced in Canada, they will cope with it and do very well 
because the economy is fundamentally stronger than it used to 
be. That’s our view. 
 
Of course on the other side there’s some people that import 
from the United States something that they may want to add 
value to, and for those people of course the higher Canadian 
dollar is an advantage. And it is also an advantage for anybody 
that has debt that is denominated in American dollars, of 
course. 
 
I’m also advised by Mr. Treleaven that one of the things STEP 
is doing is to advise businesses how to hedge against a higher 
dollar. Some of them already will do that, others may get into 
that — hedging being a way to sort of stabilize the risks 
associated with fluctuating currency value. And I won’t go into 
all the details; it’s quite complex. But in any event they want to 
talk to businesses that may wish to take advantage of a hedging 
strategy against a higher dollar as well. 
 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s 
an important item and I think we have to continue to have 
confidence that Saskatchewan can in fact cope with that. And in 
fact Mr. Treleaven explained that this morning in his radio 
interview and I was pleased to hear that. 
 
But following on that, maybe just another question. Is there an 
economic impact from the earlier Canadian government 
decision not to support the US militarily in Iraq? We’ve heard 
some anecdotal evidence that that might be the case. 
 
I’ve asked a colleague of yours earlier in the . . . in a legislative 
questioning if that was in case of the fact at the time. And I’m 
wondering if your officials have determined that there may be 
an impact on how our relation has been affected and therefore 
the economy, that we need to work with them over a longer 
period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that there has been no 
discernible impact on exports. We have not heard from the 
business community that their exports have been hurt by the 
Canadian government’s stand with respect to the war in Iraq. 
 
And I’ll repeat what I have said before which is that I think that 
what you will find dealing with Americans generally — and we 
do value our relationship with Americans — that they are very 
business oriented and they are going to do business in a way 
that makes sense to them. 
 
And if it makes sense economically for them to buy Canadian 
goods, they’ll buy them. And quite frankly, if it didn’t make 
sense for them to do that they probably wouldn’t be buying 
them now because . . . And not being critical of them, they’re 
like anybody else, they want to get the best deal; and if it’s the 
best deal for Americans to buy Canadian products instead of 
getting them somewhere else, I think that that’s what they’ll do. 
 
And I think, notwithstanding our differences over the war in 
Iraq, I think that we have a long history of friendly relations 
which will continue, in trade and other areas. 
 
We’ve had disagreements with American foreign policy before 
and we will again. And we regard foreign policy actually as 
being different than trade policy, but I’ll leave it there. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the opposition 
member, the member from Lloydminster, for his very helpful 
questions today. And I’d also like to thank my officials from the 
Department of Industry and Resources, and STEP and Tourism 
for coming to the legislature today to participate in this process. 
 
And I think that that’s . . . we’re going to move on to other 
business now, so. And yes, I move that we report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . okay, 
that we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Trew): — To lead us off I would 

invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Before I introduce the officials, some of you will notice some 
changes in the officials who are here today and so I would like 
to inform the legislature of structural change in the organization 
of our department which is taking effect today, May 1, 2003. 
 
Our announcement provides for reporting relationships and 
responsibilities to better align the department to meet our future 
needs. Barry Martin, who is well known to members of the 
legislature, has agreed to take on the role as associate deputy 
minister of an enhanced policy and programs division 
responsible for transportation policy, transport compliance, and 
partnership programs and services branch. 
 
The operations division will include the three regions and the 
engineering services branch. Stu Armstrong has agreed to take 
on the role of assistant deputy minister for operations division. 
 
Now I would like to introduce the rest of those . . . of the 
officials who are with us today. Harvey Brooks, who is deputy 
minister of Highways and Transportation, is to my left. To my 
right, Stu Armstrong, our new assistant deputy minister of 
operations, and we welcome you, Stu. 
 
Behind me is Don Wincherauk, assistant deputy minister of 
corporate services. And Fred Antunes is next to Don; he’s 
director of operations planning and business support. Mike 
Makowsky, manager of transportation and trade logistics is 
sitting to the left of Fred. And Terry Blomme, executive 
director of the southern region, is sitting immediately behind 
Stu. And Cathy Lynn Borbely is leader of our budget 
development, is sitting in the back row. 
 
And just a note that our new associate deputy minister, Barry 
Martin, would be here today but is absent due to personal 
reasons so was unable to be with us. And if there are questions 
that Barry in particular has the background on that we’re not 
able to give to you today, we will certainly get those answers to 
you as soon as possible after Barry has returned. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
minister and all his officials, and particularly the officials that 
are new positions. I certainly welcome them and look forward 
to working with them. 
 
Minister, I looked at the latest, the new . . . annual report, the 
most current annual report that’s available. And in that report 
on page 14, your department talks, or you talk about the goals 
of the department and some of the key actions for 2002-2003 
are under objective 1, preserving the primary highway network. 
And one of the . . . the item that caught my attention was, 
develop a three-year capital plan. 
 
I guess my question is, Minister, if you could elaborate on the 
extent of that three-year capital plan, in view of the fact that 
elsewhere in the report there’s mention that some 14,000 
kilometres of highway, although they may be thin membrane 
surfaces, are beyond their 25-year . . . or their service life. 
 
And then also within the report, there’s an objective stated to 
rehabilitate the highway system every 25 years. And yet when 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

 

we look at this current year’s program, we see some 750 
kilometres of the highway network is being rehabilitated. 
 
I just wonder if you could . . . If we look at some 26,000 
kilometres in the highway system, and 14,000 kilometres are 
already beyond their service life, and your goal is to rehabilitate 
the whole system in 25 years, it seems to me that we have to 
certainly do more than 750 kilometres in one year. And I’m just 
wondering if you could elaborate on the three-year plan and 
how all this fits together. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. There are actually a 
number of points within the question that need to be addressed. 
And first of all, I think if you will look at the report, you’ll note 
that it says 14,000 kilometre years. And there’s a process for 
arriving at that, and basically it is to take the number of 
kilometres times the years past service life. And so that, with 
that formula then, basically we are identifying the years of life 
that are past here. 
 
So what we need now to emphasize, and what we are 
emphasizing in our planning, is that we want to get all our 
pavements on that 20- to 25-year life cycle. And so right now 
what we’ve got with the three-year plan, and why we held back 
on putting that forward for a time, is because we needed to 
make sure that before those numbers came out that we had 
secured our federal funding. 
 
And part of the reality in dealing with the federal government is 
that they want new dollars in terms of any matched funding. 
And so we have to be very, very careful in terms of the 
negotiations, in terms of the planning that we lay out, that we 
have room to move in our negotiations with the federal 
government so that we can maximize the dollars that we’re able 
to get from them for our . . . improving our highways in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, within the three-year plan, perhaps you 
could expand on . . . has that plan been finalized? 
 
Could you — and if it has been — could you give us some 
indication as to what . . . within that plan, does that plan deal 
with the problem of providing primary highway access to 
economic . . . standards of economic activity? Does it address 
the situation where grain terminals are located 20 kilometres off 
the primary highways? And there’s been a . . . on a number of 
occasions in the past I’ve — myself and other members from 
this side of the House — have raised that. 
 
Does the three-year plan include extending that 15 kilometres 
say to 20 kilometres, as far as the primary weights being hauled 
off of primary highways? And also, does the plan include some 
initiatives to address some of the problems in urban centres 
where we have provincial highways, and in particular some of 
our national highways? I’m thinking of Regina and Victoria 
East, and the traffic congestion there. Does the three-year plan 
address some of those issues, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well the three-year plan, as been 
released so far, deals with a number of factors. 
 

Now you’ll know that a lot of dollars are locked in, due to 
programs that we are in relationship with the federal 
government on — our twinning programs, our Prairie Grain 
Roads Program, and the SHIP (strategic highway infrastructure 
program) program. However though we know in the first year 
clearly where our dollars will be spent, we know that in the 
subsequent two years there will be, there is still flexibility 
where everything is not locked in completely over those 
periods. 
 
But what we are trying to do in the three-year capital plan is to 
enable the stakeholders to also do some planning. And that will 
be our road builders, it will be some of the others who are 
looking at what they’re doing in terms of purchase of 
equipment, in terms of planning for development in a particular 
area as well. 
 
Some of the concerns around weights. Well I think we’ve 
already indicated in past questioning that we are doing a review 
of the primary weight system around the province, and so some 
of those issues may not be addressed in the capital budget but 
may in fact be there in some of the rebuilding that we’ll do over 
the following years as well. 
 
We’re looking at over this by . . . probably by mid to the end of 
May, we should be able to finalize our three-year capital 
investment program and make that information available as 
well. For the, probably next year we’ll be looking at about a 
clear sense of . . . Well, we figure for next year probably in the 
range of, we should be able to picture about 80 per cent of what 
will happen in capital. 
 
In terms of primary weights, in terms of those questions that 
have been asked about increasing to primary weight capacity 
for rural economic development, those things are being 
discussed, negotiated, and are not included particularly in this 
three-year plan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Minister, what you’re saying then is those 
areas who, that have been calling and asking for primary access 
— I’m thinking of Trailtech in Gravelbourg and the Bourgault 
plant in St. Brieux and those sorts of things — those sections of 
highway are not in the current three-year capital plan? Is that 
what you are saying, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think a couple of pieces are 
very important. We’ve talked about the negotiations that are 
going on, on a number of those fronts, where there is economic 
development. And when our capital plan is finalized you’ll 
know for this year whether or not those roads will be included. 
That picture will be clear for this year. In the out years, the 
following two years, each of those years will have more 
flexibility built into it. 
 
The other thing that, as I’ve indicated earlier, makes a 
difference in terms of how we can set those priorities for some 
of those areas is what we’re able to negotiate in terms of 
partnerships with municipalities with the industries involved. 
Some of those partnerships will be trucking partnership 
agreements and some of them will be in terms of actual 
building, road-building partnerships where either in kind or 
dollars are put into it by municipality or by the industry 
involved. 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

So there is limited flexibility there. There will be . . . Hopefully 
by the time we are able to put forward the capital plan in May, 
you will know what will be included for this year in terms of 
those rebuilds that say, for example, for St. Brieux, that might 
enable primary weight rebuild for those highways. 
 
But we do take very, very seriously the guidance of the area 
transportation planning committees in terms of setting the 
priorities. That goes into the work of setting where the funds 
will go in the capital plan as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you mentioned that negotiations have to 
take place, and you mentioned that perhaps there’s partnership 
. . . trucking partnerships and also partnerships in the actual 
construction and the funding of the construction. 
 
So are you saying that what your government’s policy is that in 
the . . . Let’s use the Bourgault plant at St. Brieux as an 
example, Minister. Are you negotiating with that plant to have 
them participate in the actual cost of reconstruction of that 
highway? Is that what you’re saying? Is that the policy of your 
government that you have, you expect these generators of 
economic activity and revenue in our province to also pay for 
the highway system that serves their area? Is that your policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Our first priority — in terms of the 
negotiations with the people who are looking for the ability to 
haul primary weights — our first priority of course is to make 
sure that we are looking after our road system. 
 
And we also, in terms of our discussions with them, we want to 
try and get to win-win situations, which is what we’re able to do 
in our trucking partnerships where we share the benefits. And 
out of those benefits, then we use those funds to help build and 
sustain our roadways and our safety. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The other . . . I mean, we are . . . In the whole process, we try 
and find innovative ways to meet the needs of those who are 
trying to develop in, say, St. Brieux or in . . . Doepker Industries 
would be another one. 
 
And we work with the municipalities. We’ve set up alternate 
haul routes so that we can preserve our pavements so that those 
people who live in the area will not run into, say, a TMS (thin 
membrane surface) road that is being broken up prematurely. 
 
And so, what we’re trying to do is, first of all, we’re trying to 
maintain our road systems and develop them using the best 
stewardship that we possibly can. And as you will well know 
from your own petitions and from other questions that have 
been raised, demands are wide. They come from all over the 
province. 
 
And therefore, when we can’t find that solution within a 
particular range of our budget to rebuild, then we work with 
those groups — the area transportation planning committees, 
the municipalities, and indeed with the industry themselves — 
because if they’re going to see significant benefit, they’re also 
looking for solutions that will be workable and timely for them. 
 
And where we can work out an agreement between all who are 

involved in that, that will be a win for those folks and will also 
help preserve and develop our road systems, then yes, we’ll 
work on those partnerships. And to this point, I think we’ve got 
some fairly good agreements that have developed where the 
industry is looking at it and saying yes, this is good for us too. 
 
And they appreciate the kind of work that’s gone into forming 
those partnerships and the co-operation that there is between 
our department, the municipalities, and themselves. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I would put forward that, with the 
additional federal dollars that the federal government is putting 
into highway construction in our province on an annual basis — 
they’re not large but everything is . . . it helps — and that will 
enable the completion of the twinning systems, twinning of our 
national highway systems more rapidly than was originally 
anticipated. 
 
I am told that there are a number of centres, in our cities in 
particular, who are sitting patiently and waiting for the twinning 
to be complete. They realize that, you know, governments only 
have so many dollars to spend on the highway system and the 
twinning is a top priority. But once the twinning is complete, 
that they are going to be coming to government with their needs 
and some needs are fairly substantive. 
 
I mean all we have to do is look here in the city of Regina with 
the traffic congestion we have here on Victoria east. I believe 
that, at least from the city’s viewpoint, there is an initial plan 
for a complete new bypass, which we’re looking at 10, $20 
million, 30 million perhaps, maybe higher the minister is 
indicating. So that’s out there in the long term, and I don’t think 
anyone is expecting that to happen within the next two or three 
or four years perhaps. 
 
But I would ask then, are those major infrastructure projects 
that are required to address some of these problems? I’m sure 
there are major projects in the Saskatoon and Prince Albert and 
North Battleford areas, and Moose Jaw, and those sorts of 
things that are out there on the horizon. And those communities 
are being very patient until the twinning project is completed. 
And then, as I said, will be coming forward with those. 
 
So has your department . . . I mean we’re talking about a 
three-year plan but I think what we need is a five- and a 
ten-year plan. Is your department doing that type of planning? 
And I guess, as an example, if you could indicate where does 
this whole traffic problem on the east side of Regina, where is it 
in that long-term planning process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I appreciate the question because 
in terms of the planning that goes on — I mean we’re looking at 
a three-year capital plan here — but in terms of the planning 
that goes on, the department has been working over many years 
and continues to work at long-range planning, trying to work 
with all of the municipalities, both urban and rural, to anticipate 
what the needs are for many years out. 
 
And so for example, and you point to the east side of Regina. 
The east side of Regina is an interesting case in point because 
their work that was done in long-range planning did not really 
anticipate that the city would make the decisions to do the 
developments that they did out around what was basically 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

 

highway. And yet it was on their land, so they had the right to 
do that. But in doing so they created . . . I mean cut into the 
timeline and created a bottleneck there which we, in our 
planning and working with the municipality, are still going to 
be working on addressing. 
 
So long-range planning around this area, you’re right, it does 
include bypass. There have been a number of models that have 
been and are being looked at and discussions are going on with 
the city here. The same in Saskatoon, recognizing that there are 
changing needs. Traffic flows are increasing. We would look 
for example to North Battleford where we knew that there were 
changes in patterns there. We were doing the twinning project 
on the Yellowhead. We very successfully did long-range 
planning there. We now have the dual bridges in which are — 
and working on the associated roadways around those bridges 
— which are providing for the needs of the Battlefords. 
 
And so in terms of planning, that is ongoing, it is long-range, 
and so it’s not a contradiction of the three-year capital plan; it’s 
just the three-year capital plan is enabling a shorter view for us 
that is more concrete. That also is being done to help our 
partners in terms of their own capital planning. What do the 
road builders need to do? What kind of equipment might they 
need? What kind of hiring or training might they need for the 
years ahead? 
 
So we’re giving them a little more solid base to work with. And 
at the same time we’re also working with communities like 
Estevan, communities that are seeing changing patterns and are 
looking down the road. What will Estevan need, for example, to 
meet the truck traffic that is moving from — say we’ll give one 
of the national highways routes that comes down — Edmonton, 
No. 16, down No. 11, down through 6, and then 39? 
 
We know that the demands are there and so we work with the 
communities. We’re meeting with them to look at how we can 
best meet those needs down in the future — I won’t say down 
the road, but in the future. 
 
And I think that the level of planning and the level of discussion 
and negotiations that continue with our municipalities is, from 
my perspective as a minister, very commendable. And really I 
think the relationships have been quite positive as we try and do 
joint planning. 
 
When we come closer to the actual events, then it becomes a 
matter of breaking the dollars loose and committing them. And 
first of all it would be the planning dollars. If we’re going to do 
something on Victoria East, we’ll need the planning dollars in 
place. Then we need the development dollars in place, and we’ll 
work on a partnership with the city there. 
 
Since by law, as I indicated last time, communities over 1,000, 
the roadways within their boundaries are generally theirs. Well 
we’ll work with the city then to find out how we can partner to 
complete this work, to make sure that the traffic flow is 
happening there effectively. 
 
So long-range planning is going on. It is not a contradiction of 
the three-year plan. The three-year just gives us a more direct 
focus for that period. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Minister, you indicated and referred to the traffic 
congestion, the problem here in Regina on Victoria East. Now 
do I understand you correctly? Is it your government’s position 
that that highway and that bypass as it exists now is solely a city 
of Regina responsibility, even though it is part of the national, 
the Trans-Canada Highway and a good . . . or at least a 
significant portion of the traffic on that stretch of road is 
actually interprovincial traffic that’s just simply trying to get 
around Regina? 
 
I’m sure you’ve driven that, as I have, at 5 o’clock in the 
afternoon and seen the congestion. And I guess I would ask, has 
your department, do you have any short-term plans — and we’ll 
leave the long-term planning — is there any short-term plans 
and any discussions going on with the city to come up with a 
short-term plan to alleviate that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Currently what is happening is the 
department is working with the city. We’re in the design phase 
for dealing with the traffic situation. 
 
But in terms of the more general question that you’re asking, in 
terms of flow of traffic and who owns what roadways, I believe 
it was 1984 that the legislation was passed where communities 
over 1,000 basically are to own the roadways within the 
municipal boundaries. 
 
And yet we continue to work with those municipalities 
recognizing that even though it may be on a national highway 
system or it may be a secondary highway system that the traffic 
is flowing through, that those communities also benefit from 
traffic moving in and through. And you’ll be aware of course of 
many communities who are concerned. As new roadways are 
built, they don’t want to be excluded because there is an 
economic impact. So the communities — though there can be 
problems with congestion — also want to make sure that they 
are not excluded from the possibility of the economic benefit 
that they will gain. 
 
So when we’re working on this particular one in Regina, we’re 
now working with the city officials. Our officials are working 
with the city on a design phase to deal with the congestion. And 
longer term, there have been some drafts of how we might look 
at a bypass, but we want to do those kind of planning workings 
in regard . . . in relationship with the community. We don’t 
want to do it excluding the communities. We want to make sure 
that they have some say and some involvement. And we do this 
. . . Some people will be aware of Moosomin being a case in 
point where the community is making their case — why should 
the road go in a particular place next to Moosomin? 
 
So we try in all of our work to hear what the needs are. I was 
talking . . . there were questions from the member from 
Rosthern last week about what our plans are around 
intersections and potential twinning of No. 11 by Rosthern. 
 
And again the department has been engaged in long and, I 
think, very respectful discussions with the communities to try 
and make sure that we are meeting the needs of the 
communities, but that we are also meeting the department needs 
to provide good transportation for intra and interprovincial and 
cross-border traffic. 
 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2003 

 

Mr. Hart: — Minister, if we could zero in on this traffic 
situation here in east Regina. I’m told that a short-term solution 
might be to have an additional turning lane so that we would 
have two turning lanes allowing the westbound traffic to be able 
to make that left-hand turn and head down the bypass and on 
their way. 
 
Is that part of the design that’s being done in your department in 
conjunction with the city that you talked about? And if in fact 
that is, are there funds? I’m told that the cost of doing 
something like that may be 2 or 3 or $4 million and I’m also 
told that perhaps there may be a cost sharing in that short, or 
interim solution. What is happening within your department to 
address that serious situation? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Yes, in terms of the work 
that is being done, the city basically is taking lead on the design 
and working very, very closely with the department as we try 
and figure out what is the best way of staging this rebuild of 
Victoria East and the interchange there. And certainly the 
second lane, as you’ve pointed to, is one of the options that’s 
being put into the works as they’re trying to work out a final 
design. 
 
And as I say, the city is taking lead but they are working with 
the department very closely. Once we’ve got the design phase 
complete — which we are co-funding with the city — once the 
design phase is complete, then we will know what our costs 
overall will be and we’ll be in negotiation with the city, as 
we’ve been working with them closely all along. We’ll be in 
negotiation with them to find out what part we will play in the 
overall funding, building, and we will make sure that this is 
done right in relationship with the city. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, in that overall proposal what . . . I’m 
also told that there’s an issue of maintenance costs on that 
section of highway and that it is — if my information is correct 
— it is the position of your government that you expect the city 
of Regina to pick up a significant portion or perhaps 100 per 
cent of the maintenance of that section of road. Is that in fact the 
correct information? And how do you — if in fact that is correct 
— how do you explain that this section of highway being a part 
of the Trans-Canada Highway system, do you not feel that your 
government has a role in maintaining that section of highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — One of the things I think it’s important 
to recognize that over time with the growth of the city is that the 
character of the traffic flow does change and it becomes more 
urban city, local traffic flow that is going on, going on these 
roadways. And what we have done in this situation and in other 
situations is we have continued to negotiate responsibility. 
 
We work within the laws but we also recognize that we do 
share some of the responsibility and therefore we do share 
sometimes in maintenance, sometimes in cost with the cities. 
And that has been a matter of negotiation, not a hard, fast rule 
like, okay it’s yours; now you’re cut off. 
 
I think it’s part of the nature not only of Saskatchewan but of 
Canada is that we try and work through things with negotiation. 
That is indeed what is happening here and we try and give 

mutual support in a variety of ways to the city so that we can 
best meet our needs in terms of the traffic flow that we’re 
responsible for. 
 
And they have made a number of decisions that have really 
changed the traffic flow in that particular area that we have no 
input on. And so based on their decisions, with changing flow, 
there are changing responsibilities, and what we need to do is 
work with them to find the most amenable situations . . . 
solutions to these problems. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you refer to a number of decisions that 
the city of Regina has made to change the traffic flow in that 
area, and I presume you’re talking about the economic 
development that has happened in that area of the city and also 
the residential growth to the south of that area. 
 
Minister, those are all things that would increase the tax base of 
this province and generate more revenue. And I would suggest 
that any government would naturally assume that they have 
responsibilities to maintain the national highway system even 
though a section, a larger section of it now is within the city 
boundaries and those sorts of things. And I would just urge you 
to take that into consideration when you are looking at making 
those changes in that area. 
 
Minister, I see the . . . I have quite a number of other areas that I 
would like to raise with you but the hour is getting late and I 
don’t see any point in raising areas such as the strategic rural 
road initiative and the trucking initiative and that sort of thing. 
 
So I look forward to discussing with you and your officials at a 
future date in the Assembly a number of these other issues. And 
I know my colleagues have a great number of questions for you 
and your officials, and we will certainly be most happy to put 
them forward next time this committee deals with the estimates 
of spending of your department, Minister. 
 
And I’d like to thank your officials for attending today and 
helping to provide the answers. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I know 
we’re late in the day but I wanted to take full advantage of this 
opportunity to introduce these guests to the House in the closing 
moments of today’s session. 
 
With us we have the distinguished guest, the ambassador from 
the embassy of the state of Eritrea based in Washington, DC 
(District of Columbia), Ambassador Girma, who is in our 
gallery this afternoon. 
 
We have Dr. Alfred Rhea, the diplomatic representative for the 
Christian embassy also based in Arlington, Virginia. We have 
Jerry Sherman, director for the Christian embassy, based in 
Ottawa. We have Jim Ginther, from the wonderful city of Swift 



May 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

 

Current, visiting Regina to accompany these gentlemen on a 
tour of Saskatchewan. And we also have Dave Smith, a local 
resident, a gentlemen who works with CUCORP here in 
Regina. 
 
And I’d like the members of the Assembly to welcome our 
guests today and to make them welcome on this cool, southern 
Saskatchewan afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Chair. I would like to add, 
on behalf of the government, our welcome to those who are 
visiting us today, ambassador and . . . ambassadors three, and 
guests from Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
First of all before I get into a couple of answers that we have for 
questions that were asked the other day, I just would like to say 
once again that recognizing the importance of economic 
development is one of the things that I think we do well in 
terms of our negotiations around the roadways. Not only in a 
situation like Regina where we value the development that has 
happened, but also as we were talking earlier about some of the 
rural situations where we do try to work with the industry, with 
the municipalities, to provide the best possible roadways, given 
the resources that we have to work with. 
 
Mr. Chair, there were a number of questions that were asked the 
other day. The member from Rosthern asked questions 
regarding accident statistics at various locations along Highway 
No. 11 — Highway 11 and Highway 312, 11 and 6th Street at 
Rosthern, 11 and 4th Street at Rosthern, the Hague entrance, 
and two access points into Osler. 
 
Statistics were obtained using the traffic accident information 
system — TAIS —database managed by the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance. And I would like to provide those 
answers for the member from Rosthern. 
 
And questions were asked by the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood regarding the Grain Car Corporation. 
And just a reminder to the member that though I wear several 
different hats, and one of those is as Chair of the Grain Car 
Corporation, and it is a bit of a hybrid, questions also may be 
asked about the Grain Car Corporation at Public Accounts as it 
is a Treasury Board Crown. So I remind you of that. 
 
So with regard to the fleet of the Grain Car Corporation, a 
question was asked: how many cars does the company own 
today; how many did it start with? In 1981 the Government of 
Saskatchewan made a strategic investment in Canada’s grain 
transportation system by purchasing 1,000 covered hopper cars 
for the movement of export grain grown by western producers. 
 
Since the corporation’s inception, 49 cars have been destroyed 

by train derailments, leaving the corporation with 951 active 
cars of which 454 are on lease to CN (Canadian National) and 
the remaining 497 are on lease to the CP (Canadian Pacific). 
And we’ll provide you with a written answer for that as well. 
 
And for the member for Kelvington-Wadena, there were 
questions asked regarding mowing tenders. In 2003-04, a 
mowing tender schedule was approved on February 25 of ’03. 
All 22 contracts were advertised March 1 to 8 and all contracts 
have been awarded. And we have got a copy of the tender 
schedule to include . . . included in the answer. 
 
The second question that was asked was with regard to 
Department of Highways and Transportation involvement in 
lawsuits from different contractors across the province, 
specifically how many cases are involved in litigation at this 
time. The department currently has two lawsuits involving one 
contractor. 
 
The department’s contracts contain a formal dispute resolution 
process which can lead to arbitration. Very few department 
contracts result in legal action. Between ’99 and 2000 and 
2002-03, the department awarded 429 contracts to road building 
industry for major highway construction and repair. During this 
period, only two lawsuits — point 5 per cent — arose from 
disputes involving one contractor. So I would provide that as 
written material for the member from Kelvington-Wadena as 
well. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I would like to thank my officials as 
well for their work and move that we report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:02. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................823 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................824 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................824 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................824 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................824 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................825 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................842 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................850 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Ceremony 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................825 
 Maple Creek Celebrates 100 Years 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................825 
 International Working Persons’ Day 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................825 
 National Aboriginal Diabetes Awareness Day 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 826 
 National Aboriginal Curling Championships 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................826 
 Biggar Teen Joins Saskatchewan Express 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................826 
 thINK Food Program 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................827 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Workers’ Compensation Board 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................827 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................828 
 Rate Review Process 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................829 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................829 
 Closure of North Battleford Residential Facility 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................830 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................830 
 Ethanol Industry 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................831 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................831 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Additions to Saskatchewan Health’s Drug Plan 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................831 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................832 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 201 — The Oil and Gas Industry Recognition Week Act 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................832 
 



 

 

 Bill No. 20 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................833 
 Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................833 
 Bill No. 22 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2003 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................833 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................833 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................833 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................833 
  Hagel (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................834 
  D’Autremont (point of order) ..................................................................................................................................................834 
  The Speaker (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................835 
 Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................836 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................837 
  Hagel (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................838 
  Heppner (point of order ...........................................................................................................................................................839 
  The Speaker (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................839 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Industry and Resources — Vote 23 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................840 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................840 
 General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................846 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................846 
 
 
 
 


	Ethanol Industry
	Ethanol Industry

