















































Hansard: April 23, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 655 
 April 23, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of producers in the Eastend 
area, as well as Val Marie, concerning the crop insurance 
premium increases introduced this year by the current 
government. The petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve received further 
petitions concerning the historic old bridges on the North 
Saskatchewan River, the prayer of relief of which reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister 
of Highways will preserve the old bridges between 
Battleford and North Battleford. 

 
Your petitioners come from Battleford and Medstead. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the alarming and 
deplorable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine with grave concerns about the condition of Highway 47. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this is signed by citizens of Estevan and also residents of 
the Boundary dam resort. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned with Highway 22, 
that section between Junction 6 and Junction 20. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Strasbourg and Markinch. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Rabbit 
Lake, from Whitkow, from Saskatoon, from Bradwell, and 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: —The following petitions have been reviewed and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and received: 
 

Petition regarding highway repairs in the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency as sessional paper no. 42; and 
 
Addendums to sessional papers nos. 13, 18, 27, 36, 40, and 
41. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 29 ask the government the following question: 
 

For the minister for the Crown Investments Corporation: 
what are the lending guidelines for Crown investments 
corporations to Crown corporations and their subsidiaries 
in the 2002-2003 year, specifically the lending ratios 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

relative to the corporate equity to loans granted; further to 
that, do these guidelines change proportionately with the 
fluctuations in the provincial credit rating? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 29 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: what specific environmental 
groups does your department get consultation on relating to 
current environmental issues? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I notice in 
your gallery is a former member that sat in this Assembly 
’91-95, Mr. Tom Keeping. I’d certainly like to extend a warm 
welcome. 
 
I have a feeling that Mr. Keeping might be joining us tonight. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, if you asked him, he could probably 
put a poem together about his observations of the session this 
afternoon. So let’s welcome Mr. Keeping to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join my 
colleague in welcoming Tom Keeping to the legislature. Tom 
and I served together for a number of years. He was a very good 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), well respected by 
his colleagues and the people in his riding. And as I always ask 
him when I see him, how are you keeping, Tom? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased today to introduce guests that are with us here 
today. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s from a family of people that have 
dedicated . . . from a family of three generations that have 
dedicated public service to this great province of ours. 
 
I’d first of all like to introduce, sitting behind the bar on the 
opposition side of the House, Mrs. Sally Merchant, former 
Saskatoon Liberal MLA who served from 1964 to 1967. And 
Mrs. Merchant, welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And Mrs. Merchant is the daughter of 
Vincent Smith who was the former Yorkton Liberal MLA who 
served from 1934 to 1938. 
 
And I’d also like to introduce . . . it’s my sincere privilege today 
to introduce Pana Merchant, Canada’s newest senator appointed 
December 12, 2002, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — One of the three generations, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not here is Mr. Tony Merchant, but I look forward to 
seeing Tony, Pana, and Mrs. Merchant this evening at the 
Saskatchewan Commonwealth Parliamentary dinner. 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, I just want to note that Tony and Pana 
are 39-year residents in the constituency of my colleague, the 
Minister of Health, Regina Lakeview. And Sally Merchant is a 
59-year resident of the MLA for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please join me, and I ask my colleagues to warmly 
welcome these special guests to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 
the opportunity to introduce to you and to members of the 
legislature several friends of mine seated in the west gallery. 
They’re from Goodsoil, Saskatchewan, long-time friends of 
mine, Ron and Margaret Moormann. 
 
Years and years ago when we used to visit them, I used to 
wonder why they used to look so tired with just two little kids 
running around the house. Mr. Speaker, they were over visiting 
us last night, and I think they’re enjoying the opportunity to see 
why my wife and I look so tired with just two little kids running 
around the house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please —you, and everyone in the legislature — 
please join with me in welcoming Ron and Margaret Moormann 
to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seated of course in the west gallery as well, is a friend of mine 
that we . . . who I met at a convention of guys named Harold, 
Harold Butch Favel. Butch is from Ile-a-la-Crosse, and I would 
like to ask all the members of the Assembly to welcome Harold 
Favel. 
 
Harold’s here, of course, looking at some workmen’s 
compensation issues and he’s certainly had time to visit the 
minister’s office. But I’d like to ask all members of the 
Assembly to welcome Mr. Harold Butch Favel. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, two people who are here because it’s Canada Book 
Day. 
 
In your gallery we have Alison Lohans, who is a nationally 
known children’s writer and is the current writer-in-residence at 
the Regina Public Library. She’s the author of 13 books, nine of 
which have appeared in the Canadian Children’s Book Centre 
Our Choice list and four of which have appeared on the 
Resources Links’ best-of-the-year list. Her books have been 
shortlisted for awards in Saskatchewan and across Canada. Can 
You Promise Me Spring? and Mystery of the Lunchbox 
Criminal won Young Reader’s Choice awards in 1994 and ’96. 
So she lives in Regina and we welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Also seated next to her is Frances 
Greenslade. You may recognize Frances’s name because her 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

 

first book which was creative non-fiction, a travel memoir 
called A Pilgrim In Ireland: A Quest For Home won the 
Saskatchewan Book Award for non-fiction last fall. And she’s 
currently working on another creative non-fiction work called A 
Rough Guide to Motherhood. 
 
She lives in Regina, does some teaching at Luther College. 
She’s originally from Ontario and lived in other provinces but 
she’s . . . we’re proud to have her as a Saskatchewan writer. 
Let’s all welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to just 
acknowledge, behind the bar on the government side, a former 
member of the House, the former member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, who I suspect is here to take in the CPA 
(Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) greetings as well. 
 
Oh, there’s two former members from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. I was getting the signal from across 
here, Mr. Speaker. I thought for a second there I was seeing 
double. But this is . . . two is twice as good, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no doubt about this. 
 
So a former, former member for Last Mountain-Touchwood 
and a former minister of the Crown, Gordon MacMurchy, is 
here, and also former deputy speaker of the House, Dale Flavel. 
And I hope that they’ll both be joining us at the CPA gathering 
this evening. And I’ll ask all hon. members to join in showing 
them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the minister in welcoming the two former 
MLAs from the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood. It’s 
a rare occasion where we have three people who have taken 
turns representing the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood and I would ask all members to join with 
me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed an honour 
for me to join with other hon. members in welcoming all former 
MLAs, but I would particularly like to make note of your 
friends, Sally Merchant and Senator Pana Merchant. And if it 
will help attendance tonight, I promise to sing to my former 
Liberal colleagues, “Are You Lonesome Tonight.” 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
the member from Melville and North Battleford in welcoming 
Mrs. Sally Merchant to the Legislative Assembly today. It is 
true, I do represent the constituency that Mrs. Merchant resides 
within, and I can report to the legislature that I’ve knocked on 
her door many times — both during elections and between 
elections. I can also report that she always wishes me well, but 
informs me that she’s not voting for me. 
 
But it’s nice to see you here this afternoon, Mrs. Merchant. I 

know you’re celebrating a very important birthday this summer. 
You look fabulous and it’s wonderful to see you here joining us 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Administrative Professionals Day 
 

Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, I want today to join with my 
colleagues in the Assembly to recognize the valuable 
contributions that our administrative professionals provide on 
an ongoing basis. Mr. Speaker, today is Administrative 
Professionals Day — a day which of course used to be called 
Secretaries Day. But as we all know, the role of a secretary has 
grown to include a much broader range of tasks, and therefore 
as the duties of a secretary have widened and changed, a new 
name for the profession was deserving, to reflect the dynamic 
nature of these administrative professionals. 
 
Apart from answering phones, writing letters, filing, sorting, 
and faxing, our administrative professionals play a vital role in 
public relations, as well as maintaining solid working 
relationships with our colleagues, our constituents, and various 
other agencies or institutions. They are our links to information; 
they are our messengers; they are our ambassadors. Quite 
simply put, our offices could not function without our 
constituency and administrative assistants to be our eyes, our 
ears, our limbs, and our liaisons. 
 
(13:45) 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank all of 
our constituency assistants, as well as our administrative 
professionals in our caucus office — Jannet, Margaret, and the 
two Gails. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it simply 
couldn’t be business as usual without the ongoing contributions 
of this important, highly skilled, and very special group of 
individuals who can be found in all kinds of offices all across 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m referring of course to our administrative 
professionals. And as part of Administrative Professionals 
Week, this day is set aside to recognize and celebrate the hard 
work and dedication of Saskatchewan’s thousands of 
hardworking administrative professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these men and women are often the first contact 
the public has with an organization and they play an important 
role in helping that organization achieve its goals and 
objectives. 
 
This year’s theme for Administrative Professionals Week is the 
Power of Professionalism. I’m sure I speak for all members of 
this House when I say we need to look no further than to the 
administrative professionals who work diligently day in and day 
out for us to know just how incredibly effective and efficient 
that professionalism truly is. 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

The talents, skills, energy, and enthusiasm of these men and 
women speaks volumes about the level of professionalism that 
exists here in Saskatchewan. In fact as many of us know, our 
schedules often make it rather difficult to keep up with us. 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’re constantly amazed at how 
dedicated and hardworking administrative professionals help us 
stay organized. We don’t know how they do it, and we probably 
just as soon not know, but we’re truly grateful. 
 
On a personal note, members on this side of the House would 
like to say a heartfelt thanks to Leanne and Joanne, two very 
important and very special administrative professionals, for all 
their hard work throughout the year. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
be remiss if I did not recognize the loyalty and dedication of my 
CA (constituency assistant), Shelley Schroeder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to recognize and 
honour all of Saskatchewan’s administrative professionals. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada Book Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as Groucho Marx, one of 
Hollywood’s most eccentric comedic film actors once said, and 
I quote: 
 

Outside of a dog, a book is man’s best friend. And inside of 
a dog, it’s . . . (hard) to read. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s tough to argue with that. And in keeping 
with those sentiments, I am most pleased to acknowledge that 
today is Canada Book Day, a very special day set aside to not 
only celebrate books written by Canadian authors but also to 
recognize the importance of literacy in personal development. 
 
Canada Book Day is part of a larger and ongoing celebration of 
Canada Book Week which runs from April 21 to April 27. This 
year’s theme is Literacy Landscapes and Literary Sites, 
highlighting the significant role particular places have played in 
developing provincial and national literature. 
 
Events are currently taking place in Regina’s downtown at the 
Scarth Street Mall where people may delight in the voices of 
our own local authors. Our guest authors seated in the gallery 
today have already treated some eager listeners with readings 
from their work. Other activities have been going on all 
afternoon including face painting, greetings from the public 
library, a book sale and display table, and musical 
performances. 
 
And so today, Mr. Speaker, let us give our thanks to our 
authors, publishers, and booksellers who give us access to their 
work and in doing so enlarge our minds, spark creativity, and 
broaden our horizons. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Earth Day 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to tell my colleagues about an event that happened 

yesterday, but one that should be kept in our minds year around. 
 
Yesterday was Earth Day. It marked its 33rd anniversary. The 
concept was conceived at a conference in Seattle in 1969 and 
the following year, 1970, was officially launched. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many ways to be mindful of Earth Day 
and how to keep it 365 days a year — such things as planting a 
tree, community cleanup, a nature walk, how about riding your 
bike to work or walking instead of driving, maybe organize a 
recycling drive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Royal Saskatchewan Museum in Regina 
honoured Earth Day by planting a tree dedicated to the memory 
of renown Regina naturalist, Robert Kreba. Kreba passed away 
in November 2001, and was employed 25 years at the Regina 
museum. He was an avid birdwatcher and even co-authored a 
bird-finding guide for Regina and area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that all members of this Assembly 
do what they can to make our planet a more environmentally 
friendly place to live, not only for this generation but for future 
generations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Health Centre for Cumberland House 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
great pleasure of being in my home community of Cumberland 
House, along with my colleague, the hon. Minister of Health. 
We were there to announce some more good news for northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Cumberland House is now one step closer to the construction of 
a new health centre in our community. Yesterday, the Minister 
of Health presented a cheque for $200,000 for planning and 
evaluation for this important project. 
 
The new health centre in Cumberland House will integrate 
existing health services provided by both the Cumberland 
House Cree Nation and the health region. The end result will be 
a modern, attractive facility that delivers a wide range of health 
services all under one roof. This will not only benefit residents 
in the area requiring health services but will also provide an 
improved workplace for our valued health providers. 
 
This announcement is part of our government’s commitment 
made in the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care for a 
renewed health care system that promotes greater access to 
quality health care in the province. This commitment builds on 
the work that has already been done with the Kelsey Trail 
Regional Health Authority to ensure this health centre is a 
provincial capital priority. 
 
Our provincial budget includes a 61 million investment over the 
next two years. This key investment shows our continued 
commitment to work with our regional health authorities to 
renew our publicly administered health care system in this 
province and to fulfill our action plan and to make sure the 
people of Saskatchewan continue to have access of the highest 
quality care. 
 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Helen Swedberg’s 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a very 
special day for a very special lady. Mrs. Helen Swedberg of Big 
River is celebrating her 100th birthday today. Mrs. Helen 
Swedberg is of Swedish ancestry, born in Kansas, and migrated 
to Langenburg, Saskatchewan at an early age. 
 
Mrs. Helen Swedberg had four sons, two of which served in 
World War II. After a few years in the Langenburg area, she 
moved to the Dore Lake area where she operated a 
fishing/hunting camp. She loved the area so much she decided 
to stay and make Big River her home, her retirement 
community. She says the Big River community is good to her 
and she loves them all. 
 
She now lives in the Big River health care centre and today the 
health care is having a come and go tea in her honour of her 
birthday. On April 25 the family is putting on a birthday party 
to commemorate Mrs. Swedberg’s 100th birthday. 
 
On a personal note from Susan, her granddaughter, and I quote: 
 

My grandmother always encouraged women to spread their 
wings. She always believed in this. She loves finer things 
of life and is still very, very active and very, very sharp. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
please help me congratulate Mrs. Helen Swedberg on her 100th 
birthday today. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Unveils Immigration Initiative 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
knows that empty slogans and promises will not grow this 
province. We know that growth, health, and prosperity for 
Saskatchewan requires a vision and a plan to make that vision a 
reality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Immigration has played a powerful . . . has had a powerful 
impact on the economic and social fabric of our province over 
the last century, Mr. Speaker, and it will play a major role in the 
coming century as well. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we have a strategy for 
Saskatchewan to attract and retain more immigrants and to 
encourage increased immigration from other parts of Canada. 
Mr. Speaker, this strategy entitled Your Future is Here will 
include a long-term immigration plan, initiatives to attract and 
retain people in the province, and a partnership with the federal 
government to achieve these goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased that my colleague from 
Saskatoon Southeast, the MLA Pat Lorjé, has been appointed 
Legislative Secretary to the Premier to implement Your Future 
is Here. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party can talk all they want about 
growing the province. They use empty slogans and promises 
but this government has a vision and we have a plan and, Mr. 
Speaker, that plan is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would remind the member 
from Regina Dewdney of something I think he knows full well, 
and I think his staff should know full well, and that is that we 
do not use members’ names in the legislature, refer to them by 
their . . . Order, please, order. We refer to them by their titles or 
by their constituencies and I would ask the member to pay 
special attention to that. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Reaction to Harassment Allegations 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that Terry 
Scott has now tendered his resignation as deputy minister of the 
Environment as a result of his mishandling of the Murdoch 
Carriere harassment case. 
 
Can the Premier tell us why Terry Scott made the initial 
decision not to fire Murdoch Carriere? Was it because he 
misunderstood the government’s harassment policy? Did he 
understand the policy and make a bad decision in applying it? 
Or was there some other reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me come to the veiled 
question that has just been put on the floor of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure this legislature and to assure the 
people of Saskatchewan that when Mr. Scott made his own 
disciplinary decisions concerning Mr. Murdoch Carriere, there 
was no political influence — no influence from any member of 
this caucus or this cabinet. I want to make that absolutely 
crystal clear. 
 
Mr. Scott made his decision based in the policy framework that 
has existed until now — a policy framework which the events 
surrounding Mr. Carriere has exposed to be full of 
shortcomings. 
 
The minister of the Public Service Commission, in due course, 
will be presenting to the people of Saskatchewan and this 
legislature changes to that policy that should make future 
decision making clearer for those who are charged with it in the 
civil service and clearer for all elected members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to ask the Premier to again reiterate: did the Premier’s 
investigation look into the possibility at all, of any political 
interference? Can the Premier tell us with absolute certainty to 
all the people of Saskatchewan that there was no political 
interference of any kind on behalf of Terry Scott to protect the 
job of Murdoch Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat now the answer to 
the question which I knew was coming. 
 
In my investigation and research into the decision-making 
process around Mr. Murdoch Carriere, as it involved Mr. Terry 
Scott as the deputy minister, I can say that no political influence 
was brought to bear from any member of this caucus or cabinet 
or any member of this House that influenced Mr. Scott in his 
decision making. He made his decision for discipline within the 
parameters of the process as he understood it. As is widely 
known in the province, our government disagreed with his 
decision and took steps to terminate Mr. Murdoch Carriere from 
the employment of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rate Review Process 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskEnergy. Last 
week that Crown corporation announced that they would be 
seeking a 22 per cent increase in the natural gas rates, 33 per 
cent increase on the commodity. Of course it’s been a . . . been 
part of the process in the past that the government’s 
independent rate review panel — or supposedly independent 
rate review panel — would consider the application, make 
recommendations, and then and only then would cabinet decide 
whether or not to approve the recommendations or the request 
for an increase. 
 
On this occasion though, Mr. Speaker, we know that the 
government has already . . . the cabinet has already approved, 
has already approved, the rate increase on an interim basis 
which would certainly call into question, would call into 
question, Mr. Speaker, this government’s commitment to an 
independent rate review process. 
 
So I wonder if the minister would stand and explain to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers how the decision to approve the 
increase before the rate review panel even meets is . . . has 
anything to do with independent rate reviews in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well first of all let me say before I answer the question, that I 
don’t remember — I may be wrong on this — but I don’t 
remember that member being critical, Mr. Speaker, when we 
reduced the gas rates last time by some 10 per cent. He didn’t 
criticize then when we introduced an interim rate change, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The answer to the question is, Mr. Speaker, is that we indicated, 
Mr. Speaker, that the rate review panel would review the rate 
application by SaskEnergy; it would report back to us with their 
recommendations. Subject to those recommendations, Mr. 
Speaker, cabinet would accept, amend, or reject those 
recommendations just as it has always done with every 
application in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well had the 
opposition and the people of the province known that even with 
that decrease the NDP (New Democratic Party) would still be 
overcharging Saskatchewan people for their gas, there might 
have been a lot more discussion about that decision. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not just the people of the province or the 
Saskatchewan Party that are concerned about this government’s 
cavalier treatment of its own commitment — its own 
commitment — to an independent rate review panel. 
 
Here is what the former Chair of the government’s rate review 
panel says about this cabinet decision. Here’s what Bob 
Lacoursiere had to say, and I quote: 
 

Anything that makes the committee less independent is 
going in the wrong direction. And I think that by having 
cabinet making the decision ahead of time like they have 
just done, it really makes it tough for the committee to 
proceed in an independent manner. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the cabinet interfering in this utility rate 
review process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We are not, Mr. Speaker. Cabinet is not 
interfering, as that member suggests, Mr. Speaker. We said that 
we would approve an interim rate increase subject to the rate 
review panel’s recommendation. That’s exactly what we are 
doing. If we waited, Mr. Speaker, likely . . . the likely outcome 
— I say likely because I’m not going to presuppose what the 
panel would say — is that you would see a larger increase that 
would have to be imposed at the time when the panel reports 
back. I don’t think the public of Saskatchewan want that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So in respect to the people of Saskatchewan, we thought it the 
prudent thing to do to approve SaskEnergy’s recommendation 
to cabinet, which was to put in place a interim rate increase that 
is subject to recommendations by the panel which cabinet 
accepts, rejects, or amends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, by the minister’s answer, the 
minister’s answer calls into question the very same gentleman 
who chaired this rate review panel all of these years up until 
very, very recently. 
 
The quote that I read earlier was not from the opposition. It was 
not from any MLA. It was from the former Chair, the minister’s 
own chairman of the rate review panel process. And it’s he that 
contends that this government’s action in this regard will call 
into question the independence of this rate review panel. No 
matter how the minister cuts it, that’s what the Chair of the 
panel is saying. 
 
So again to the minister, again to the minister: what is he doing 
to restore any semblance of confidence people should have in 
the fact that this rate review process is independent from the 
NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered this 
question a number of times. The only time cabinet has amended 
in any way the recommendations of the rate review panel, Mr. 
Speaker, was when we asked SaskEnergy to absorb a $76 
million deficit, thereby not passing on the increase, the large 
increase, that SaskEnergy customers would had to have taken, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the public of Saskatchewan appreciated that. I don’t 
know about members opposite from the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker, but I think the public appreciated that. I think the 
Saskatchewan rate review panel has lots of creditability, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think the public of Saskatchewan think that as 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Out-of-Province Investments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to the 
same minister. Later today, Mr. Speaker, the government, the 
minister, will table the annual reports of the Crown corporations 
of the province of Saskatchewan in this Assembly. And those 
Crown corporations will detail exactly how the NDP 
government have been stewards of the taxpayers’ money 
through this very significant part of government, through the 
Crown corporations. 
 
Now the government has said consistently that it wants these 
Crowns to be investing all over the world — that’s what it said 
— in order to keep utility rates low here in the province, in 
order to benefit the people of the province. 
 
So I wonder if the minister could stand in his place today and 
confirm that in those reports he tables later on, there’ll be 
information that shows the government is in fact now making 
money on its foreign investments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, therein will lie the clear 
difference and distinction between this government, Mr. 
Speaker, and that Sask Party opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been absolutely clear, absolutely clear, 
that the role of the Crown corporations is to provide 
low-quality, reliable service here in Saskatchewan and that’s 
exactly what they’ve done right . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, what they have done over the years is provided 
high-quality, low-cost services right across the province. That’s 
what they will continue to do. 
 
But in an effort to do that, Mr. Speaker, what they have to do is 
they need to diversify. They need to diversify because they need 
to seek other venues for earning revenue. And that’s exactly 
what they’re doing. The record will show, Mr. Speaker, that 
over the bundle, over the piece, they have absolutely returned 
great profits to the people of Saskatchewan from investments 
outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the record will show that except for 

one deal done in the late 1980s by the previous government — 
one out of legions of deals — except for that one, this policy of 
risking taxpayers’ money around the globe has been an 
unmitigated disaster in the Crown corporations. That’s what the 
facts will show. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s argument has always been this, 
has always been this: that by making money in places like 
Australia, Nashville, and Atlanta, the people in those places are 
actually subsidizing services to people here in the province. 
And that would be great, Mr. Speaker, except that it’s not true. 
Every year the NDP up until now has wound up losing money 
on its foreign investments. So that means Saskatchewan people 
are actually subsidizing places like Australia, Nashville, and 
Atlanta. 
 
So can the minister tell us today that in the annual reports he 
tables later this afternoon, did the NDP’s foreign investments 
finally — did they finally — start making a profit in 2002? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think all I need to 
do is repeat the answers last time, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the only way our Crowns can survive, Mr. Speaker, is if we 
allow them to diversify into other areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Prior to 1996, when that Sask Party said, Mr. Speaker, that our 
Crowns need to operate in a more competitive environment, 
they need to compete, Mr. Speaker . . . And I make the point 
that they were right. The public of Saskatchewan agreed with 
them on that point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that our Crowns are competing, what do they say? They 
say, don’t compete, Mr. Speaker; tie their hands behind their 
back. Mr. Speaker, they say, don’t invest outside of 
Saskatchewan. They say, don’t compete in Saskatchewan where 
the lucrative markets are, Mr. Speaker. They say, restrict them 
to their core services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if anybody doesn’t understand that that is a recipe 
for shrinking and selling and privatization, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
absolutely clear that’s what the Sask Party wants to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at some 
of the NDP investments. In 2002 the NDP invested $7 million 
in Craig Wireless — a wireless Internet and cable company 
providing service in Manitoba, BC (British Columbia) and Palm 
Springs, California. In 2001 — sorry, Mr. Speaker — 2001 the 
NDP put 3 million more into the company for a total of $10 
million. So I’m sure the people of the province are very happy 
to know that their tax dollars are helping to provide cable 
television to the poor people of Palm Springs, California. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the first two years, SaskTel lost nearly $6 
million on its Palm Springs wireless cable company. So the 
question to the minister is this: Mr. Speaker, did this investment 
finally start making money in 2002? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer the question 
because the member opposite has asked the question, Mr. 
Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, here is, here’s the real agenda — the 
agenda is clearly to discredit the Crowns for privatization. 
 
The answer to the question, Mr. Speaker, for that member from 
the Sask Party, is this, Mr. Speaker, is that we have identified in 
those investments that in the start, in the starting years, the first 
number of years — one, two, and three — there were planned 
losses. Clearly they’re planned losses; in any start-up company, 
whether privately owned or public, Mr. Speaker, that’s a given, 
generally speaking. That’s been the case. 
 
But our plan for the Crowns is to look into the future where 
these investments will start to return money and revenues for 
the people of Saskatchewan so that they can offer those 
consistently low rates for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in 2001 SaskTel invested 16.7 
million taxpayers’ dollars into BC-based telco that they’ve 
changed the name of to Navigata. In its first year of operation in 
2001, Navigata lost $2.5 million. 
 
Can the minister tell us, how did Navigata do last year? Has it 
started to turn a profit or is it still losing millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, again I say that if we are 
going to maintain the services that we have here in 
Saskatchewan with our Crown corporations, and this will be the 
clear distinction and if they don’t make it — the Sask Party in 
the next provincial election — an issue, I guarantee you, we 
will. 
 
Because the people of Saskatchewan want to know about our 
Crowns and they want to know, Mr. Speaker, that our Crowns 
will be there to serve them, not just in large centres like Regina 
and Saskatoon but right across the province, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to know that they will have low rates, that they’ll be able 
to provide services right across the province. And the reason 
we’re investing now is for the future, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
investing for the future so those investments will bring revenues 
back into the province. 
 
What do they want to do? They want to sell them off; they want 
to limit competition here in Saskatchewan; they want to sell the 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. Nothing more complicated than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition, 
let me assure the minister on that side of the House that we 
relish and look forward to the opportunity to debate Crown 
corporation policy in this province. We’re going to be happy to 
talk about our priorities here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
in places like Admiral instead of Australia, Mr. Speaker; in 
places like Nipawin, Mr. Speaker, instead of Newcastle, 
Australia or Atlanta, Georgia or Nashville, Tennessee. We’ll 
gladly put our Crown corporation policy against the tired old 

1970s lava-lamp, shag-rug Crown corporation approach of the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now back in 2000-2001, the NDP decided to cash 
in on the dot-com craze. They decided to invest in a company in 
Atlanta called Retx and a company in Nashville called 
tappedinto. Now they’ve sunk nearly $30 million into those 
particular dot-coms and lost money up until 2002. 
 
Will the minister tell us in the annual reports he’s tabling later 
today, have those two companies made a profit yet for the 
taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Tired and old, Mr. Speaker? Tired and 
old? This is the party, the Sask Party, that wants to shrink the 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker; they want to shrink the Crowns. They 
want to put up walls around Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to sell off in investments, Mr. Speaker. They want to 
shrink our Crowns. 
 
They say we’re tired and old, Mr. Speaker. We have made our 
Crowns competitive just like private sector companies. We’ve 
made them competitive. We’ve made them modern, Mr. 
Speaker. They are lean, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they provide 
great service across our province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have Crowns now that are 
rejuvenated, that continue to provide high-quality service at the 
lowest rates not just in Canada but, in many cases, across North 
America. 
 
They say we’re tired and old. They want to sell them off and 
shrink them. I think not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t know for sure, but we’re 
pretty sure that the reports tabled later today, the facts of the 
matter, the facts of this debate we’re having right now will 
support the Saskatchewan Party position, which is basically 
this: that when our Crown corporations stick to their knitting, 
when they focus on the province, they have a good deal of 
success — success that we compliment them on. 
 
But when the NDP allows them to stray to make investments all 
over the world, that’s when they get into trouble. We think 
that’s what the facts will say later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the question to the minister is this: in anticipation of 
those annual reports, just would he stand up and tell us, tell the 
members of the House if one, single, NDP foreign investment 
made any money at all in 2002? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that member suggests that 
this government doesn’t have the right policy on Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

 

Mr. Speaker, well let’s look at the record. Let’s look at the 
record. A Crown corporation that when we took over was 
virtually bankrupt, Mr. Speaker — virtually bankrupt — they 
paid down huge debt, Mr. Speaker; they have a debt/equity ratio 
that is comparable to any private sector corporation. Mr. 
Speaker, they paid $1.6 billion in dividends and equity 
payments to the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have been part of, according to all the credit 
rating agencies, a part of this province’s 10 consecutive credit 
rating upgrades — 10 consecutive credit rating upgrades. Mr. 
Speaker, they meet TSX standards on virtually every 
component, Mr. Speaker. They have received all kinds of 
accolades from the private sector, Mr. Speaker, and from the 
bond rating agencies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they in the Sask Party say, we’re doing the wrong thing 
with Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
minister responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Under the NDP, the Government of Saskatchewan has gambled 
millions of dollars buying high-risk companies and making 
high-risk investments all over the world. For example, SaskTel 
has bought companies like Retx.com in Atlanta, Georgia; Craig 
Wireless International in Winnipeg, Manitoba; tappedinto.com 
in Nashville, Tennessee; an ag dealer magazine in southern 
Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP be providing a complete annual 
financial report of each of these companies so taxpayers can 
assess the value they are getting for the millions of tax dollars 
the NDP has gambled? Or, is the NDP going to cover up the 
financial results of these businesses by burying them as a 
footnote to the SaskTel annual report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we have done more to 
make our Crowns accountable, Mr. Speaker, than any 
government past has ever done, Mr. Speaker — past has ever 
done. Mr. Speaker, our statements are audited twice, first of all 
by the Provincial Auditor and by private sector auditors, Mr. 
Speaker. The annual reports, as I’ve indicated, meet TSX 
standards, Mr. Speaker. We are now providing mid-year reports 
that have never been provided before, Mr. Speaker. We report 
— and this government did this, Mr. Speaker — on all 
significant transactions, Mr. Speaker, and I could go on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you and I say to the public of 
Saskatchewan, the people that need to come clear is the Sask 
Party. What is their agenda with Crowns, Mr. Speaker? What’s 
their agenda? And let me elaborate a little bit when I refer to the 
member, Mr. Speaker, from . . . This is a quote: 
 

Brkich defends Sask Party ‘grow Saskatchewan’ plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he said that they would . . . And I quote: 
 

. . . would not be sold off immediately, (referring to 

SaskTel and others) but (would sell) when the selling price 
would reap the “best bang for the buck.” 

 
Their agenda is clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s 
also something that needs to be very, very clear and that is that 
Saskatchewan taxpayers have the right to get a complete 
accounting, a complete accounting, of every business operation 
and every financial performance of every company the NDP has 
gambled taxpayers’ dollars on — companies like Retx, 
tappedinto.com, and agdealer.com; companies like Minds Eye 
entertainment, the government’s movie company; and 
companies like FarmGro Organic, the NDP’s bankrupt organic 
seed company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the minister is simple: will the 
NDP be providing a detailed annual financial report of each of 
these businesses the NDP has bought with millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars or does the NDP intend to cover up the 
operations and financial results of their multi-million dollar 
expenditures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting 
question, how do we cover . . . If we’re covering it up, how is 
that they and everybody know about these, Mr. Speaker, if 
we’re supposed to be covering it up? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say this about this and let me be serious in 
response to the question. Mr. Speaker, as I travel across the 
province talking about the role of Crown corporations and the 
investments that we’re making, and as our president and a 
number of the officials within Crown Investments travel across 
the province making presentations on the investments, Mr. 
Speaker, it is rare indeed — it is rare indeed — in our province 
when people in the communities where we are making these 
presentations say to us or to me, Mr. Speaker, don’t help us out; 
don’t partner with us; don’t work with the private sector. 
 
You know what they say? They say the Sask Party is on the 
wrong page, Mr. Speaker. They say, work with us, partner with 
us, help us grow the economy in our communities, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what they say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporation Dividends 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
final question is for the Minister of Finance. According to the 
2001 annual report of the Crown Investments Corporation, 
Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations made a net profit for CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) of $110 
million. But the NDP took $200 million in dividends from the 
Crowns in 2001-2002 fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, that means our 
Crown corporations were forced to borrow money to pay the 
NDP its $200 million dividend. 
 
So what about this year? In 2002-2003 fiscal year the NDP took 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

a $300 million dividend from Crown corporations. 
 
Will the minister confirm that our Crown corporations earned at 
least $300 million in profits last year, enough to cover off the 
$300 million the NDP took from the Crowns last year to 
balance the budget? Or has the NDP once again forced the 
Crown corporations to borrow the money to pay its dividend to 
the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I can 
recognize that the member opposite for the Sask Party, the critic 
for Finance, would understand some of the vagaries of 
accounting, being with members of course who were in the 
1980s masters at the vagaries of accounting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at what we’ve done today and we’ve talked 
about the accountability, we talk about the dividends, everyone 
knows and it’s in the accounts that there was a deferred 
dividend that was brought into the subsequent year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations will be paying $200 
million in dividends this fiscal year. They paid $300 million of 
dividends last fiscal year. And they paid on average $150 
million of dividends the year before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And guess what? Since our Crown corporations have been 
revitalized they are now providing over 95 per cent of their 
capital investments right in this province, Mr. Speaker. And the 
investments that they’d make outside of Saskatchewan are 
returning dollars here so that we can pay for health care and 
education, Mr. Speaker — not like the 1980s when they 
equity-stripped our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from North Battleford on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — By leave, to request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 
members. We have in the interim been joined by another former 
member of this House, Tony Merchant, who is seated with his 
mother behind the bar. 
 
You know, when I go to Remembrance Day services, 
periodically we’re introduced to a veteran who says he had to 
lie about his age to get to serve his country. Well when I 
consider that Tony was a member of this Assembly nearly 30 
years ago, I think he must have lied about his age to get to serve 
in this Assembly. 
 
I’d ask all members to please join me in welcoming Tony 
Merchant to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition I too would like to 
welcome Tony Merchant to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also would like to introduce the person 
sitting up in the east gallery. Many of you who were attending 
the Social Science Teachers’ Institute would recognize the 
young lady sitting up there as Lindsay Krawetz, my daughter. 
 
Lindsay has been taking first year university here in Regina; has 
completed four final exams, and I understand one of those final 
exams was political science and it’s out of the road now so she 
doesn’t have to worry about that one. But she still has one more 
exam to go on Friday, and will be looking forward to 
employment here in the city of Regina. 
 
And I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming my daughter, 
Lindsay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, it is my 
duty to table: the 34th annual report for the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association; and the annual report for the period 
ending March 31, 2002 of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Library; the report to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan on the 2002 financial statements of the CIC 
Crown corporations and related entities, dated April 2003; and 
the report to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on the 
financial statements of Crown agencies for the years ending in 
the 2002 calendar year, dated April 2003. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 140 through 142 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses questions 140, 141, and 142 have 
been submitted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand and convert questions 143 and 144 for debates 
returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 143 and 144 converted to orders 
for return (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to table on behalf of the government response to written 
question no. 145. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 145 has been tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

 

once again to stand on behalf of the government and convert 
question no. 146 for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 146 converted to debates 
returnable. 
 
(14:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
introduce my officials before, and then I would like to give a 
brief overview of the successes we’ve achieved in the 
Department of Highways and Transportation, as well as our 
plans for this fiscal year. 
 
So I’ll begin by introducing the officials. To my left is deputy 
minister, Harvey Brooks, and to my right is assistant deputy 
minister, Barry Martin, responsible for operations. Behind 
Barry is Fred Antunes. Fred is director of operations for 
planning and business opportunities. 
 
Right behind me is assistant deputy minister, Don Wincherauk, 
and behind Don Wincherauk is Cathy Lynn Borbely, leader of 
budget development. To Don’s left is Mike Makowsky, 
manager of transportation, trade, and logistics; and to his left 
when he arrives will be Les Bell, who is manager of sustainable 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the key to success in any endeavour is having a 
good solid plan and this government has such a plan. And 
because of that plan Saskatchewan’s future is indeed wide open. 
I’ve had the good fortune to see this plan in action first-hand 
out there in the province, travelling the roads and highways. It’s 
by driving these roads and meeting the people who live in rural 
and urban areas that I hear what great work we are doing, and 
also what more needs to be done — and more definitely needs 
to be done, Mr. Chairman. 
 
My government listens to the people of Saskatchewan, and we 
will continue to listen and to move forward with our plan to 
build better highways. In 1997 we committed to spend $2.5 
billion over 10 years on highway improvements. We had the 
vision and we had a plan to fix our roads faster and we wanted 
to do this in a fiscally prudent manner — so that’s exactly what 
we did. Building for the future is about building momentum for 
growth and opportunity, and building programs and support for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
A few weeks ago the province announced its 10th consecutive 
balanced budget. It continues the tradition of strategically 
investing to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people while at the 
same time managing the province’s finances in a responsible 
and prudent manner. 
 
A significant part of this year’s provincial budget is the 
investment of $296.2 million to fix the roads and to build better 

highways. This budget includes significant investments in 
critical public infrastructure. Since 2000-2001, including this 
new budget year, we will have invested $1 billion in our 
highway system, ensuring a transportation network capable of 
supporting the movement of goods in and out of the province. 
 
A month ago we celebrated the partnership between the federal 
and provincial governments allowing us to complete, five years 
ahead of schedule, the twinning projects on Saskatchewan’s 
portion of the Trans-Canada Highway and the western section 
of the Yellowhead highway. This project is not simply a matter 
of grading and paving; this project has meaning and importance 
far beyond the dynamics of simply building a road. In such a 
large geographic area as Saskatchewan, an efficient network of 
highways is vital in a variety of ways. 
 
This past summer I signed a memorandum of understanding 
with the three other Western Transportation ministers to further 
leverage our joint commitments and strengths to develop a 
sustainable national transportation system and strategy. 
Together we present a unified voice to stakeholders, especially 
the federal government, on common Western transportation 
initiatives, issues, and goals. 
 
Together we represent about 37 per cent of Canada’s GDP 
(gross domestic product) and we have a strong and united voice. 
We are raising the profile of Western transportation challenges, 
initiatives, and solutions while also working together on 
Western campaigns toward increasing transportation safety. 
 
Working with our neighbours to the South is also a critical link 
in building and maintaining a sustainable transportation system 
that includes enhanced economic development of and trade 
opportunities for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our province is working to maximize provincial trade corridor 
routes to increase the efficiency and strength of trade nationally, 
from province to province, and internationally. In fact last 
spring, Mr. Chairman, I signed a memorandum of 
understanding with Manitoba and North Dakota as part of 
Saskatchewan’s continued work with other northern Great 
Plains region jurisdictions. At this signing Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba, Minnesota, North and South Dakota, Nebraska, and 
Iowa formally endorsed the jointly prepared document, Trends 
in Transportation and Trade — Moving the Northern Great 
Plains Region to a Stronger Economic Future. 
 
It is the collaboration on work such as this that will lead to an 
enhanced trade opportunity for Saskatchewan while 
maximizing our highway and other transportation networks. 
This vital trade network enables our businesses to compete with 
Alberta, Manitoba, and others by providing for the 
cost-effective and reliable north-south delivery of goods, 
people, and services. 
 
With a trade-dependent economy, it is important that my 
department maintains a good working relationship with our 
American and our Canadian partners. This relationship also 
means that tourists visiting our province have the assurance that 
while they’re driving in Saskatchewan, the roads they traverse 
will lead them safely to their destinations. 
 
Emergency vehicles have to have the ability to quickly get to 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

the scene of accidents or mishaps. And so we build and repair 
and maintain our roadways. 
 
Finally, it is a statement that our governments are committed to 
these values and committed to show the rest of Canada that 
travel and transportation in Saskatchewan is timely, safe, and 
efficient. 
 
Saskatchewan has already demonstrated a significant level of 
support for the twinning of our sections of the national highway 
system. And in this year’s provincial budget, the Department of 
Highways and Transportation has its second-largest budget in 
the province’s history at $296.2 million. 
 
As government moves forward on its twinning commitments 
and transportation infrastructure investments, Saskatchewan 
will be even more accessible and will boast a network of 
highways totalling over 26,000 kilometres. Adding in the over 
164,000 kilometres of municipal roads gives us the largest 
network of roads in Canada. Saskatchewan’s total road surface 
would circle the equator over four times. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan’s future is wide open. Our 
twinning initiative is another way that we can continue to build 
our province and maintain our infrastructure for today and for 
generations to come. 
 
With this year’s budget we are on track to meet the commitment 
government made in 1997 to invest $2.5 billion on highways 
and roads over 10 years. This year we will exceed the 1999 
commitment to invest $1 billion over four years and 900 million 
over three years. This 900 million includes federal government 
funding that I’m proud to say that we negotiated long and hard 
to get. We feel the federal government has an obligation to 
provide an ongoing commitment to investment in the national 
highways system and in northern Saskatchewan. To date such a 
long-term commitment from the federal government has not 
been forthcoming, so we have aggressively pursued the 
short-term funding opportunities that are available. 
 
We’ve been very successful in recent years through the Prairie 
Grain Roads Program, the strategic highway infrastructure 
program, and the new Canada strategic infrastructure fund. And 
we are cost sharing with the federal government on all of these 
programs. 
 
As the Prime Minister said during his recent visit to the 
province, and I quote: 
 

It’s the right thing to do for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me repeat that phrase because it is familiar: 
 

It’s the right thing to do for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The infrastructure of this country has been neglected for too 
long and: 
 

Now that we have a balanced budget for the seventh year in 
a row and a bit of cash, it’s good to invest it in the security 
of people who travel on the roads of Saskatchewan. 

 
So what will the people of Saskatchewan get for the $900 

million in work we have planned and are delivering? The 
people of Saskatchewan will get a better, safer, more 
sustainable transportation system that supports economic and 
social development. 
 
For example, here are a few of the things we accomplished last 
year. More than 665 kilometres of major road construction and 
110 kilometres of smaller road projects were completed. More 
than 30 kilometres of twinned highways were opened, including 
a second bridge over the North Saskatchewan River at North 
Battleford. In rural Saskatchewan, 245 kilometres of rural 
highways were upgraded to a pavement, resulting in five key 
rural corridors being upgraded to a paved standard. Under an 
agreement with Pavement Scientific International of Saskatoon, 
new road-strengthening technology was used in 50 kilometres 
of thin membrane surface highway reconstruction. 
 
In the course of our work to prepare for future expansion of the 
highway system, one of the oldest archaeological sites in North 
America that includes human habitation was found near St. 
Louis. This find has the potential to generate research, and 
perhaps even tourism, in the education opportunities in this 
area. It also gives us insight into the patterns of travel and into 
the cultures of that time. 
 
Northern communities and contractors delivered more than $2.8 
million of work through 109 contracts and agreements as part of 
our effort to support northern development. 
 
The patent for the road and rail power unit which was 
developed by the innovative staff at Highways and 
Transportation was sold to Brandt Road Rail Corporation, 
allowing Brandt to aggressively market this unique vehicle 
around the world and to create jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
The department’s transport compliance branch received a 
Partner in Safety Award from the US (United States) 
Department of Transportation’s federal motor carrier 
administration in recognition of the outstanding assistance in 
conducting security sensitivity visits to Saskatchewan carriers 
after 9/11. 
 
A key objective of the plan is for the department to manage its 
own resources more efficiently. We have undertaken internal 
initiatives to absorb administrative cost increases. We have 
created a wall between our road funding and our administrative 
funding in order to maximize our on-road program delivery. 
 
Any savings during the year in administration can be 
reallocated to road expenditures, but road funding is not used to 
offset any administrative pressures. 
 
We have leveraged our activities to create opportunities for 
youth and for people with disabilities. We provided many 
employment opportunities for young people by hiring 148 
summer students last year, 8 students through the centennial 
student employment program, and 28 co-op students during that 
year. 
 
Through our disability employment initiatives, we currently 
employ 30 people with disabilities. 
 
The department has been a leader in government’s initiatives to 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

 

refocus government and improve accountability. The IT 
(information technology) merger between Highways and 
Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization is a 
model for clustered IT service delivery within government. 
 
We continue to demonstrate leadership in government 
accountability and performance management initiatives. The 
2001 annual report included a 2002-03 performance plan and 
was so popular that we had to reprint it. 
 
Looking back, last year was a successful year for the 
department and one for our government as a whole. 
 
This year, in partnership with the federal government, we will 
invest more than $25 million in provincial funding on twinning. 
We will grade 15 kilometres and pave 38 kilometres to 
complete twinning of Highway No. 1 West this fall. We will 
grade 40 kilometres of Highway No. 1 East and Highway 16 
that will be open to traffic in 2004. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Chairman, my government’s vision is to transform 
Saskatchewan’s transportation system to meet the social and 
economic development opportunities of the 21st century. We 
continue to achieve this vision by focusing on a sustainable 
transportation infrastructure, strengthening economic 
development, and serving social needs, and the safe movement 
of people and goods. 
 
Before we move on with the business of estimates, Mr. 
Chairman, I would also like to take the opportunity to recognize 
the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood as the opposition 
critic for Highways and Transportation. The member has been 
the critic for the last year and, as such, I have found him to be a 
good and challenging opponent and a gentleman. I look forward 
to his questions and perhaps his colleagues’ questions in this 
year’s estimate debates. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I would like to 
welcome the minister’s officials here this afternoon. It’s a . . . 
I’m sure the people present here in the Assembly this afternoon 
play a very vital role in Transportation and Highways, the 
Department of Highways in our province, and as I said I would 
like to welcome here . . . welcome them here and thank them for 
the good work that they’ve done in the past. 
 
Now the minister went on . . . or just completed a bit of a 
speech I guess in . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sermon. 
 
Mr. Hart: — A sermon, as one of my colleagues says, as far as 
all the good things that his department has done in the past. And 
so . . . and I find that perhaps we have the deputy minister and 
his assistant deputy ministers and so on, and I’m sure the . . . 
perhaps they’re . . . they should be familiar with the minister’s 
vision and his view of the future and that sort of thing. And so 
perhaps we could look at the budget in the budget estimates and 
perhaps get into some of the nitty-gritty of that. 
 
But I did find one or two things that the minister mentioned a 
bit interesting. He talked about administrative savings and any 

savings that were made or that he . . . his department found, 
they were put into construction and that sort of thing. Yet when 
you look at the budget, the administration budget is exactly the 
same as last year. And so I guess I’d question what savings 
were found, because it doesn’t reflect that in any of the figures 
that I have, Mr. Chair. The administration total is $4.4 million 
in ’03-04 and it’s the same figure as ’02-03. Perhaps the 
minister may want to comment on that a little bit later. 
 
I find also interesting comments made about the trade corridors 
and those sorts of things. I congratulate the minister on taking 
the initiative. I guess my question would be what took them so 
long, what took this government so long? 
 
Since the signing of the Free Trade Agreement and even prior 
to that, we’ve seen a dramatic increase of products and goods 
moving on the north-south trade corridor. And now finally, 
some close to 10 years after that, we’ve seen that increase in 
traffic where this government is finally realizing that maybe we 
should get on board and develop some partnerships and some 
protocols with some of our neighbouring states and 
neighbouring provinces to develop that sort of a linkage 
between the markets for our goods. 
 
And so I would ask . . . I guess, Mr. Chair, I would ask the 
minister to comment on the johnny-come-lately through this 
whole trade corridor issue and why his government didn’t act 
on this quite some time ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the questions. First of 
all in terms of the administrative savings, the member opposite 
should be aware that there have been increases in wages and 
salaries. All of these increases have been absorbed and that’s 
why the number that you see will be the same number that was 
there previously. There’s been a lot of good work in terms of 
making our administration as efficient as it could possibly be. 
Absorbed in ’03-04 were $1.6 million in salary increases; in 
’02-03, 1.2. 
 
And so I think if you look at the fact that we’ve had these 
increases and we’ve absorbed them, you will have to agree that 
the work of the administrative part of our department has been 
very, very good, very solid work, and I can only commend them 
for that work. 
 
Secondly I’d have to say, Mr. Chair, that the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood has been referred to as Rip Van 
whatever-his-last-name-is-that-I-can’t-say-at-this-moment, and 
it’s really important that when I’m responding to this question 
about our relationship with the US and the kind of plans that 
we’ve got, that the member opposite should actually take a little 
bit of look at the history. 
 
Just because he’s noticed it finally doesn’t mean that other 
people haven’t been involved for a long period of time, doing a 
lot of work to make sure that we have good trade relationships. 
That work has been ongoing for years. The department has done 
excellent work on it. And the signing of the memorandum of 
understanding last year was part of an ongoing program that 
commits us to even greater challenges in that trade relationship, 
and in building a transportation system that will enable that 
trade relationship to grow and prosper even more. 
 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

So it’s not a matter of us finally getting to it; we’ve been at it 
for a lot of years, doing very good work. It’s a matter of — I 
gather — it just coming to your attention. But don’t try and foist 
that onto the government. The government has been working on 
it, done excellent work. 
 
These kind of relationships and these kind of agreements are 
not put together overnight and signed overnight. They take a lot 
of groundwork and a lot of thorough work by department staff 
to prepare the groundwork for this. That’s what’s been going on 
and I welcome you to this year, and to the work that’s going on 
this year, and appreciate if you ask a question you will get a 
straight answer on it. 
 
But when you put the innuendo in there, I do have to comment 
on that. And the fact is that work has been ongoing and will 
continue to go on because we value the trade relationship that 
we have with the US. And we need to have very, very good 
corridors, not just at the border itself but we need to make sure 
that our corridors running east-west and north-south intersect 
and that we do have good corridors, both with rail and with 
roadway. 
 
So that’s what we’ve been working at. And we’ve been at these 
relationships not just through this department but through other 
departments to make sure that we do develop the kind of 
network that we need to augment our plans for a wide-open 
future that truly will prosper the whole of this province. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister tells us that work has been 
going on for quite some time on the trade corridors and 
negotiations have taken place. Yet as far as any physical 
evidence, it’s only been in very recent years that there’s been 
some noticeable difference in the condition of highways that 
lead to those markets and to those trade corridors. 
 
If you look at the neighbouring provinces on either side of us, 
Mr. Chair, we find that Alberta has some very good highways 
that allow their exports to gain access to the US market. The 
same can be said for Manitoba, the highway south of Winnipeg. 
Yet we have limited access. The conditions of some of our 
highways have just very recently commenced to be improved to 
allow that access. And so I think we certainly have been aware 
of what’s been happening in the past and we see that once again 
Saskatchewan is, instead of being a leader, we are a follower, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
But having said that, I would now . . . I’d like to turn my 
attention to this year’s budget, Mr. Chair. The minister says that 
this is — if I heard him correctly — this is the second highest 
budget in the history of his department. 
 
On March 5, the Prime Minister came to town and made an 
announcement saying that the federal government has signed an 
agreement with the province of Saskatchewan to . . . for $82 
million over five years to speed up the twinning of our national 
highways, Highway No. 1 and Highway 16. 
 
Now that translates into about 16, $17 million and then the 
minister’s department has been good enough to provide me with 
some comparisons as far as federal dollars in this year’s budget 
as compared to previous years budget. And it seems that this 

year there is $9.3 million more, more federal dollars, in the 
department’s budget. The budget has only risen $3.3 million 
over last year. 
 
So where’s the $6 million of additional . . . of federal dollars? I 
would suggest what has happened, Mr. Chair, is that this 
government, as they’ve done on other occasions, they’ve taken 
the federal dollars and put them into their budget and 
withdrawn their own dollars, as they’ve done in the millennium 
scholarship a number of years back with bursaries to our 
post-secondary students. 
 
And here again when people were thinking that . . . When they 
watched the news, or the news clip, or read the news release or 
the coverage in the local papers of additional federal dollars 
coming to Saskatchewan to accelerate the twinning, that most 
people would have assumed, I would think, Mr. Chair, 
logically, that there should be more overall dollars in the 
provincial budget for this fiscal year. There is a slight increase 
but nowhere near the magnitude of the additional federal dollars 
that are being accessed. And I would wonder if the minister 
would care to explain what happened to the $6 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chairman, with regard to the 
federal funding and our funding and the numbers which the 
member opposite gave, the fact is that we may have had to 
reduce our funding for twinning or our overall funding by about 
$6 million, but we negotiated long and hard to get federal 
dollars for which we have no apology at all. Federal 
government has not come up to the table voluntarily in terms of 
a long-term program for funding of national highways system 
and so we have pressed and pressed and continue to press to get 
the best that we can in any short-term funding arrangement. 
 
So first of all, we may not have had $6 million — that $6 
million — so the assumption that we’ve just simply taken the 
federal to offset ours is inaccurate. 
 
And the second point is that along with the $296.2 million that 
we have in our program this year, which includes federal 
funding, we also have transportation partnership funding of 2.6 
million, industry partnerships of 2.85, and centenary funding of 
3.17. So that brings us to a total budget of almost $305 million 
this year for repairs and improvements. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So any kind of implication that we are not funding as fully as 
we possibly can the priority of our transportation system from 
the provincial coffers, I think would be inaccurate. But I think 
it’s . . . I think we’re very fortunate that we were able to 
negotiate a deal with the federal government that in a time of 
high demand in so many other areas of our provincial budget 
we were still able to — albeit with that federal funding — 
provide the second largest budget in the history of 
Saskatchewan for transportation. 
 
Now I think when we add these other funds in that have come 
through our partnership relationships that we have worked at 
developing over the years, I think we will see tremendous work 
being done to help meet our goals and to help fulfill our vision 
for building better highways in Saskatchewan. 
 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister’s explanation confirms 
that in fact in this year’s budget there are less provincial dollars 
than there was last year in the highways and transportation 
budget. As I said earlier, when the Prime Minister came to town 
and the minister and the Premier were at the news conference 
and of course the media was all . . . was there, most . . . I would 
assume that a lot of citizens of this province would have 
assumed that there would actually be more money in the 
highways budget than what we’ve seen. 
 
And as I said . . . So what the minister had said earlier is that 
. . . he alluded to the fact that this government may not have 
been able to keep up to . . . keep their share of funding up to the 
level it has been in the last couple of years and that they were 
dependent on federal funding to carry . . . keep the programs 
going and the construction going. 
 
And I know, speaking to members of the Road Builders 
Association, they were quite disappointed after the budget was 
released. They had . . . there was a bit of hope for some 
additional work and some additional activity in their . . . in 
construction. With the clawback of $6 million it really doesn’t 
. . . they tell me it doesn’t translate into a lot of additional, extra 
work, and not the type of work that they were looking for, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
What I would like to ask the minister at this point in time is, 
with the early freeze-up and winter weather, early onset of 
winter last fall, there was a number of unfinished projects 
around the province, whether they were resurfacing, 
construction, upgrading, that sort of thing. I wonder if the 
minister could give us an indication of the approximate number 
of those projects that weren’t completed — I’m talking major 
projects, major resurfacing and construction — and the 
approximate dollar value of those uncompleted projects. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The officials inform me, just in 
response to . . . I’ll respond to your last question first and then 
respond to the point that you made earlier. 
 
But first of all, in terms of the amount that was budgeted and 
the projects that were delayed, it’s very, very difficult to 
quantify the exact shift. Because what is happening all the time 
in highways operations is, as you’re moving towards the end of 
a season or as you’re coming to a point where a particular 
project is held back, you’re trying to get the most effective, 
efficient use of any resources, any dollars that you have and 
keep the people moving as fully as you can. 
 
And so in terms of the overall budget, the total dollars were 
spent in projects that will move the overall program forward, 
but that might have been some shift into crushing over the 
winter into winter haul. But all of the funding that was set for 
road building was absorbed by the projects that were able to 
move ahead. Those that were delayed by weather, whatever the 
costs were on that, were shifted — or the savings on that — 
were shifted into the other programs that would move the whole 
program ahead. 
 
And with response again to the points about the government 
overall budget and budget picture and what we’re doing in 
transportation, we made commitments a number of years ago. 
In ’97 we made a commitment to a $2.5 billion of expenditures 

over 10 years. We did not say that those dollars would all come 
out of one provincial coffer but we did make a commitment for 
10 years, $2.5 billion. We will be seeing . . . that one is 
exceeded early in the 10th year. The 1 billion, four-year 
commitment made in ’99 will be exceeded in this fiscal year. 
 
The province has been very successful in securing federal 
funding. We’ve worked hard for it and we’re glad that we’ve 
got that funding here. And with that funding we are going to be 
able to meet our three-year, $900 million commitment. 
 
So again, any kind of implication that we’re not fulfilling our 
commitments, we’re not doing what we said . . . The road 
builders that we are in constant contact with are pleased that we 
have the kind of funding that we do in place for our highways 
and transportation, and they are pleased with the amount of 
work that we’re putting forward. 
 
Of course it would be better if we could do more; of course that 
would be pleasing to us as well as to road builders. But we are 
fulfilling the commitments that we have made and we are 
seeing projects move ahead that many people have been saying 
they desire. So I think, overall, the member opposite looking at 
this picture will have to admit that we are meeting the 
commitments we made; we are not short selling anyone on this 
front at all. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Minister, you said that you’ve worked 
hard to secure additional federal funding, and I think we on this 
side of the House certainly agree that the federal government 
has a responsibility. 
 
You indicated in your opening remarks that we have about 
26,000 kilometres of . . . kilometres in the provincial highway 
system. 
 
And my question to you would be, how does the funding that 
your government’s been able, the federal funding that you’ve 
been able to secure compare to federal funding that, say, the 
province of Manitoba and the province of Alberta have been 
able to secure in the last . . . for this current fiscal year? Would 
you have that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There are a number of programs that 
we are engaged in with the federal government. The SHIP 
funding, which is strategic highways infrastructure program 
funding, which is population base, and so therefore we’re 
basically on par with our neighbouring provinces there. On the 
Prairie Grain Roads Program, because we have so many 
grain-dependent roads in the province, we fare much better than 
others. 
 
On the infrastructure fund of which we’re receiving funding for 
the twinning, there are different decisions made in different 
provinces as to what they will request and where they will use 
that funding. Manitoba, for example, it’s our understanding is 
using the bulk of that funding for flood control and so it’s very 
difficult to compare for us. We felt that our major projects were 
in Highways and Transportation and so that’s where we 
requested the funding. And we got basically what we were 
expecting to get from them there. 
 
But there was an additional piece that we got and, in terms of 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

either Manitoba or Alberta, there has been nothing come 
forward yet or announced and that is with regard to the Border 
Infrastructure Fund. And this fund amounts to $5 million from 
the federal government, which of course we match dollar for 
dollar. And this fund will be used to help enhance our border 
crossings and associated roadways. And we’re looking forward 
to seeing those upgraded, not only for the people in that area but 
for the whole of the province, and as I was alluding to earlier, 
also to enhance our trade relationships on the north-south 
corridors. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, if I heard correctly, the strategic 
highway infrastructure program, the federal program, is 
population based. And so what you’re telling me is that Alberta 
. . . or Manitoba and Saskatchewan have, I guess, fairly close to 
the same population, so then Manitoba received about the same 
number of dollars as what Saskatchewan did in this current 
fiscal year under that particular program. 
 
I can see under the . . . this strategic infrastructure fund, 
governments decide to use those dollars for other purposes 
whereas, I would assume under the highway infrastructure 
program, those dollars are devoted specifically to the highways 
program. 
 
So my question is I would like you to be somewhat more 
precise as to the actual dollars that Manitoba has got. I think it’s 
important for citizens of the province to be able to compare the 
effectiveness of your government in negotiating with the federal 
government as a comparison to what other provincial 
governments are able to obtain under these specific programs. 
So if you could be somewhat more precise as far as what 
Manitoba received under the highways infrastructure program, 
it would be useful. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I haven’t gone over the Manitoba 
numbers, but in that it’s on a per capita basis over the five years 
of the program, they would, on a per capita basis, receive the 
same, on a per capita basis, that we receive in Saskatchewan. 
 
The whole SHIP program is $600 million and over this period, 
Saskatchewan will receive $18.5 million, and the program 
commenced in the fiscal year ’02-03. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Just to return to our earlier discussions that we 
had as far as federal dollars displacing provincial dollars in this 
year’s budget, would it be a fair statement to say that certainly 
there will be acceleration of the twinning projects on Highway 
No. 1 and Highway 16 because of the federal dollars and 
they’re devoted to those particular projects? 
 
But then, would it not also be fair to say that there is actually 
less money available for the rest of the highway system in this 
fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think to make it very clear at the 
beginning, that overall there is more money going into 
Saskatchewan roadways. That’s vitally important to recognize 
that we are tied on many of these programs on matching dollars 
with the federal government which includes the Prairie Grain 
Roads Program, and those have to be designated for 
grain-dependent roads. 
 

But I think just to take a look at . . . You were raising some 
concerns by the road builders, and I think it’s very important to 
understand that we are providing a 15 per cent increase in earth 
work this year. So their work is going up on that end. We are 
providing 29 per cent increase in asphalt concrete work over 
’02-03. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And though there is a decrease in granular work, one of the 
things that’s very important to remember is that we are also 
encouraging and using new technologies with the PSI 
(Pavement Scientific International) process, cement fly ash, and 
that is demanding less granular work, hopefully building better 
roads with a more solid base for less dollars. 
 
I think the experience in the member’s own constituency would 
probably make clear that we are making progress here. The 
investment is a good one, and overall we are seeing an increase 
in roadwork in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m pleased to say that recognition is there, that where and 
how that roadwork is being put into place may have changed 
somewhat by the federal government’s insistence on matching 
with new dollars, but still overall more money going into 
Saskatchewan roadwork. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I guess the point that I’m making is that 
following the federal announcement, expectations arose as far 
as the amount of activity and funding to Highways and 
Transportation, and then on budget day there was a bit of a 
letdown. And that’s . . . and I think that’d be fair to say that 
because of the withdrawal of provincial dollars, the federal 
announcement didn’t have the impact that it could have and 
should have had, Minister. 
 
What I’d like to do is move on and perhaps just discuss one or 
two policy areas before I turn the questioning over to some of 
my colleagues. They have some highways questions in each one 
of . . . in their constituencies that they’d like to raise with you at 
this time. 
 
What is your government’s policy as far as providing primary 
highways access to areas of economic activity — they may be 
manufacturing plants; they may be feedlots; they may be hog 
barns; they may be primary . . . new cement elevators — what 
is the overall policy if these projects are not located on a 
primary highway, and yet for them to be efficient and 
competitive in today’s world marketplace they need to have . . . 
need to be able to ship primary weights? 
 
I know there’s been . . . a number of these economic centres of 
activity have been in conversation with your department and are 
running into some difficulties in solving this problem of gaining 
primary weights to their facilities. And I wonder if you could 
explain what your policy is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I appreciate the member’s 
question because there has been a lot of work done in terms of 
dealing with concerns around primary weight systems and also 
with the ability to enable and help the manufacturing industry 
around the province. 
 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

 

One of the things that has been very key in our whole program 
— and the member will have heard me refer to this a number of 
times — has been working with the area of transportation 
planning committees, people who live in the various regions 
who really keep in touch with what the needs are and who help 
set priorities for a particular area. And some of the 
considerations that they are taking into account are: what are the 
economic developments that are happening in the area; how 
important are those to a particular area; and where do they fit in 
terms of the priorities? 
 
We also have a number of ways that we have been helping . . . I 
mean we’ve been trying to work with Manitoba and Alberta to 
deal with issues around weights in terms of dealing with 
primary weights. We’ve upgraded a number of highways in the 
past year so that they can handle primary weights. We do this 
again in consultation. 
 
One of the other things that’s been very important has been 
work with the transportation partnership program, where 
companies can join the partnership program and it expands 
access for primary weights. 
 
Currently, if people are within 15 kilometres of the primary 
weights — you’ll be familiar with that — that they can travel to 
those roadways. But if they’re outside of that primary network, 
then the things that we have been working with and some of the 
areas where we have had success is working with the 
community for alternate heavy-haul routes. 
 
And secondly to work with communities and with industry to 
help upgrade particular roads so that they will be capable — 
excuse me — so that they will be capable of handling those 
primary weights. 
 
We recognize that this is a challenge for the province as we’re 
investing and reinvesting more in trying to upgrade the system, 
that when you move highways to primary weights the 
consumption of the asset also increases. And we have to be very 
cognizant of that and not get ahead of our ability to sustain the 
developments that we’re doing and sustain the repair and 
maintenance of those roadways that will be handling primary 
weights. 
 
So we try and do this in consultation with the area 
transportation planning committees, we try and do it in 
consultation with communities and businesses in the area, in 
consultation with our neighbouring jurisdictions, and we are 
keeping . . . we are very cognizant of the need to continue to 
grow and develop our economy in Saskatchewan. And so those 
things all go into consideration as we have upgraded some of 
our pavements to primary weight . . . on our roadways to 
primary weight-bearing roadways. And we also, you will recall, 
expanded a number of those roads from 10-month primary to 
12-month primary, which has also helped a number of the 
industries that are close to those primary weight systems. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I listened carefully to your response and 
it seems like your main initiative is the partnership program 
whereby the shippers are asked to bear part of the cost — 
whether it be a manufacturing plant or, as I said, a feedlot or 
grain terminal or what have you. Now it seems to me there are a 
number of situations in this province, I’m thinking of perhaps 

the Trailtech plant down at Gravelbourg or the Bourgault plant 
at St. Brieux. These plants operate and compete in . . . on a 
world market. I understand that neither of those two particular 
plants have access to primary weights because they are a short 
distance, in one case, off of a primary highway. 
 
It seems to me that if your government is serious about helping 
their competitive position in the world marketplace, that rather 
than asking them to help pay for part of the primary weight 
highway system, that . . . Is it not the role of government to 
provide the infrastructure so that businesses can compete in the 
world marketplace, earn foreign dollars, and create . . . or earn 
tax dollars that they can then pay into the general revenue 
system, rather than governments asking them to pay for some of 
the infrastructure and then also governments investing, in some 
cases, in their competitors. 
 
I’m thinking of Drake Meat Processors versus Harvest Meats 
processors in Yorkton. It just seems to me that it’s a skewed 
policy. It seems to me that the role of government should be to 
provide the infrastructure so that these companies can be 
competitive and be successful right here in Saskatchewan, 
rather than having to move elsewhere where the infrastructure is 
provided for them, Minister. I would suggest that that would be 
perhaps a sounder policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well really the question makes me 
wonder whether the Sask Party would basically just fund 
everybody who asks for it, whether they would have any regard 
to the overall asset — makes me wonder how much thought 
actually has gone into the developing a question or a plan 
around roadways. Because I did indicate earlier that any 
movement to primary weight increases the using of that asset, 
the consumption of the asset. It costs big dollars. 
 
Most of the investment that we’re putting into the province in 
terms of roadways is going into rural highways, into rural 
roadways. And we are doing this in consultation, as I indicated 
earlier, with the people from those areas to try and make sure 
that the priorities that are set are right. And when we’re setting 
those priorities, we have to set the priorities with regard to the 
whole province. 
 
Let me also take you back to conversations that we had last year 
in terms of setting priorities around some of these places. I’ve 
got to ask the question, why in the world did they build in some 
of the places that they built when they had no primary access? 
Why did they not build where they would have access to 
primary weight? Why did they not build where they would have 
access to alternate transportation like rail? I mean, if we were 
just simply to respond to everybody’s demand for a primary 
weight highway to handle the product that they want to send 
from that place out there, we would shortly have nothing left to 
provide funding for our primary highways that need work. 
 
So what we’re trying to do — in consultation with the people of 
this province, and that includes people from every region 
through the area transportation planning committees — are set 
priorities that are manageable and sustainable so that we can 
continue to build the whole road network in this province so 
that it will best enable our economy to grow. So that’s what 
we’re doing. 
 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

We recognize that there are operations in various places around 
the province that don’t have that access, that wish they had the 
access. And again, if we had unlimited resources, we would 
wish that we could provide that access. We don’t; therefore we 
must be very prudent in our planning and in our spending to try 
and meet those needs as quickly and as fully as we are able 
using the guidance of the people from those regions. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I’m not suggesting that this province 
has the capability to build primary highway to every facility 
that asks for it. But there are certain centres of economic 
activity which if you just . . . If a person stands back and just 
looks at it, it makes a whole lot of common sense that these 
people — take the Trailtechs and the Bourgaults and plants of 
that stature that generate a lot of economic activity and a lot of 
revenue which will help you achieve your 6.8 per cent GDP, 
growth in GDP, and that sort of thing . . . It would just seem 
that to the average person, it would just make common sense 
that you would provide the type of infrastructure that those 
people require. 
 
Now going back to our conversation of a year ago, when grain 
companies look at locating grain terminals, there are more 
things than just the highway. It’s absolutely very important the 
highway is, but it’s also access to rail . . . a location where a 
siding can be built and a number of things besides the highway. 
And so there are times where grain companies are forced to 
build in a location where . . . on a secondary highway even 
though, all things being equal, that wouldn’t be their first 
choice. 
 
And that is the situation in my constituency in the Southey area. 
We have a situation there where we have 4 kilometres from a 
primary highway to their plant. It’s not on the Prairie Grain 
Roads Program this year. Why? I know what the answer is — 
because they don’t want to partner with you folks. That’s the 
answer. 
 
Now is that, is that . . . That’s your policy then. And so let’s 
make it very clear that investors looking at investing in this 
province, if they want a . . . if they’re not locating on a primary 
highway, they’d better be prepared to ante up some dollars to 
help pay for primary access. That is your policy, I understand, 
Minister. And I don’t think that’s the type of policy that’s going 
to grow this province. 
 
And we need to have a strategic plan and develop our 
highways, that we look at our highways as an investment not as 
a cost. And they will generate and they will pay for themselves 
over and over again if it’s done properly, Minister. 
 
But I don’t think we’re going to solve this debate today and our 
time is moving on, and I know my colleagues have some 
specific questions about highways in their constituency. And at 
this time I will turn the questioning over to my colleague from 
Estevan. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s important to note . . . You 
referred to the particular terminal in the Southey area and to the 
discussions that were had in terms of partnership. Well 
certainly, we do encourage partnerships to enable the kind of 

road delivery system that people are looking for for their 
industry. 
 
But I do want to also point out that when you ask . . . You asked 
a question regarding the Prairie Grain Roads and why that 
particular 4 kilometres was not included. Well we do have a 
management committee for the Prairie Grain Roads Program 
and that management committee is made up of three federal, 
three provincial, two Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, one Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association representative. And these people develop the policy 
criteria and administer the Prairie Grain Roads Program. 
 
So to get a direct answer on that, the management committee 
would have that. But they try and . . . To the best of my 
understanding, they try and put all of the requests from the 
whole province into the works and make their decisions based 
on where we will get the best return for those investments 
overall. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Mr. Minister, 
to you and your officials. I appreciate you taking the time to 
answer some of the questions we have regarding the highways. 
 
Mr. Minister, my first concern is regarding the border crossing 
at Highway 39. Now I do have a little bit of preamble to this 
question and it was last fall when I attended a meeting. We 
were actually discussing the MLC (Midwestern Legislative 
Conference) conference that’s going to be held here in Regina 
in 2005. And I can remember a member from the government 
side, specifically the member from Regina Victoria, expressing 
quite concerns . . . expressing grave concerns about there wasn’t 
any signage at the border crossing at North Portal indicating 
when you’re entering the province. 
 
And I just want to assure him, Mr. Minister, that people do 
know when they’re entering Canada, and specifically 
Saskatchewan, at that crossing by the condition of the highway. 
So you know, they . . . As to put up a sign saying, you are now 
entering Saskatchewan, people do know. They can tell by the 
condition of their shocks, their windshields, and everything else 
when they leave that area. 
 
And it is so bad, Mr. Minister, that people, specifically truckers 
and others, that they’re now taking alternate routes. They’re 
going to Emerson, Manitoba as an alternate. And the businesses 
and customs brokers in that area have voiced concerns about 
this. 
 
And now I know that the feds have announced the Border 
Infrastructure Fund for that highway, and you had expressed 
earlier that you were looking forward to the improvements that 
will take place. And I can assure you, Mr. Minister, that your 
anticipation probably pales in comparison with that of the 
people who have . . . that will have a direct impact on. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I was wondering if you could explain to me 
exactly what is all . . . within the border infrastructure 
programs, the guidelines. Does it extend a certain amount of 
kilometres beyond the border, in this case North Portal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I thank the member for her question. 
And you’re probably right that the people who live in the area 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

 

are very enthusiastic about the work that will be done, not only 
at the border but, due to a lot of very, very good negotiating by 
our team, also to the associated roadways. Because at first the 
Border Infrastructure Fund was only going to be for border 
crossings themselves. But we were able to, through diligent 
work, get associated roadways included as well. 
 
In terms of signage, there will be better signs going up there. 
And the other . . . I think what’s key in this whole process is 
that this border crossing at Highway 39 is one of the top 10 in 
Saskatchewan. And we recognize that and therefore what this 
program actually means, it’s not just a $5 million program, it’s 
a $10 million program over five years with our matching 
dollars. And it is again through the negotiations that we were 
able to have our plan to not only upgrade the border crossing 
itself, where we have to meet the security standards which will 
be set in negotiation with the federal government in Canada and 
in the US. And once we’ve got those parameters in place, we’ll 
know what our funding is for the border itself and then we’ll be 
funding also the associated roadways and improving those 
substantially. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, do I understand you right? I know that you’ve said 
that the federal government put in 5 million, the provincial 
government is putting in 5 million. Now is this total of 10 
million specifically earmarked for the North Portal crossing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Funding is for both the North Portal 
border crossing and for the associated Highway 39. 
 
Mr. Chair, may I also, while I’m on my feet, request leave to 
introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I have leave to do this then, do I? 
Thank you very much. I would like to introduce Judy Bradley, 
former minister of Highways and Transportation, now school 
principal and friend. So it’s very nice to have you here 
observing our estimates, Judy, and I hope I’m meeting the 
standards that were set over the years. And I would ask all 
members here to welcome Judy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, when you said associated 
roadways that this $10 million is earmarked for as well, now 
that’s going to be spread over five years, so that’s $2 million a 
year, of course. Simple math. But associated roadways, just 
exactly what does that mean? Is that specifically Highway 39 or 
are you going to work towards Estevan or what’s the scoop on 
that? 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’m losing it here fast. It’s the bitter 
outlook on life that I hear talked about here. Well anyway, I 
would like to note that with regard to the language around 
associated roadways, that was the language that was used in 
negotiation. But in terms of our planning, it is Highway 39 from 
North Portal to Weyburn that we are looking at the 
improvements on. 
 
And one other point is that I wouldn’t assume that it will break 
down to $2 million a year, 10 million over five. But in terms of 
the breakdown, we’ll work on that, negotiate, and hopefully 
we’ll be able to see timely improvements given the Midwest 
Legislative Conference. Given our province’s centenary, we are 
going to try and make sure that we’ve got this area in very good 
shape for those events. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and when you said a 
bitter outlook on life, it wasn’t I that said that; it was one of 
your colleagues. 
 
Another area of concern in my area, Mr. Minister, is Highway 
47 South, and as you are aware I’ve been presenting petitions 
every day regarding the condition of this highway. And I’m 
sure if we sat until Christmas, I would probably have enough 
petitions to present every day. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I just want to read you a letter I received a 
copy of, “Dear Sir,” regarding Highway 47 South: 
 

We are writing in regards to the unacceptable state of 
Highway 47 and specifically the portion which commences 
at Woodlawn Regional Park (south of Estevan) and extends 
3 1/2 miles to the south. This highway is a heavily travelled 
highway which is used by local residents as well as our 
United States neighbours. I might add that for our 
neighbours to the south, it is their first impression of our 
province. This highway is in a terrible state and becoming 
worse daily. It not only is hard on vehicles, it is a safety 
hazard which deserves your immediate attention. 
 
With this letter, we must insist that you travel to Estevan 
immediately to obtain a first hand look at the state of this 
road. I would be happy to have a member of council 
accompany you on a tour of the highway. 
 
Once you are able to see the road and confirm our 
contentions . . . (as to) the road is harmful to personal 
safety, vehicle repair and tourism, we are sure you will 
agree to our demand and have this road repaired 
immediately. Yours truly. 

 
And it is signed by Greg Hoffort, administrator for the RM 
(rural municipality) of Estevan No. 5. 
 
I was just wondering what your response is to Mr. Hoffort’s 
letter, as well as a response to numerous concerns that I have 
voiced through petitions in this legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I thank the member again for the 
question. I have been listening to the petitions. 
 
And again in response to the letter, I think it’s important to 
know that I in fact have been down and travelled on 47 with a 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

local guide to look at what . . . the shape the roadway was in, 
and I agree that the roadway there is in poor shape. There are a 
number of plans that are underway and I expect the member is 
aware of some of those, including Luscar’s potential plan to 
move the location of that roadway, and so that works against 
decisions to do a major rebuild at this point. 
 
However, recognizing the state of the road, we know that there 
needs to be work done on the paved section through Luscar, 
needs to be padding levelling there, there’s some severe dips. 
We also recognize that the TMS (thin membrane surface) 
section and the gravel section earlier will need work. And they 
will be of course with the spring, in the worst shape that they 
are in . . . that they can be in and we’re looking at the regular 
maintenance and work to bring those up to at least a safe 
standard. 
 
We look forward to Luscar making its decision so that we can 
then proceed with the partnership and working on getting the 
appropriate work done on those roads. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your response to 
those questions. And with that, I’ll turn it over to my 
colleagues, and I can assure you that the people in my area will 
be watching very closely and probably, you know, voicing their 
concerns if this work isn’t done in an appropriate time. 
 
But in the meantime, I do thank you for your responses. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The minister spoke 
about the importance of having a north-south corridor and I 
think we can appreciate the value of economic development and 
tourism and the whole industry within the province and the 
value that it’s got. And we can recognize that in that 
west-central, northwest region with Highway 21 and Highway 
4, the importance of having good roadways going north and 
south. And I think there needs to be some thought put into, I 
guess, what the system is going to provide for us through that 
opportunity as well for those two roadways. 
 
(15:45) 
 
In particular though, I would like to ask the minister, in the 
sense of what’s happening within that west-central, northwest 
region, of the importance of the west-east traffic that’s 
happening in that area as well, there’s some economic 
development opportunities that have come on to stream. There’s 
also the oil and gas industry that it’s developing in that area, 
and it’s coming on quite nicely over this last little while as well, 
and actually from the oil and gas sales that were made in April 
there was in fact a piece of property that was sold just west of 
Wilkie, which was the highest paid piece of property in that 
region, some 6,000 hectares. So there is some real interest of 
activity starting to happen in that area as well. 
 
And we know that there’s something going on with Highway 14 
from Biggar to west of Unity, that there needs to be some work 
done. And there’s some aggregate being placed just west of 
Wilkie in the sense of something happening in, I think that the 
kilometres going west of that community, in that sense. 
 
Could the minister speak a little bit about the . . . of the activity 
that may happen in that area and to what extent that roadway is 

going to be repaired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The piece of road to which the 
member was referring is an AC, an asphalt concrete road, and it 
is scheduled for resurfacing. And it is approximately 11.1 
kilometres. And the cost of the resurfacing there will be $1.637 
million. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that response. 
There was some work done to the latter part of last year on 14, 
that came from west of Unity, through Unity, and went east of 
Unity, and it was a very thin type of a membrane structure that 
was put on that road surface. It was kind of a cosmetic type of a 
facelift that it gave that roadway. And it hasn’t really proved 
that it’s going to have any longevity in the sense of having 
some stability within that roadway. 
 
What is the intent of using that type of a structure and what is 
the future planning of putting that type of a structure into place 
as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The member indicates that some 
people were wondering if it was a light paving or resurfacing 
with pavement. Actually it’s a process called micro surfacing. 
It’s used all over North America. And basically what it does, it 
squeegees out the light surface. It takes the ruts out, fills cracks, 
and increases the lifespan of the road by somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of five to seven years. And so that’s the process 
that was used there and hopefully it will give us the additional 
five to seven years. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess just for the 
experience of travelling that roadway over the last little while, 
it’s showing that there’s some rutting and that’s starting to 
prove out again in the sense of the traffic that it’s carrying as 
well. 
 
Is there some experience that the present government has had 
with that type of surfacing that you’ve placed in other parts of 
the province that you can, you know, give us some assurances, 
when that type of expenditure is put onto the roadway, that we 
know that it’s going to give us some value when those dollars 
are spent in that area as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We’ve had actually a number of years 
of experience with this type of micro surfacing used on 
Highway 1 and 16 under heavy truck traffic — probably 25 
times more than what you would see in the area that you’re 
referring to. 
 
But it’s not only our provincial experience that we work with 
and has given good service in those areas, but we’re also 
looking at other North American experience and we know that 
it’s . . . this process is used in San Francisco area. And there 
again your traffic volumes are way, way over anything that we 
see here, and they’ve had good results with it there. 
 
So if there are some inconsistencies, those will be dealt with in 
regular road maintenance. But overall, our results with micro 
surfacing in this province and across North America have 
proved to be very good value for money. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay. Again thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

 

think that roadway maybe needs some attention as far as 
monitoring and seeing what’s happening with the traffic load 
and the type of traffic load it’s carrying as well, because it . . . 
that’s only been down for the winter months and you wouldn’t 
expect through the winter months, with the freeze-up, that you 
would have that type of an impact on the roadway already. 
 
And that roadway is already starting to show that there is some 
sections in there that are showing that there is some rutting 
going on in there. So something has to be addressed there 
before that road goes back into the condition it was in. And if 
you travel the rest of that 14 — it’s rutted tremendously terrible 
in other areas as well — that something has to happen with that 
entire roadway. 
 
Just a question in a sense of policy. When you are constructing 
road in another area and you’re using a roadway — in particular 
the one I’m referring to is Highway 21 going north of Unity — 
and you use Highway 14 coming out of the Phippen gravel pit 
going north to the Adanac corner and then you went north on 
that corner on to the grid roads to get back onto 21, there was a 
tremendous cost there. And I think there was a bit of sharing 
that went on with the Department of Highways with the 
municipality. But that section between Adanac and Phippen was 
tremendously rutted from the travelling of those gravel trucks 
going down that roadway. 
 
What is the policy and sense of, I guess maintaining and 
looking after that type of a breakdown? And also where’s the 
monitoring that comes in when those gravel trucks are 
travelling down that roadway and they’re travelling at 
tremendous speeds, sometimes over the speed limit and 
overweight as well? When you’ve got gravel running off the 
sides of a gravel truck, you know you’ve got the thing well 
overloaded as well. What is the policy in a sense of being able 
to monitor those situations and deal with them when something 
like that happens? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, first of all, I’m absolutely 
shocked to hear that Saskatchewan citizens might be going over 
the speed limit, for one thing; and secondly, that they might be 
hauling overweight loads in this province anywhere. 
 
But to respond directly to your question in terms of the haul, if 
there’s any haul in there that is Department of Highway’s haul 
for rebuilding, that . . . the weights are monitored right at the pit 
and they are not paid for overload weights. 
 
So if it’s haul for a department project, they are monitored right 
there, they are loaded at the pit and weighed, and therefore we 
are not getting overloads on those. 
 
If it’s municipal, we rely on our traffic officers for enforcement 
of those weights, and it’s our hope that the municipal 
governments would also be responsible in making sure that they 
are not having overweight loads hauled as well. 
 
Secondly — and I think this is very important — that in terms 
of our project timing, we also try very hard to make sure that 
the best time for hauling is when the roads are frozen and so we 
try and haul in the winter time to minimize damage, and that 
has been our policy. We continue to work on that basis. And so 
there are some times when we do haul at other times, but most 

of our hauling is set for that time. 
 
So we try and maintain our roads. We do count on people 
following the law. It’s our expectation even though we know 
that some do not. And for our own part, we monitor those that 
are in contract with us. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay, again, thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
know that particular project, all the aggregate was hauled from 
the pit right out and it was hauled through the summer months. 
 
There was no stockpiling that was done on-site on 21, and it 
was hauled right through the summer period of time. And at 
that time I was working with a business at Unity, and I travelled 
that road three or four times a day, and when I was travelling at 
105 or 110 that gravel truck caught me pretty quick. So even I 
can travel over the speed limit at the odd time as such. 
 
But that aggregate was hauled by contractors out of there, not 
your department. Now whatever way you, I guess, determine 
the value of contractual work or department work, I guess, you 
know that was the situation with it there. 
 
But I guess the policy is when the road is damaged, you know, 
due to the fact of that material travelling across that road — and 
it was very evident what happened that summer there — what is 
the policy of going back and looking after the problem that was 
caused on that road surface? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I suspect the member feels much 
better after confessing in this House that he was going over the 
speed limit on those roads. And I can still give absolution, so 
you now have absolution for your speeding over there. 
 
And I do want to also point out that on those particular 
roadways there is, simply if the . . . if there is direct damage by 
the haul, then it is expected that the cost of the contract will 
increase to cover the repairs. And so . . . But that’s if there is 
direct damage. We do have precedent for that in the past. 
 
However it is our understanding that, for many industrial 
purposes, at times there is heavy haul and heavy use of a 
particular roadway. And generally when it’s just the kind of 
wear and tear that is caused by that extended use, that’s covered 
in our maintenance budgets over the years. 
 
So in a particular case like that, our area supervisor will be 
looking at the roadways, seeing what needs to be done. And if 
there are repairs needed, those will be put into the list and 
priorities set for them. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Okay. One quick question regarding the twin 
bridges in North Battleford and Battleford, I guess. What is the 
future of those bridges? And I guess there’s a huge impact to 
that whole area of the Battlefords for economic values as well 
as social values of where those bridges are right now, and that 
they could be maintained into the future. Just quickly, if you 
can just address that, what the thoughts around that situation are 
right now? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With regard to the Battlefords River 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

crossings, we have just completed work on the newest bridge 
last year. There’s some work on the roadways. There is still 
work on the second part of the twinning bridge there. The older 
bridge of the two needs approximately another $1 million worth 
of upgrade. I believe that’s being done this year. And so in total 
for over about six years, $24.8 million is being put into that 
particular area to make sure that we have good transportation on 
the twinned Highway 16. 
 
And we have, with regard to the old bridges that are not a part 
of the major highway transportation system there, we are 
negotiating with the municipalities involved. And we recognize 
that they have some desire for those as some type of 
transportation. Whether it’s motor vehicle transportation from 
Battleford to Finlayson Island and possibly a footpath on the 
other bridge, we recognize that there is some planning, some 
negotiation, some discussion going on about how those will be 
handled. 
 
But in terms of our overall transportation system, those bridges 
are not necessary as . . . for handling vehicular traffic, and so 
appropriate decisions and discussions will happen to find out 
how those bridges will be used in the future. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, as we conclude 
this session of estimates, I would like to table the global 
estimates and I would like to thank the minister and his officials 
for their responses to our questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee report 
progress and proceed to estimates of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Today with me is Angie Gélinas, deputy minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation; Chris Martin, acting director of 
corporate services; Dylan Jones, executive director, strategic 
policy and youth; Olivia Shumski, director of Saskatchewan 
centennial; Carlos Germann, manager, heritage resources; Ron 
Wight, senior advisor to the deputy minister; and David 
Debono, president and CEO (chief executive officer) of SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network). 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of all, I’d like to 
thank the minister and I’d like to welcome her officials here and 
thank you for taking the time this afternoon to answer some 
questions we have. 
 
Madam Minister, the first thing I’d like to do is table the request 
for the globals, and if you would mind completing them and 
returning them to me at your earliest convenience, perhaps by 
the time we meet the next time so I can have some comparisons 
made. 
 

And another thing I would like is, as we have done in previous 
years, I would like a complete list of the communities and 
projects that will be supported by the Community Initiatives 
Fund in the fiscal year of . . . or have been in 2002-2003, and a 
list of those communities and projects that were denied funding 
for the same period. 
 
Madam Minister, for the benefit of those who may not be 
familiar with the Community Initiatives Fund, could you please 
give us a background on it and why it was established, when it 
was established, and all the reasons pertaining to that, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think, as people will recall, the 
Community Initiatives Fund was created to distribute a portion 
of casino profits to benefit Saskatchewan people and 
communities. And the amount that was established was 25 per 
cent of the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation’s profit, so that 
would be the casinos in Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 
Now the specific grants are allocated by an arm’s-length board 
in three priority areas: vulnerable children and youth, problem 
gambling treatment and prevention, and health care. And 
starting this fall, the Community Initiatives Fund will be 
providing grants to support new centennial initiatives that 
support the three targeted areas including physical fitness, 
Aboriginal partnerships, and culture and recreation, and 
centennial capital and programming projects that benefit 
communities. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. For clarification 
purposes, would you just provide details on the following. In 
the fiscal year of 2001-2002, $7.4 million was directed into the 
GRF (General Revenue Fund) from the Community Initiatives 
Fund. Yet in that same fiscal year, 142 projects that had applied 
for funding were denied. Is this correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can’t confirm exactly how many 
were denied because it is community groups that make 
recommendations to the board of trustees, and regardless of the 
amount of money, not all projects are approved. Some of them 
just don’t fit the guidelines. 
 
When we do send across for you the list of projects approved 
and not approved last year, it will give you a better idea of what 
was and wasn’t approved. But I can’t give you an absolute 
number, but I can commit to giving it to you. 
 
But I will emphasize that regardless of the amount of money not 
all projects are approved, because it’s based on the 
recommendation of local committees. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, when the money is directed to 
go to the programs that you had initially specified, a lot of the 
people in communities are saying that perhaps the guidelines 
are just a little bit too strict. 
 
Have you worked anything out in that area to make it easier for 
them to have access to this funding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In actual facts, based on letters from 
MLAs on the Saskatchewan Party side of the House, from our 
own MLAs — the first three-year funding strategy is at an end 
and the guidelines that existed for that three-year period but 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

 

we’re now entering into a new three-year period — and in fact 
there has been some substantial adjustment to criteria, both for 
capital for small communities and as well for the kinds of 
projects that would be eligible. 
 
So I think people will find that the comments that were 
forwarded to us from yourselves and others have been used by 
the board of trustees to revise the criteria and the requirements 
for matching funds and whatnot, to make this money a little 
more accessible to smaller communities. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you just 
give me some examples or an idea of why a community or a 
project might be denied? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the reasons would be that they 
don’t meet the requirements for matching monies. Another 
reason might be that the population area served does not have 
enough population in it to meet the requirements, because in the 
instance of smaller communities normally those requests are 
looked at as a region. And those would be some of the kind of 
things that would have prevented people from getting projects. 
There might have already been someone else who received 
funding serving that same service area. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m sure that 
there’s a lot of cash-strapped communities out there that might 
have appreciated receiving some extra money to help them out, 
and it is my understanding that the money in CIF (Community 
Initiatives Fund) is solely for the purposes of assisting 
communities that have applied for the various funding projects. 
 
Why wasn’t the CIF’s generous surplus simply redirected to 
those community projects that had previously been denied? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I just wanted to be clear on the 
member’s question. There would be two things really at play. 
One is that again, local committees make recommendations 
about whether they think the projects are the right ones for their 
community, whether they’re . . . the organization has the ability 
to deliver the project, etc. And those are determinations that are 
made locally; we play no role in those determinations. 
 
There’s committees that exist, made up of a range of people 
from all the different human service areas, that make 
recommendations to the board of trustees of the CIF. 
 
But also there would have been unexpected revenues because 
once programs get established, then if they’re removed people 
get very upset. And at a certain point when the funding 
mechanism between First Nations casinos and non-First Nations 
casinos was established, there was a flip clause which affected 
how many revenues were retained depending on whether a 
casino was on-reserve or off-reserve. 
 
So at a certain point there was some revenue left in the fund in 
order to ensure that, if in fact the flip negatively impacted the 
total amount of money in the fund, that community groups 
wouldn’t find that they were all of a sudden without their 
resources to continue valued programs in those communities. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Ms. Minister. Some of the projects 
that were denied funding last year were a new building for 

senior citizens, playground equipment, youth and elder 
mentoring, curling camp, a youth fitness and drop-in centre, 
rural family support services, parenting classes, a skate park, 
gambling awareness, food bank, youth forums, life skills 
education, stay-in-school programs, inner city hockey classes, 
teenage pregnancy prevention, and a summer camp for children 
with acquired brain injury. 
 
Given that the money in the CIF is targeted for projects such as 
these and since it appears that these programs more than meet 
the criteria, why would the communities that applied for 
funding be denied to help see these very worthwhile and 
important programs completed, or implemented at least? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well you know I’m fond of saying: in 
Saskatchewan there’s a million good ideas a day but you can’t 
fund all of them. 
 
And the . . . again I take you back to the fact that local 
communities are very involved in these determinations, so there 
would have been reasons at the local level. And some of them 
. . . some of the reasons may have been related to priorities in 
existing services, but some of them may have been related to 
the criteria. So as I said in an earlier answer, those criteria have 
been adjusted. 
 
And I would urge people who were not successful under 
previous rounds to look at the new criteria and to resubmit their 
applications because I think the criteria are more flexible now 
and also there is considerable additional funds to expend right 
now. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m a little bit, I 
guess, taken aback by your response that there are a good . . . a 
million good ideas out there and you can’t implement them all. 
 
Some of these were for children with acquired brain injury. 
There’s life skills classes, stay-in-school programs, teenage 
pregnancy prevention. These were denied and $7.4 million was 
turned back to the GRF. And you’re saying that there are a 
million good ideas and we can’t implement all of them. How 
about trying some of them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again, as hard as the member is 
trying not to hear what I’m saying, local committees adjudicate 
these and they would have had reasons why some of those 
projects were not approved. In some instances it may have been 
that they felt that there wasn’t enough additional resources. 
 
But again I would just say that there is money there, the criteria 
have been revised, and that certainly I would encourage people 
to have another go at it. Because this is money that wouldn’t 
have been there before without casinos; it’s a new source of 
revenue and the money is there. We’ve tripled the amount of 
funding in the new three-year distribution strategy so I think 
there’s a very good prospect that the local committees would 
make a decision in favour of more of these projects perhaps 
than in the past. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is there any place 
that these . . . the people that were in charge at the local level, is 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

there any place that the people applying for grants could have 
gone for a second opinion when they were told that they were 
unworthy of receiving the grant, or is it just cut and dried at that 
stage? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because the decision is made at two 
levels — the local committee recommends and the board of 
trustees either approves or rejects what the community has 
recommended — I think they would have the ability to write to 
the board of trustees if they were really not in agreement with 
the decision. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, to your officials, welcome. I have a number of 
questions but I’d like to start with SCN. I’m wondering . . . I 
understand the distance learning may not be under SCN any 
more and may be moved to the Department of Learning. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that’s correct. It was determined 
that the core competencies of the Department of Learning were 
more related to the delivery side of . . . the content delivery side 
of distance learning. And SCN primarily is providing the 
physical capacity to deliver distance education. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Madam Minister, does that mean that we 
basically have a provincially owned television network then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s three things that SCN is 
primarily involved in. One is CommunityNet delivery. Another 
one is all the help desks and everything related to distance ed; 
they do all the technical stuff for distance ed. And as well there 
is the broadcast network that broadcasts I think important news, 
information, stories, and whatnot around and about 
Saskatchewan that other networks are not as interested in. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How many of the people that are working for 
SCN are actually doing the support work for distance 
education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s three that would specifically be 
related to the various specifics of the delivery of distance ed — 
going back to the help desks and whatnot I referred to — and 
then 20 more generally that support the broader technical 
capacity of the network that’s needed. I guess it’s like having a 
telephone in order to have Internet — it supports the basic 
infrastructure of the network. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, SCN is receiving about $1.7 
million less this year than it did last year. Is that amount of 
money being transferred now to the Department of Learning? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, it’s a straight-across transfer. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So how many of the staff that were with SCN 
are now with the Department of Learning? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There were six; there’s now three. 
Three that were more on the program content side have moved 
over to Sask Ed and the three that were more on the technical 
support side are still with SCN. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So six people probably don’t account for $1.7 

million. What is the difference? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Eight hundred thousand supports what 
the regional colleges require in order to receive and be 
participants in the learning network: 600,000 to U of R 
(University of Regina), U of S (University of Saskatchewan), 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), etc., then 200,000 is the actual staff and related 
costs. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So this amount of money all went into those 
. . . into the Department of Learning then — the amount of 
money you just talked about. So right now then SCN is dealing 
with some of the helplines, and I also understand it’s dealing 
with encouraging the development of Saskatchewan regional 
Aboriginal content in Saskatchewan. 
 
Does that mean that you have people involved in SCN that are 
going out and promoting or getting information to actually 
make films or make . . . develop programs for this issues, and 
what are they actually doing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The way the system works is licence 
fees are provided to program producers who are selected 
because of the quality of their projects and teams. 
 
And we’re not the only funder; there’s usually a vast array of 
funders who get involved in a successful request for production 
support. But in our instance, $1 of expenditure by ourselves 
triggers about $10 in investment from other film sources. So 
we’ve triggered, over the time that we’ve been in operation, 
about 80 million in production dollars for Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, was it . . . was there any 
consideration given to moving the helplines to the Department 
of Learning as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The technical support part is really 
related to technical requirements, like the satellite system that 
supports the Legislative Network, supports CommunityNet. So 
you would have had to duplicate if you start splitting those off 
into SaskTel, into the legislature, etc. This is the most efficient 
way to do it, to have all the technical stuff in one place 
supporting a wide variety of networks. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. My colleague 
has a couple of questions on that. But I’m going to just ask you 
on two other issues. One of them is on the heritage operations 
support. I notice that it’s just about double this year. Can you 
tell me where the extra money is going to this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Every once in a while we have to thank 
the federal government for their contributions. The 640 is 
coming directly from the federal government increase in 
support to the heritage places initiative program. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So was there any criteria that was attached to 
this gift from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. I want to make sure I give you 
exactly the right information here. Under the federal-provincial 
agreement, the heritage resources unit will receive 633,000 for 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

 

their role in the national historic places initiative. 
 
And what it is actually is a national registry of Canadian 
historic sites. And I know there’s a lot of competition for sites 
to be part of this registry because it does mean that they 
achieve, much like the national parks program and whatnot, a 
bit of a protected status. 
 
The federal government I know is getting very concerned that 
we were losing a lot of our heritage resources in Canada and 
decided that it was important, both to know what we have, what 
our asset inventory is in terms of heritage, but also to make sure 
that as new projects are being selected for inclusion, that a 
representative array of historic places and Aboriginal history, 
the whole entire history of both the province and Canada, would 
be represented through this Canadian registry of historic sites. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How are 
communities made aware of the fact that there is double the 
money now for heritage projects compared to last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now there’s several parts to this 
program. It’s about preservation, and part of it is training local 
communities what steps they can take to preserve local heritage. 
But it’s also got to do with the promotion of heritage sites so 
that these very important assets that we’ve got, people actually 
know about them. Because it’s one thing to protect them, it’s 
another thing to enjoy them and share them with others. 
 
The normal way that people approach historic designation, 
there’s . . . it’s a process that involves municipalities. So in 
some instances a certain type of designation is done at the 
municipal level, some is done at the provincial level, and some 
at the federal level. 
 
But if anybody is in doubt, they should just write to us and 
we’ll direct them to the appropriate place to get all the supports 
that are possible for a heritage designation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, municipalities and 
individuals would have to be aware that the money was there 
before they could write to you and ask you how they could get 
the information. So is there some kind of information blitz 
that’s been given to municipalities? Are rural people, as well as 
urban people, given the opportunity to know about it? And is 
there more . . . When a decision is made on who is going to be 
. . . which program or project is going to be shown, how is that 
decision made? Who makes that decision? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I guess in the time-honoured 
process of government, sometimes announcements are made 
before all the details are worked out. And the federal 
government is actually working on the package of information 
that will be provided to people about how to access the 
resources because again it’s not always grants, although there is 
a grant element involved in all the heritage stuff. But they’ll be 
working on the communications package that will let people 
know exactly how they can access the supports and resources of 
this program. And I’m sure that in the process of developing 
that, they’re collaborating with both the province and 
municipalities to develop that. 
 
But you know this kind of stuff has been around a long time and 

most of the people that are involved in heritage have, I think, 
some idea of how to get hooked up at least enough to get the 
information they need. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, you indicated that they’ve 
actually talked about the program but they really haven’t 
developed the information around it. So are you going to be 
spending the money this year? Are they going to develop the 
information and design the program and spend the money this 
year, or is it something that’s going to be actually talked about 
and then shown again next year? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The answer is yes to that. And the 
Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation, our heritage 
branch, will be coordinating the Saskatchewan portion once the 
details are cleared up. But this has been a program that’s been 
under development over the last two years and I think it’s just 
dotting the i’s and crossing the t’s that’s taking place right now. 
 
But again, the registry will be an important part of it because we 
do have a lot of assets out there that are largely not well 
identified. And I think this is an effort based on a need that 
everybody who works in this area saw, to make sure that we not 
only preserve these assets but that people managing them are 
better informed about how to manage them, and also that people 
have access to them through a better promotional effort. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I am well aware, as are all 
the members on this side of the House, the importance of our 
heritage, and the fact that our province is just 100 years old and 
we’re losing a lot of our heritage sites already. So it’s very 
important when we do have some federal money finally coming 
into this province that people are aware of it. 
 
Can we get a commitment that MLA offices will get some 
information on this so that we can tell people in our area that 
there really is some funding available, and that we can start 
promoting the project ourselves? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll make that commitment to you 
today, that as soon as it’s finalized we’ll get that information 
right out to MLA offices so people are able to let their 
constituents know. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. Can 
we also get a breakdown of how the money, the $710,000 for 
the heritage operation support, was spent last year? I know that 
there are a number of communities that apply every year hoping 
that they will get some funding to keep their heritage sites, and 
often there isn’t enough funding to go around. Can you give us 
an idea of how the money was spent last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well the $710,000 figure is the figure 
that supports the professional staff such as archaeologists, 
architects, etc., who are able to do both the analytical, the 
preservation, and the redevelopment assessment and advice to 
communities on the particular heritage site they’re trying to 
preserve, and also to do some evaluation of the sites in terms of 
their heritage value to the province. 
 
And as well, 345,000 in direct grants is administered by the 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2003 

 

Heritage Foundation, which is kind of a stand-alone board that 
receives proposals directly from communities on projects. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, just to clarify then: there’s 
$710,000 spent on the support staff and $345,000 spent on the 
actual projects. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well an important part of a heritage 
designation is understanding the archaeological, architectural, 
and other value of the built heritage. So you do need people 
who are knowledgeable, otherwise it would be like going to a 
yard sale — everything old would be deemed to have value. 
And people have to actually be able to both assess the state of 
— what would you call it? — the state of preservedness of 
some of this stuff, estimates around what it would cost to 
redevelop it, etc. There’s a lot of technical work required 
around heritage preservation and archaeological preservation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The $345,000 
that was spent on actual projects then, can we get a copy or a 
list of those projects that were actually approved? And is this 
also money that was spent in museums in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Museums are separate but the annual 
report for the Heritage Foundation, which either you can get 
yourself or we can get for you, lists all the grants that were 
given out to communities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. My last question, Madam Minister, 
the $710,000 that was spent on the support staff: how many 
people are working in that area of the department and is some 
of that money actual contracts as well as hiring direct people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s nine staff actually within the 
heritage branch and three at the foundation. 
 
But I would have to say even at that, one area where we really 
haven’t done enough yet is in the area of the Aboriginal 
heritage and archaeology and whatnot. There’s a lot of 
unanswered questions in that whole area about preservation and 
it’s an area that we’re doing more work on this year, but we do 
have one person in the branch who specializes in that area. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I’m 
looking at a news release dated January 25, 2003. The release 
deals with the funding that was made to the community of 
Aberdeen for a new skating rink and curling rink, and 
apparently there’ll be other space for other recreation and 
cultural activities in the complex. 
 
My question is, what are the criteria for . . . that communities 
must meet to be eligible for funding, as the community of 
Aberdeen is, and was there something unique about Aberdeen 
to receive a grant of $491,500? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think all I’m able to tell you about 
that project today, that that would have been determined by the 
committee at the local level, and it was a cultural and 
recreational complex. 
 
And I suspect that a couple of factors would have been 
involved. One would have been the population area served. 
Another one would have been the joint use facility because joint 

use facilities are popular in small areas because they can make 
better use of dollars. And they may have already done some 
fundraising of their own which gave them a larger matching 
dollar component that put them up on the list. 
 
But I don’t have the actual criteria because again, we don’t 
decide. That gets done at the local committee level. And we 
could ask that the committee provide that criteria, but we don’t 
actually administer it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder if you 
could elaborate on the local committee that makes these 
decisions. Who is this committee? What’s the committee 
comprised of? 
 
And then also, if you could provide the criteria that this grant 
was allocated on, and also criteria that other communities need 
to meet in order to qualify for funding under this particular 
program. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I’d like to introduce in the, of course, the 
Speaker’s gallery, we have some special visitors to the 
legislature. We have, of course, tribal council chief from MLTC 
(Meadow Lake Tribal Council) Richard Gladue. We also have 
O’Neil Gladue, who is a vice-chief. And we also have a chief 
from Buffalo River, Elmer Campbell. And we also have Chief 
Robert Mitsuing from Makwa Sahgaiehcan and Frank 
Kytwayhat from Makwa Sahgaiehcan. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So I’d like all members to say Ta wow and welcome our special 
guests to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With leave, also to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much. And thank you 
to my colleagues for granting leave. 
 
I of course as well want to take the opportunity to welcome the 
chiefs here and Grand Chief Gladue as well. Most of them are 
from my constituency, although not all. 
 
I wanted the member from Cumberland to do the introduction 
first, as much in Cree as possible because I’m not nearly as 
versed as he is. 
 
But I do want to welcome all of you here today. It’s really a 
privilege to see you, and I hope I have a minute to chat with you 



April 23, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

 

afterwards. So thanks for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Chair, with leave to also welcome 
our guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. On behalf of 
the Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition, I would like to 
take this opportunity to also welcome our guests from MLTC 
here this afternoon. We hope you are enjoying the proceedings 
so far. And I understand we’ll be spending a little time together 
later on in the week, and I’m looking forward to that very 
much. Welcome again. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just reiterate here a little bit in a 
general way about the funding criteria. The applications that did 
not receive funding support didn’t meet the following criteria. 
They didn’t have a combined urban-rural population threshold 
of over 4,500. And they also, excluding the CIF, would have 
needed to have 75 per cent of their project funding in place at 
the time of the application. 
 
I’ll just mention that there’s two types of committees that 
administer the CIF. The one for community grants to kind of 
human service organizations, that’s a number of local 
committees. But the one that deals with capital is a 
province-wide committee of community representatives. 
There’s eight people representing the entire province and the 
criteria that they would have used in the last round would have 
been the criteria I just read out to you. But that criteria has been 
revised as per the member’s very early question in this 
discussion, and we are going to make it easier for communities 
to meet the threshold. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, I’d just like to thank you for 
your time this afternoon. I’d also like to extend my thank you to 
your officials for being here and helping us clarify some 
matters. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much for your helpful 
questions. I know this is a very important area to communities, 
and anything we can do to make it work better for them is, I 
think, a good thing to do. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:47. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................655 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................655 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................655 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................655 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................655 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................656 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................656 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................656 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................656 
  Sonntag ..............................................................................................................................................................................656, 680 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................656 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................656 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................657 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................657 
  Hillson ................................................................................................................................................................................657, 664 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................657 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................664 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................680 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................681 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Administrative Professionals Day 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................657 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................657 
 Canada Book Day 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................658 
 Earth Day 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................658 
 New Health Centre for Cumberland House 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................658 
 Helen Swedberg’s 100th Birthday 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................659 
 Government Unveils Immigration Initiative 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................659 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Government Reaction to Harassment Allegations 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................659 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................659 
 Rate Review Process 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................660 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................660 
 Out-of-Province Investments 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................661 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................663 
 Crown Corporation Dividends 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................663 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................664 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................664 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................664 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................664 
 



 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................665 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................667 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................672 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................674 
 General Revenue Fund — Culture, Youth and Recreation — Vote 27 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................676 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................676 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................678 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................680 
 


