















































Hansard: June 26, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1981 
 June 26, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to rise on behalf of people from Kelvington and 
Lintlaw to present a petition. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in that area. 
 

And as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this petition 
are from the community of Kelvington and Lintlaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m also very pleased to rise 
again today on behalf of people in my area who are very 
concerned about Highway No. 49. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding areas. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Porcupine Plain, Rose Valley. 
 
I do so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
bundle of petitions signed by individuals concerned with the 
dangerous and deplorable condition of Highway No. 43. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from the 
communities of Vanguard, Aneroid, Gravelbourg, Shamrock, 
Glenbain, Regina, Kincaid, and communities all over 
Saskatchewan and beyond. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
residents of Swift Current, I rise today. Their petition deals with 
the constructive alternative to the government’s plan for a 
permanent CT (computerized tomography) scan in our home 
community. The prayer of their petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all the petitioners again today are from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from residents of Saskatchewan, in fact in 
Alberta, who are very concerned about the conditions of 
Highway 43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Lac Pelletier, Swift 
Current, Blumenhof, and Lloyd, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise again today in the House to present a number of 
petitions on behalf of the citizens of west central Saskatchewan 
concerned with the rate of health care in the area. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure the current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good folks from 
Kindersley, Eatonia, Smiley, Coleville, Plenty, Brock, 
Netherhill, and other communities in the south . . . west central 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with the high cost of prescription drugs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Davidson, Girvin, Regina, and 
Kenaston. 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens opposed to the 2003 premium crop insurance 
increases to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Borden and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present the petition on behalf of the citizens concerned 
with the condition of Highway 14. And your prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair this highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by people from Wilkie, Landis, Biggar, 
and Handel. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens all over the province of Saskatchewan that are 
concerned with the education tax burden to our landowners. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Prince 
Albert, Spiritwood, Shellbrook, Big River, and there’s a whole 
host of representative areas in the province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed by Saskatchewan 
people who are concerned that deregulation and privatization in 
the electrical industry is causing electrical rates to increase 
dramatically in other jurisdictions. And the prayer, Mr. Speaker, 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners humbly pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are primarily signed by 
citizens in Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the petitions presented yesterday 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received and tabled as addendums to previously tabled 
sessional papers no. 12, 13, 18, 21, 114, 116, 120, 141, and 162. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce two 
guests sitting in your west gallery, Mr. Speaker. It’s only 
unfortunate that there’s only two of them up there when there 
should be four, because their respective spouses are not able to 
be with us today. 
 
But I am referring to, first of all, Mr. Ted Bowen who is most 
famously known as the husband of esteemed mystery writer 
Gail Bowen, and also most infamously known as one of our 
caucus researchers and writers. 
 
And accompanying him today . . . And unfortunately her 
spouse, Claude, is not with us today. He’s in Nanaimo and 
people will know Claude Thompson as being the former dean 
of Arts of the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
But Phyllis Thompson is here today. She’s visiting in the 
province following her retirement, well-deserved retirement, I 
might say, to Nanaimo, BC (British Columbia). Phyllis, of 
course, used to teach English at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) and also at STM (St. Thomas More) College 
and also at St. Peter’s College in Muenster. So certainly she has 
taught her way around the province and probably taught many 
of us how to properly speak the Queen’s English. 
 
So I would ask all members of this House to give a warm 
welcome to Ted Bowen and Phyllis Thompson. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly today, I 
would like to introduce in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, two 
representatives from the wildlife federation of Saskatchewan. 
And I would ask that they stand when I say their name. 
 
First of all is Sandra Dewald. She is the acting CEO (chief 
executive officer) for the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 
She’s taken over from the Hon. Lorne Calvert, who has stepped 
down . . . or, pardon me, Lorne Scott, who has stepped down. 
And the second one, Mr. Speaker, is Pete Schlivert who is the 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

 

president of the wildlife federation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And both of them are here today because they have an interest 
in the province of Saskatchewan to deal with habitat and 
wildlife. And I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
please welcome to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to the rest of the House, I would like to 
introduce a very special group of young people from 
Saskatchewan. It’s the Association jeunesse fransaskoise and 
they’re here preparing for their fall Fransaskois Youth 
Parliament, and we have their shadow cabinet here. And they’re 
going to be doing this in mid-September. 
 
So I’d like to introduce them — and if they could stand or give 
a wave — the Vice-Premier Ministre is Renée Morissette from 
Saskatoon; the Leader of the House, Guylaine Patenaude; the 
Speaker, Louis-Philippe Dubois; the Vice-Speaker, Daniel 
Ramage; the Leader of the Opposition, Maxe 
Joanisse-Blackmore; the member of the opposition, Michaël 
Potvin; and four ministers: Renée Côté from Regina, Chantal 
Côté from Regina, and Joël Potié from Regina . . . or Saskatoon, 
and a special . . . Michel Laforge, who I happen to have taught 
in grade 1. 
 
So I’d like to ask the House to give them all a warm welcome 
and we’ll look forward to seeing you in September. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the member opposite in welcoming the students, 
Fransaskois students, to the legislature today, and I do hope you 
will enjoy the Youth Parliament later on. And I do want to 
commend you for your involvement and your interest in the 
political field. 
 
So I’d like to welcome you on behalf of the official opposition, 
and I ask all members to join me in welcoming them once 
again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all 
I’d to join with the member from Saskatoon Southeast in 
welcoming Phyllis Thompson to the legislature. I remember 
Dean Thompson and Professor Thompson from my 
involvement with the University of Saskatchewan. It’s very nice 
to see her again today. I know she’ll pass on greetings to her 
husband. 
 
And also I want to say it’s very nice to see so many young 
people in your gallery today who are interested in politics, and 
that gives us all hope for the future. 
 
And among them I also would like to introduce, Mr. Speaker, a 
young man who just graduated from Riffel High School in 
Regina, who’s Trevor Hollaway, and also his friend, Reid 
Miller. 
 

And I happen to know that Trevor is interested in politics and 
plans to study politics at the University of Regina and possibly 
study law and also has an active interest in politics. And that 
gives me a great deal of hope and it makes me glad that young 
people would be interested in politics, Mr. Speaker, and it 
should give us all hope. 
 
So I want everyone to join with me in welcoming these young 
men to the legislature today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my pleasure to make two separate introductions if I may, both 
in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all I would like to introduce to you two gentlemen who 
have travelled to join us from their home in Beiseker, Alberta. 
I’d like to introduce to all hon. members my father, Joe Hagel, 
and one of his best friends, Joe van Hee. 
 
My father and mother operated Hagel’s Hardware on Main 
Street in Beiseker, Alberta. And he did that for his entire life till 
he retired some 16 years ago. And I know all hon. members feel 
particularly privileged to be able to introduce family members 
who are very, very close and special to us to other members of 
the Assembly, and I would invite all hon. members to say 
welcome to my dad and his best friend, Joe van Hee. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when I was scrutinizing your 
gallery, I noticed that my father is not the only dad who is 
watching his son at work today; that our Page, Luke 
McWilliams, his father, John, mother, Val, and sisters, Maria 
and Kate, are also in the gallery. And if you think that that’s not 
a whole lot of pressure when you go to work and you’ve got the 
whole family there watching you, then you’ve got another think 
coming. 
 
And I think we would all want to . . . want the McWilliams to 
know their son has done an excellent job through this term and 
to extend a warm welcome to the Luke McWilliams family. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I forgot 
one name here and a very important one — Janique Dubois — 
and if she could wave. Janique, I can’t see you because of the 
clock. But she is the coordinator of this group and we will all be 
getting letters from her. So thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Willow Cree Healing Lodge 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With prayers, 
songs, drums, and dancing, the Willow Cree Healing Lodge 
was officially opened on Beardy’s/Okemasis First Nation 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

Reserve yesterday. The Hon. Wayne Easter, Solicitor General 
for Canada, along with Lucie McClung, Commissioner of the 
Correctional Service of Canada, and Chief Garnet Eyahpaise 
presided over the event. 
 
The lodge is a 40-bed, minimum-security facility for Aboriginal 
offenders located 6 kilometres west of Duck Lake. 
 
The lodge is a result of a working partnership between 
Beardy’s/Okemasis First Nation and the Government of 
Canada. The medicine wheel is incorporated in the architectural 
design of the lodge. Within the circle, five buildings 
accommodate a staff and programs. The advice of elders was an 
integral part of the design of this facility. 
 
The $6.6 million facility will receive its first offender in 
September 2002. The facility will employ 46 staff at an annual 
budget of approximately $3 million. 

 
The creation of this healing place is a tribute to our Elders. 
Without the benefit of their wisdom, (their) teachings and 
guidance, we would not be here today. Many steps were 
taken to lead us to this day. Many more will be needed as 
we continue down the . . . path (of healing). 

 
These are the words of the chief from that reserve, Chief 
Eyahpaise. I would ask all members today in the Assembly to 
please help me congratulate the Beardy’s/Okemasis First Nation 
on the opening of the Willow Cree Healing Lodge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Roughrider Statistics 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the talent in this building extends 
far beyond the walls of this Assembly. Very seriously, this 
building is loaded, Mr. Speaker. Calling this to mind is an 
article in last Sunday’s Regina Sun which features our Mr. 
Curtis Phillips, one of our commissionaires, who is one of two 
keepers of the keys to the statistical history of the Saskatchewan 
Riders . . . Roughriders. The other is Mr. Edward Yuen. 
 
As the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) of a 
constituency which is a veritable stone’s throw away from 
Taylor Field, I take a very great interest in the affairs of the 
Riders. So Curt’s compilation of stats is of more than passing 
interest to me and to all Rider fans, especially as the drive to 
Grey Cup 2003 gets well underway. 
 
Curt is the editor and author of the, quote, “Saskatchewan 
Roughrider Player Reference, 1960-1996,” which lists the 
individual statistics of every person who has played for the 
Riders for that 37-year period. He is, the article states, 
contemplating an update of his material to the present which, 
after last Thursday’s game, will no doubt include a statistic on 
heart-stopping victories achieved in the last 10 seconds of play. 
 
Mr. Yuen’s book, by the way, called 92 Years of Roughrider 
Football, includes information from 1910 when the Regina 
Rugby Club was formed to the present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members and all Rider fans appreciate 
the exhaustive and highly necessary job Curt has done for the 

Rider . . . for Rider fans, and I know we all look forward to his 
periodic dates over the coming years and very soon, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sandra Schmirler Olympic Gold Park 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, June 
14, I had the honour to be among a group of around 40 people 
who were treated to the maiden tour of the Sandra Schmirler 
Olympic Gold Park in Biggar. The informative tour gave us 
insight into the development of the park and gave explanations 
regarding the numerous plaques and accomplishments of 
Sandra and her team. 
 
The park is expecting a large number of tourists this summer 
due to the November 2002 release of the book, Sharing the 
Memories. The national attention has people passing through 
Biggar taking the time to stop and pay tribute to Sandra by 
taking in the park. 
 
Those involved with the park, in partnership with the Biggar 
Museum and Gallery offer a little more history about the 
creation of the park as well as share facts as you view Sandra’s 
memorabilia housed at the museum. 
 
The park tour not only celebrates the accomplishments of 
Sandra and her team, but it promotes the success that can occur 
when we work together. The park is sure to get a lot of attention 
and the tour guide will be getting busier come July 26 with a 
kickoff of a 10-day run of the Gold on Ice musical, the team 
Schmirler story. 
 
I’d like to encourage everyone, whether a group or an 
individual, to take a walk in the park. Planned bookings and 
information can be acquired through the Biggar Museum and 
Gallery. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Research Grants 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, a university becomes great 
because of the excellence of its teaching, how well its 
professors profess, and also because of its research, its 
contribution to the ever-expanding world of discovery and 
knowledge. 
 
My alma mater, the University of Saskatchewan, meets both of 
these criteria. On the research side, just last week it was 
announced that 10 new faculty members at the U of S received 
research grants of more than $660,000 from the Canada 
Foundation for Innovation, to carry on its research in the soil 
sciences, neurology, geological engineering, electrical 
engineering, biochemistry, veterinary pathology, and 
biomedical science, and plant science. 
 
The awards recognize the potential value to Canadians of this 
research and the direct economic and educational benefit to the 
university and to Saskatoon. This is good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know all members will join me in welcoming to the University 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

 

of Saskatchewan and congratulating the following researchers: 
Steven Siciliano, Gordon Binsted, Derek Peak, Ian Fleming, 
Judith Smits, Bill Patterson, Yu Luo, David Janz, Kirstin Bett, 
and Robert Johanson. 
 
I ask all hon. members to congratulate the University of 
Saskatchewan and these researchers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battlefords Children’s Choir 
 

Mr. Lorenz: — Mr. Speaker, the Battlefords Children’s Choir 
will be going to Ottawa in spite of not receiving a Sask Culture 
travelling grant. The Battlefords Children’s Choir was chosen to 
represent the Battlefords and the province of Saskatchewan at 
Unisong 2003 from June 27 to July 2. 
 
The Battlefords Children’s Choir was founded in 2000 by 
co-directors Dianne Gryba and JoAnne Kasper. It is a 
community-based auditioned group from . . . made up of 24 
girls and boys from the ages of 9 to 15. Twenty-one of these 
children will be travelling to Ottawa. The Battlefords Children’s 
Choir represents a group of children that participate in two 
concerts a year as well as taking part in numerous community 
events such as Remembrance Day services, Christmas carols, 
festivals, hospital auxiliary events, festivals of the trees, and the 
Kiwanis music festival. 
 
The choir has travelled to Moose Jaw, Muenster, Melfort, 
Biggar, and Saskatoon, and Regina to perform and participate in 
workshops within the province. 
 
Unisong 2003 is a special choir experience in Ottawa taking 
place from July 27 to . . . pardon me, June 27 to July 2. Choirs 
representing each province and the territories in Canada will 
perform a massive choir. This massive choir is performing three 
concerts on Canada Day at the National Arts Centre with the 
National Arts Centre Orchestra. 
 
Mr. Speaker, join me in wishing these young children their 
success in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan Festival 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, here’s another good reason for 
everyone to head to Saskatoon this summer, at a sedate 110 
kilometres an hour, please. Check out the big tent on the banks 
of the South Saskatchewan. There you and all invited guests 
once again have the choice of two Shakespearean plays 
presented by the award-winning Shakespeare on the 
Saskatchewan festival. 
 
The excitement begins the day after Canada Day and continues 
through the summer till mid-August. This summer they are 
again offering two of Shakespeare’s well loved and insightful 
plays. 
 
As You Like It is about a group of young men and women — 
much like us, Mr. Speaker, and the emphasis on the young — 
who become tired of being cooped up in a castle. They escape 

to the forest where all sorts of magical and romantic events 
occur. This is the play with the familiar speech, “All the world’s 
a stage, And all the men and women merely players.” 
 
Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan’s other play this summer is 
Measure for Measure. It’s about justice and the abuses to which 
the justice system can fall prey should power-hungry, 
self-centred individuals ever gain control. This play reminds us, 
quote: “We must not make a scarecrow of the law . . .”A lesson 
for all members, in all assemblies, on all sides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to attend Saskatoon’s 
Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan festival. Great acting, great 
fun, great plays, all in a great setting, in a great town. What 
more can you ask for? Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Summer Sizzler 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people 
in Humboldt are once again getting geared up for their annual 
summer celebration. On July 11 and 12 Humboldt will be 
hosting their annual Summer Sizzler. 
 
The event starts on Friday evening with a parade, followed by 
entertainment which includes Humboldt’s very own Beer Tent 
Gang. Saturday morning starts off with a pancake breakfast. 
Grandstand activities for Saturday include a horse show, mutton 
busting, and a sheep and goat show. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the cultural circle, the members of the 
German Heritage Society will be in costume, welcoming people 
to the quilt show and art show, yodelling, dancing, and 
storytelling. There will be activities for children — a petting 
zoo, a clown, juggler, magician, and much more. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in order to provide for some succulent dining 
for our guests, the German Heritage Society is hosting a pig 
roast. The evening will be capped off with a family dance with 
music by the Crawdaddy’s. 
 
All of this is happening in Humboldt on July 11 and 12. And I 
invite all members of the Assembly to come out to Humboldt, 
Saskatchewan’s newest and best city, and celebrate the Summer 
Sizzler with us. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Investments Corporation Advisory Committee 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday 
the Saskatchewan Party obtained and released a confidential 
government report that recommended privatizing the 
management of CIC’s (Crown Investments Corporation) 
money-losing investment portfolio. 
 
But when the Saskatchewan Party asked the minister 
responsible for CIC about this government report, the minister 
said he had never heard of it. He said he was not aware of its 
recommendations and obviously had not even read the report. 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is, who authorized the establishment 
of the advisory committee that wrote the report and why wasn’t 
the minister aware of the report’s existence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as Vice-Chair of the Crown 
Investments Corporation, I’ll respond to these questions from 
the opposition. 
 
What has happened in this instance, as in many instances, is that 
the Crown Investments Corporation has sought advice from 
prominent citizens and advisers in Saskatchewan around some 
very important issues for all people in Saskatchewan. It’s a 
process that works in a number of different ways and it’s 
something that’s an ongoing thing that happens as it relates to 
many different issues. 
 
This is what happens. On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
we work carefully and diligently with advice from many 
different places because that’s the only way that you can make 
things better, that you can improve things, and that’s what we 
are doing here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the reality 
is we’ve seen an NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
stumbling every step of the way through this session, Mr. 
Speaker: confusion, cover-ups, scandals, investigations, 
inquiries, and misleading statements. 
 
Yesterday in the legislature I asked the Premier if he had 
appointed this secret committee to advise on how to fix the 
mismanagement at CIC. Here’s what the Premier said, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . to be very, very clear, the advisory committee to the 
Crown Investments Corporation . . . was established by 
order in council. 

 
And the Premier also said and I quote: 
 

. . . this committee was established by an order in council 

. . . Order in councils are debated and approved at the 
cabinet table. 

 
When the Premier said that, the Minister of CIC was there and 
shaking his head. Mr. Speaker, that isn’t true. In fact if the 
cabinet didn’t approve it and neither the Premier nor the 
minister was aware of the report, who authorized the committee 
to do this work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s offensive when that 
member knows the answer, and he got the answer yesterday that 
there was a misquote by the Premier around certain points, and 
that he then — and it was clarified within minutes — that he 
then comes forward today with something that is different . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, order. Order. 
Order, order. Order. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, that issue was clarified 
yesterday. 
 
But one thing that has not been clarified yesterday or today — 
and I ask that member and the member from Swift Current to 
clarify today — is how come they have a document which was 
clearly marked as for draft discussion, for discussion purposes, 
and all of a sudden it doesn’t have that on there? Who altered 
that document? 
 
It was part of a process that has been . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, that line of questioning 
yesterday and the continuing line of questioning today goes 
right to the heart of what the next election is going to be about, 
is who do you trust. And I say to the people, the people of 
Saskatchewan do not trust that member and other people who 
are working with him because of the continued examples we’ve 
seen in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, the 
longer the gong show goes on on the other side of the House, 
the more brown envelopes we’re going to get revealing the 
mismanagement of the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, first the Premier says that 
the appointment of the advisory committee recommending the 
privatization of CIC III’s (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Industrial Interests Inc.) management was made 
by a cabinet order after a vigorous debate. And the Premier 
insisted that there was vigorous debate around the cabinet table. 
He said that the CIC minister was fully engaged in the debate. 
 
Then moments later, as the minister indicated, he admitted that 
none of what he had just said was true, because as it turns out, 
cabinet neither debated nor had authorized the establishment of 
this committee. And the CIC minister admitted that he was 
unaware that the committee had even written a report. 
 
So the question remains: who’s running the show over at CIC? 
Is it the minister? Is it the Premier? Who authorized the secret 
committee report and then kept the contents of the report secret 
from the Minister of CIC? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what happens with this 
government is that we work together with the leading citizens 
of this province, with the leading experts of this province, with 
the leading experts of this country to continue to develop public 
policy. And what we do is seek advice in various forums. 
 
We talk about it, we discuss it, we deal with it in many places. 
And we don’t deal with reports that are just in a draft or 
discussion format until we’ve had . . . been assured that the 
people, the well-respected people of this province who provided 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

 

that kind of discussion report, are finished with it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I don’t like to hear from the members 
on that side of the House is anything about being . . . doing 
things in secret. We know the source of their party; it was 
formed in secret. We know the kinds of things that they do to 
duly elected members of their caucus who are supposed to be 
their candidates. We want nothing of that. The people of 
Saskatchewan want nothing of that member and his party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Performance of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan have observed that the NDP has had a truly 
dismal session. If the NDP wasn’t apologizing for something 
that they did, then they were refusing to comment because of 
. . . because they were under investigation for something that 
they did. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even the Premier’s dismal performance 
yesterday in the Assembly seemed to be a fitting end to the 
session that we’ve just seen. The Premier, in this House, denied 
that he called the nuclear industry a dirty industry. Then he had 
to admit that he said it was the dirtiest industry. The Premier 
tried to claim that a third party had reviewed the disastrous 
mega bingo issue. Then he had to admit in the House that there 
was no third party review. Mr. Speaker, the Premier sat in this 
House and claimed that his budget was balanced. And then he 
had to get up a few minutes later and admit that the province 
was sinking deeper into debt and the budget wasn’t balanced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier finally admit that his government 
has lost control? No one is running the ship over there. Mr. 
Speaker, he’s lost control of his cabinet, his government. Will 
the Premier simply call an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the privilege of 
sitting in this House now for the better part of 12 years, and 
expect to sit into the future, Mr. Speaker, in this House. And 
I’ve witnessed the estimates in this House, Mr. Speaker, over 
that period of time. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
yesterday in this Assembly, I saw some of the most dismal — 
dismal — pathetic exercise of asking questions in estimates that 
I’ve seen in the entire time that I’ve been here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Any time that you have a member opposite, Mr. Speaker, who 
is . . . touts the language, Mr. Speaker, that he wants to be the 
former . . . or the premier of this province; and to watch, Mr. 
Speaker, the kinds of language that he used in this Assembly 
yesterday where you take 15 minutes of estimates, Mr. Speaker, 
to read two letters that are by constituents from across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. That is why in this province today, Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at what Saskatchewan people are 
saying, is that they do not trust the Leader of the Opposition; 
they don’t like the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker; and 
that’s why he trails his party by 20 points, Mr. Speaker. And by 
the next election, they’ll have him gone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Support for Beef Industry 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, that member from Regina South 
ought to be informed that the member from Estevan is absent 
today because her father is on his deathbed. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Members 
are not to . . . Order. Order, members. Order. Order. I’ll just 
remind members, they are not to refer to the absence or 
presence of members in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for CIC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago, CIC spent $20 million to 
buy a 35 per cent share in Centennial Foods. Centennial Foods 
is one of the largest hamburger makers in the country with a 
major plant right in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm that Centennial Foods is 
still using a large percentage of imported beef, beef imported 
from the US (United States), Australia, and New Zealand in the 
production of its hamburgers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is true that in 
this country we do import American beef. American beef, Mr. 
Speaker, has been imported into Saskatchewan and into Canada 
for years. The level of import today is, I can report, Mr. 
Speaker, is even higher than what it was during the same period 
last year, partly because of the issue of the BSE (bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy) today. 
 
And when the member opposite asks the question about 
whether or not we have a higher beef import into Saskatchewan 
today or into Canada today, at the present time the answer is 
that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan is a major shareholder in Centennial Foods. The 
Saskatchewan Party believes that everyone in our province 
should be doing all they can to support our beef industry in this 
time of crisis. It seems to me that whenever possible we should 
be using Canadian beef. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are currently unable to sell our beef into the 
United States and to other markets. There’s a glut of beef on the 
Canadian market and our cattle industry is suffering. So why is 
the government still using imported beef in its 
government-owned hamburger plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what happens 
is that when the United States supplies beef to this country and 
when we have supplies that are coming into this country that are 
purchased by retail outlets across this country . . . in this 
province, they don’t examine, Mr. Speaker, in which specific 
venue they make their way into, Mr. Speaker. We have a trade 
agreement with the United States today, and we sell more into 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

the United States today, Mr. Speaker, as exporters, than we 
import into the United States — and have for some time, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of total, in terms of total exports and imports, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t examine today — and 
we will into the future, Mr. Speaker — determine the amount of 
beef that’s going to be making its way into the US. We can 
determine, Mr. Speaker, not to bring any more beef into this 
country from the US, Mr. Speaker. We can determine that. 
 
But as I’ve said to other people on many occasions, we have a 
huge, huge need to be a partner of the US, a huge need. And 
they are our greatest ally today in terms of our export. And the 
minute that we start to poke them in the eye, Mr. Speaker, in a 
major way, if you want to poke them in the eye on beef, then 
you need to remember what will happen with the gas and oil 
industry, Mr. Speaker, with the grain industry. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that maybe your . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, there may be good reasons for 
using imported beef under normal conditions, but these are not 
normal conditions. The border’s closed, Canadian producers 
can’t sell our beef, and there’s a glut on the market. 
 
A week ago producers got together in Moose Jaw and sold 
thousands of pounds of beef at $1 a pound. Hundreds of people 
came out to buy the beef to support our cattle industry. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve spoken to many people who tell me they are 
actually eating more beef than ever before as their way of 
supporting the cattle industry. Yet our own government is still 
using imported beef in its hamburger plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me the government could be doing 
more to support our cattle industry by switching to 100 per cent 
Canadian beef, at least until the borders are reopened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government still using imported beef in 
its government-owned hamburger plant? When will this 
government begin to walk the walk and not just talk the talk 
when it comes to supporting our beef industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s exactly why — that’s exactly why, 
Mr. Speaker — yesterday in our discussion in this House, or in 
our debate about how we deal with international trade, this 
brochure from the Saskatchewan Party that’s being circulated in 
Regina and across the province as part of their campaign clearly 
shows, clearly shows, Mr. Speaker, about how little they know 
about international trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, by the question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
(14:15) 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — By the position and point that’s been made 
by the member from Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker, clearly 
indicates that they have absolutely no appreciation or 
understanding of how international trade works, Mr. Speaker. 
And so the member opposite thinks that he’s sitting in his chair 
from Thunder Creek can turn off the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. The Minister of 
Agriculture has the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . but, Mr. Speaker, that somehow a 
individual province can turn off the tap and, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms in their relationship with some of their greatest partners to 
the south. This is what the member advocates. 
 
And I expect that he would advocate that we do that for 
softwood, Mr. Speaker, and I expect that he would advocate 
that we do that for the cow, for the beef industry. I would 
expect . . . he says we should do that for the oil and gas 
industry, Mr. Speaker, and in the potash industry. That’s what 
they advocate. 
 
That can’t work, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why they are sitting 
over there and will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wildlife Habitat Land 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Environment minister. 
 
In 1995 the NDP passed legislation to protect critical habitat 
wildlife land across Saskatchewan. But then in 1997, the NDP 
passed new regulations allowing them to remove that protected 
status and use these sensitive lands to settle treaty land 
entitlement negotiations. And last week, the minister admitted 
he was using 97,000 acres of critical habitat wildlife land to do 
just that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what changed between 1995 and today that made 
the NDP decide these sensitive leased lands no longer needed to 
be protected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I stand in this 
Assembly saying that as part of government we will work very 
hard and diligently with the First Nations to make sure that we 
follow through with the agreements and the contracts that we 
are signatory to. 
 
I would point out to that member that we have withdrawn the 
wildlife habitat protection land for three groups, Mr. Speaker: 
one being the First Nations; second group being the RMs (rural 
municipality); and the third group being some of the lessees that 
have land that butt up next to the wildlife habitat protection 
lands. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, yes, we have withdrawn 97,000 acres of land 
from the wildlife habitat land but there are three groups that 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

 

have benefited, Mr. Speaker, and albeit that the majority of that 
land was for First Nations, there are three distinct groups. And I 
would ask that member and that party why they focus attention 
on the First Nations partners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, the member just said he 
withdrew them. When did he do that? As of just last week he 
didn’t know anything about this and now he stands up and says 
he withdrew it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s approximately 3.4 million acres of land 
currently protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 
The vast majority of this land is currently leased to cattle 
producers who do an excellent, an excellent job of managing 
and protecting these sensitive areas. 
 
But cattle producers are not allowed to purchase any of this land 
that is leased, that is protected under The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act. But the minister has admitted that the NDP will 
sell at least 97,000 acres of land as part of the settlement to 
satisfy TLE (treaty land entitlement) negotiations. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker: why is the NDP treating this 
protected lands differently when they are dealing with cattle 
producers who lease the land than they do when the government 
is negotiating TLE settlements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons 
why that Leader of the Opposition’s at 27 per cent in the polls 
in terms of trying to be the leader, and falling, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s why that party’s going to fall, fall, and fall steady, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s because they come along, they have no solutions, they have 
no idea what it takes to govern this great province, and all 
they’re trying to do is to divide and conquer people, Mr. 
Speaker. That doom and gloom is not going to work. 
 
We have, and we will continue forwarding, plans to protect 3.4 
and 3.5 millions of . . . million acres of this great province 
under wildlife habitat protection, Mr. Speaker. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, if we don’t do it next, we’re going to do it the week 
after, or very shortly thereafter, is we’re going to add another 
50,000 acres to the wildlife habitat protection lands to make 
sure that the spirit and intent behind this Act is being followed 
through. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, I say shame on that party and 
shame on that member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

Water and Sewer Infrastructure 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, now the 
NDP is angering even their own dwindling congregation of 
supporters. Monday night, the Minister of the Environment sent 
an official to the North Battleford City Council to read the riot 
act to them because they hadn’t started the new sewage 

treatment plant. 
 
While he threatened and bullied the city council, he did not 
offer one red cent to construct the new sewage treatment plant 
to replace the one that the provincial government built for Sask 
Hospital, upstream from the water intake, many years ago. This 
angered Councillor Len Taylor who said, just write the cheque 
if you want it built. 
 
My question for the Minister of the Environment is, how many 
other communities will be faced with the same problem of 
having SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) order and bully them around while giving no help 
to them to meet their responsibilities? Or will he take 
Councillor Taylor’s recommendation and write the cheque? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important 
that we point out is that paramount to our responsibility as the 
minister is to make sure that we look after public safety, Mr. 
Speaker. What is not important to us is to do any prosecution or 
to bully or to threaten, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have constantly worked with the city of North Battleford, as 
we’ll work with other cities to make sure that public safety is 
protected, Mr. Speaker. That’s a very important role. And we 
will not take any chances, Mr. Speaker, with the safety of the 
Saskatchewan public. We will work with all the communities 
involved. We’ve maintained that. There’s good co-operation, 
there’s good progress being made. And I would ask that 
member not to interfere on a political basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Waiting Lists for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, despite the new injections of 
money from Ottawa, there continues to be an eight-month 
waiting list for MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) in this 
province, and our MRIs operate for as little as 40 hours a week. 
Access is a Catch-22 — a patient can be bumped up on a 
waiting list if he or she can prove that their case is critical, but 
they can’t prove their case is critical until they have the MRI, 
and it takes to eight months to get the MRI. 
 
My question for the minister: when he is going to relieve 
patients? When is he going to institute a two-week waiting list 
for doctor-ordered MRIs? Or is he going to recommend that 
patients in Saskatchewan who are in critical need of immediate 
MRIs travel to Alberta and pay for it themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to respond to this 
question. We are working hard with our surgical care registry 
and it’s now being implemented right across the province. The 
next project is the diagnostic services the member’s talking 
about, so that we can deal with these things in the same way 
whereby we have a fair, open system that everybody will 
understand in how things are assessed so that the people can get 
the care that they need when they need it. Our system is 
designed to provide the urgent emergency care very quickly, 
and we deal with all of these cases on a basis that has very clear 
standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we’re going to do in this 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

province, we’re going to continue to do, is we’re going to 
continue to expand the access right across the province. We 
announced the Moosomin hospital this morning. We announced 
the work in Outlook previously. We are going to continue to 
work despite that member’s Liberal friends in Ottawa who 
don’t step up to the plate and give us all the money we need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New Integrated Health Care Facility for Moosomin 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 
rise today to inform the members of the Legislative Assembly 
about an important announcement. 
 
This morning I had the opportunity to visit Moosomin, and on 
behalf of the Premier, the Government of Saskatchewan, and 
Saskatchewan Health I was extremely pleased to announce that 
Saskatchewan Health is giving its approval for the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Regional Health Authority to proceed with a new 
85-bed integrated health care facility in Moosomin. 
 
The new health care facility will replace the existing Moosomin 
Union Hospital, the Eastern Saskatchewan Pioneer Home, and 
the Eastern Saskatchewan Pioneer Lodge into one integrated 
facility, Mr. Speaker. The new health care facility will provide 
better coordination of acute care, long-term care, home care, 
and a wide range of community services in one facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project is one of the commitments made in 
this government’s Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care 
which the Premier and I were pleased to announce in December 
2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on budget day we announced that $61 million 
would be allocated over the next two years for new and 
upgraded health care facilities in Saskatchewan. This significant 
commitment allows us to approve and support a number of new 
projects such as this one that are necessary to sustain our 
province’s health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this approval to proceed to the next stages of the 
project in Moosomin will allow the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Regional Health Authority and the community planning groups 
of Moosomin and surrounding areas to build on the work 
already done to ensure the new integrated health care facility in 
their community becomes a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to commend the community for 
fundraising efforts that are nothing short of outstanding. 
Moosomin and surrounding area residents have raised more 
than $6.2 million for this project. Their creativity has been 
nationally recognized and is a great example for other 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Moosomin’s new health care facility will deliver a wide range 
of health care services all under one roof. This will not only 
benefit residents in the area requiring health care services, but 
will also provide an improved workplace for our valued health 
care providers in this region. 
 

The Regina Qu’Appelle Regional Health Authority and its 
community partners are very close to completing their 
functional plan and design of this project. The next step is the 
construction phase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the end result will be a modern, attractive facility 
providing high-quality health care services to the residents of 
Moosomin and area and a more efficient and practical 
workplace for their valued health care providers. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take a moment to first of all acknowledge the efforts of the 
community of Moosomin and the surrounding area. 
 
And through the past number of years, Mr. Speaker, this 
community and many communities around, as well as every 
RM in the surrounding areas and in the western side of 
Manitoba, have worked very diligently, worked very hard, put a 
lot of effort into raising the necessary funds locally to indeed 
move a project of this nature forward. 
 
And so, for the community of Moosomin and surrounding area, 
Mr. Speaker, the announcement this morning was something 
that was really welcome and I know the residents of that 
community have been working very hard for this specific 
announcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this hospital is important because it’s going to 
meet the needs of the people of that area — and not only that 
area, Mr. Speaker, but play a very integral part in the delivery 
of health care services in the province of Saskatchewan as we 
look at trying to meet the needs of long waiting lists that have 
grown through the past number of years. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve talked about this, of how we can utilize service facilities 
such as Moosomin to indeed address the long waiting lists by 
utilizing the excellent health care staff that we have in that 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I was unable to attend this 
morning’s official announcement as the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, a month ago, had extended an 
official invitation through the community of Kipling to join 
with him to officially cut the ribbon opening the new water 
treatment facility in the community of Moosomin. 
 
So while I was able to join with the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, Mr. Speaker, it was unfortunate that, 
while the Minister of Health did give me a heads-up the other 
day, there was no official invitation certainly extended to me at 
that time. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, however, I must say, for the community of 
Moosomin, this announcement is important and I’m pleased to 
see that this announcement has been made and that construction 
will begin on a hospital that has been long overdue in that 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased today to 
stand once again on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions number 775 through 781 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 775 to 781 have been submitted. 
 
(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my immediate left is Al Willcocks, who’s the director of our 
forest ecosystems branch; directly behind me is Lian Schwann, 
who is with Justice. To my immediate right is Bob Ruggles, our 
assistant deputy minister. And of course directly next to Ms. 
Schwann is Paul Osborne, with the Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs. And I wanted to make sure for the record 
that I mention Ms. Schwann’s name twice, Mr. Chair, because I 
think it’s very important to . . . three times now, that’s right. 
Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials here today on the passing of Bill 43, 
The Forest Resources Management Act. 
 
I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, can you give us a brief 
overview of the Bill in the context of what it is? And the reason 
I ask for this, Mr. Minister, is because to many of the people in 
the forestry industry they have some concerns even though they 
understand that the Bill must be passed because they believe the 
biggest portion of this Act is a good portion of legislation that 
needed to be addressed to solve the softwood lumber issue that 
we have in the province. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, could you give us a brief overview of the 
Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Thanks to the member for the question. 
 
First of all I want to point out that some of the points that we 
raised in our second reading of the amendments for the forest 
management Act, most of us know that these amendments are 
intended to assist Saskatchewan in negotiating a timely 
resolution to the softwood lumber trade dispute with the US. 
And as most of us are aware in the House, in the Assembly, 
Saskatchewan’s forest industry plays a critical role in the 
economic well-being of our province and the production of 
softwood lumber is a large piece of that industry, each year 

producing almost 415 million board feet valued at nearly $150 
million. 
 
So I think the purpose of the amendments is to make sure that 
we position our forestry companies and our province to take 
advantage of this changed circumstance window — if you 
wanted to characterize it as a window — to continue to resume 
softwood trade with the US in a sense that we don’t have these 
huge levies and these huge countervail duties that impede our 
forest resources development strategy. 
 
So clearly, Mr. Chairman, the amendments here are intended to 
gain access to the American market and in collaboration with 
the Department of Commerce to make sure that our forest 
industry continues remaining strong and vital in our province. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, and 
regarding consultation with the forestry industry itself, I know 
you’ve done some work in that regards to the forestry industry 
regarding the potential for this Act being legislation that’s 
needed right now. 
 
Have you been in contact with the forestry industry in regarding 
the regulations of this Bill? And to my knowledge this is where 
a lot of the problem lies with the Bill is the fact that a lot of the 
forestry people in this industry have some problems with the 
regulations of this Bill. Can you comment on that please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out the obvious answer is, of course. We want to 
deal with industry; we’re working very closely with industry. 
And as we speak we have officials meeting with the industry on 
a regular basis. 
 
And I’m prepared to certainly to share a letter that we’ve got 
from the Council of Saskatchewan Forest Industries, which I 
think represents somewhere around the neighbourhood of 85, 
90 per cent of the industry, in which they make reference to the 
Bill. 
 
And so the collaboration that we have with industry is so very, 
very important for us to gain access to the market. We 
obviously can’t do it in a vacuum. So in terms of having a 
relationship with the forestry industry, as minister of, I’ve made 
reference to a number of telephones calls I’ve made to various 
members involved with the industry. 
 
And those discussions have happened with people like COSFI 
(Council of Saskatchewan Forest Industries) and like 
Weyerhaeuser. And I would like to share a comment, a couple 
of places where we’ve highlighted in the letter from the Council 
of Saskatchewan Forest Industries, incorporated. And I quote: 
 

However as we stated in our last letter, the status quo is not 
an option at this time. We must move forward to meet as 
best we can the challenges now facing the softwood lumber 
industry in this Province. Unfortunately, Bill 43 is a 
required part in meeting these challenges. 
 
We have received assurances from your Department that 
they will continue to consult with the Forest Industry in this 
Province as this matter continues — both . . . (to) the 
drafting of the regulations to (supporting your) . . . 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

legislation and any negotiations that take place on (the) 
implementation of these changes. We have accepted those 
assurances. 

 
I think those two paragraphs are really . . . amount to the 
amount of work that our officials have done on this matter. We 
have good collaboration with the industry. As the minister, we 
have assured industry that we are going to collaborate with 
them because after all we both have the same objective. And 
that is to protect the forestry industry in this province. 
 
They realize our role. We certainly realize their role. And 
together we understand that in order for us to be successful in 
our efforts, we have to gain access to the American market. And 
that’s specifically and really the purpose of us moving forward 
on this particular Bill. 
 
We have an incredible opportunity and the more we wait, the 
less that opportunity diminishes. And that’s why it’s with 
urgency and haste that we want to move forward to take 
advantage of this window of opportunity. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. 
You have quoted from that letter from the forestry industry. 
And would you be, Mr. Minister, would you be at this time able 
to table that letter to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, I have no problem 
tabling this letter and I would ask one of the pages to take the 
letter and give me back the original to make sure I don’t lose 
my highlighted spot. And again thank the member for his 
interest in the correspondence. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, please. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you 
for tabling that. 
 
I listened very carefully to the comments you made, addressing 
from that letter. And I find that in the letter it does state that this 
Bill is of importance. But I also found that, in my consultation 
with the forestry industry myself, that they have some problems 
with regulations. 
 
Has there . . . another letter of support that you have that would 
reiterate the fact that there are some problems with regulations? 
And the reason I’m asking this, Mr. Minister, is the fact that if 
there is and we identify in the Bill that there is, how closely is 
your department and the forestry industry working right now to 
identify those regulation problems? And how will you address 
them so that the forestry industry in this province understand 
the regulations and have some input into it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairman, it’s 
very, very important that the opposition understands that this is 
certainly a crucial part of the discussion that is necessary to 
ensure successful resolution to this whole softwood dispute. 
 
Now I think that member is intelligent enough to know that 
what you don’t want to do is negotiate in a public forum 
because obviously negotiations should happen certainly at the 
table with legal counsel and certainly with industry and 
certainly with representatives of government and certainly 
technicians and bureaucrats and professional people that 

understand what is at stake. 
 
And certainly I defer a lot of the vision and the work and the 
necessary effort to that table of professional people that have 
been intricately involved with this particular matter. And as 
minister we have them enjoy our confidence and we know that 
they’ll position Saskatchewan interests well. And as minister I 
know that there’s an opportunity here so we wanted to make 
sure we take advantage of the opportunity as quickly as we can. 
 
So I want to again assure that member that regulations in terms 
of working with the industry is certainly a premise of us moving 
forward. And again I share a second letter, and I quote from the 
second letter from Weyerhaeuser, and the quote is as follows: 
 

We propose that Weyerhaeuser and the Council of 
Saskatchewan Forest Industries . . . work closely with 
Saskatchewan Environment in the development of the 
Regulations and a review of the clauses of Bill 43 that will 
in fact be necessary to achieve a ruling of changed 
circumstance in the softwood lumber dispute. 

 
And the second part of the letter I want to quote is: 
 

We propose that Weyerhaeuser and COSFI representatives 
accompany and support you in your discussions with the 
Department of Commerce. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that we have made the offer to industry 
that we will work very closely with them on the development 
and implementations of the rules and regulations that may 
accompany our effort to try and get access to the American 
market and some of the conditions that they apply to us. And 
that work will certainly be something that we’ll undertake most 
seriously and very quickly. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I believe that both 
Weyerhaeuser and COSFI have named representatives from 
their appropriate organization to ensure that they do have that 
participation. 
 
So again I would point out that we want to take advantage of 
this opportunity. BC and Ontario are moving. Saskatchewan 
wants to move, and I’d urge the opposition to join us and let’s 
move this Bill through and give Saskatchewan forest industry 
the needed access to the American market as quickly as we can. 
Because you must strike when the iron’s hot and when the 
opportunity’s there, and that opportunity is now. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. Mr. 
Minister, you have again quoted from a letter and if it would be 
your pleasure to please table that letter in the House so that the 
opposition may also be able to peruse your comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — That letter is so tabled. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
part of the letter that has been sent to you by the Council of 
Saskatchewan Forest Industry, incorporated: 
 

For example, some parts of this legislation may unduly 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

 

affect the rights and obligations contained in existing 
licenses issued by the Province — and it has been these 
licenses that have been the basis over the past several years 
for the making of decisions by industry to invest capital in 
these new mills and . . . (to) improvements to existing 
processing facilities in Saskatchewan. The . . . (uncertainty) 
provided by these licenses will (surely) be (eroded) 
considerably eroded. 

 
Mr. Minister, can you comment on that part of the letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, it’s very important that 
I reiterate to the opposition is that we have given assurances — 
and you can quote the minister in this Hansard — that we’ve 
given assurance to the industry. We’re going to work very 
closely with them on the rules and regulations. 
 
What we’re trying to do . . . This whole process is a enabling 
process in order for us and our negotiating team to gain access 
to the American market. What we’re not trying to do is we’re 
not trying to redraft FMAs (forest management agreement). 
We’re not trying to put our partners, which is industry, at a 
disadvantage. 
 
We are clearly here to move forward and to address this issue 
once and for all. It’s been 20-some years we’ve been having 
these difficult challenges. We want to find a lasting solution. 
And in order for us to do this, we have to work with the 
industry. And we’ve given that assurance by telephone call to 
COSFI, to Weyerhaeuser, to many of the groups that have been 
involved. And we will continue assuring them publicly that our 
intent is to work very closely with industry — and I’ll say it 
again, very close with industry — on the development of the 
rules and regulations. 
 
All we’re trying to do is take advantage of the changed 
circumstance window of opportunity here with the Americans 
to position our forestry companies to have that access — that 
access — for many, many years to the American market. And I 
would ask the members of the opposition to join me and to put 
this Bill through as quickly as we can because as we speak, BC 
and Ontario have moved. We want to move faster than that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Chair. I welcome those remarks that you have just made 
because it is our job as opposition to find out, when any Bill 
comes forward, to find the good and the bad. And I’m not 
saying that there is no good, because there is. We both know it 
and we need to move forward with the Bill, and we will be 
moving forward today and passing this Bill. 
 
We are only doing our job, Mr. Minister, as opposition because 
there are concerns out there. You’ve reconciled that there is 
concerns out there. We have letters stating that there are 
concerns out there. 
 
All I’m asking or was asking is the fact that you will work 
diligently with the forestry industry, who are the people that 
work in this province in the forestry industry, to make sure they 
can sustain a living and sustain a business that will go forward 
in this province. And the government and the forestry industry 
have to work together on these regulations to see that this 

industry will stay afloat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I absolutely agree 
and concur with the statements of that member and to point out 
that what we’re here to do, and certainly as minister 
responsible, is to find a lasting resolution. And I have every 
great confidence that the industry will rise to the occasion and 
we once again will become solid trading partners with the 
Americans. 
 
And to point out that it is not by design that this Bill has come 
forward; it is by good, thorough planning. It is through 
negotiations. It doesn’t happen by accident. And certainly I 
think overall that I would like to commend our negotiating 
team. We have legal counsel in Washington. We certainly have 
professional people that have collaborated with the federal 
government on this particular matter. We have our own legal 
counsel that has ensured that Saskatchewan’s interests are 
maintained. There’s been a tremendous amount of work. 
 
And it was not by circumstance, Mr. Chairman, that the day that 
the DoC (Department of Commerce) issued their policy 
bulletin, then we collaborated or corroborated that policy 
bulletin with some of the issues brought forward with this 
forestry management Act, and lo and behold, there’s almost a 
perfect match. 
 
And what I would point out that is not by accident that that 
happened. I think that was the result of very astute planning, 
very good management of the negotiating process, good legal 
counsel both provincially and nationally, and internationally. So 
there’s been a lot of work being done, and I want to assure that 
member that we will continue to work with our industry 
because they’re very crucial partners and why would we want to 
work against a partnership that we developed over the many 
years. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And thank 
you, Mr. Minister, for leading this discussion most 
appropriately as where we want it to go. 
 
You mention the criteria that has been set out in a United States 
policy paper issued by the Department of Commerce, and 
certainly they have set forward five criteria that they would like 
to see Canadian jurisdictions meet in regards to overcoming the 
softwood tariff that has been applied against — and we all 
agree, we believe to be unduly — against certainly 
Saskatchewan softwood. 
 
Mr. Minister, though, in this Bill . . . And some concerns have 
been raised by my colleague from Shellbrook-Spiritwood that 
the Bill has some shortfalls in it. And as we look at the 
conditions set out by the Department of Commerce in the 
United States, is that they have set, set five criteria. And we are 
only able to ascertain by going through the Bill and working 
with our colleagues in the forestry sector, is that this Bill may 
only be addressing three of the criteria that have been set out by 
DoC. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you be able to comment please as to how 
your department is going address the concerns of the forestry 
sector when the DoC has set out five criteria and this Bill 
appears to be only addressing three of them. 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
To the hon. member, I would point out as well that I think it’s 
very important that there are six conditions that the DoC 
bulletin has identified. We have taken the position that, from 
our perspective, we will address all or part of the conditions to 
make sure that we sufficiently position Saskatchewan’s interests 
to satisfy DoC’s concerns. We feel it’s a very confident process 
that we can achieve this goal. 
 
Obviously we have to put a package together and apply for the 
changed circumstances opportunity, and once that is done then 
we’ll certainly with haste put an application in and hopefully 
resolve this matter for many years to come. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, is 
there discussions going on in your department that because you 
feel you only need to address some of the concerns raised by 
DoC that that’ll be adequate? Or do you feel as though that this 
is only a first step but eventually in the near term the 
Government of Saskatchewan is going to have to be able to . . . 
going to have to come with further strengthening of this Act in 
order to address all the concerns by DoC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I just want to 
point out one of the things is that we have constructed the Bill 
to make sure that we follow through with the conditions that we 
have to meet. Again those discussions through the application 
and further negotiating that is necessary, that’ll certainly unfold 
as to what is necessary for us to do to gain access to the 
American market. And those discussions are proceeding well 
and we’re very confident we can achieve this. 
 
I would point out that one of the things . . . this whole process 
enables us to position Saskatchewan well. And that, I think in a 
nutshell, clearly provides us with some flexibility, if you will, in 
trying to position Saskatchewan’s interests ahead of BC’s and 
Ontario’s, not in the sense that we want to diminish their role 
but certainly want to protect our share of the market as well. 
And we’re very confident we can do that. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, is this 
changes to the Act to give the federal government more 
leverage in negotiations? Or is the changes to the Act to ensure 
that our forestry sector and that the Government of 
Saskatchewan would be carrying the lead role to ensure that the 
softwood tariff that has been applied against Saskatchewan 
softwood lumber will be . . . can be dealt with unilaterally? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
That was certainly a very interesting question in the sense that I 
want to clarify that, first of all since the province has 
jurisdiction over, you know, over the resources, we have 
certainly the lead role to play on the legislation. So every 
province must do their own Act; legislation is very, very 
important for this. 
 
And the duties will be lifted on a province-by-province basis 
once it is decided that we have satisfied DoC’s needs, and that’s 
one of the reasons why as a province you want to move very 
quickly. 
 

Overall the federal government, as you know, there are two 
different tracks that we’ve undertaken. This one track is the 
negotiations track and the other, of course, is to the World 
Trade Organization, the WTO track, the litigation track. 
 
And the federal government is responsible for the overall 
process in the sense that they would look at the litigation of the 
WTO track; look at things, for example, like interim measures 
such as the duties versus the Canadian export tax. These are 
some of the roles that the federal government would play and 
whereas we wouldn’t play. 
 
So overall they’re responsible for the entire package, but 
province by province we’re striking our own Act. We’re doing 
our own changed circumstance application. We have 
responsibility for the resources. 
 
So we have a very good collaboration, very good contact with 
the federal government to ensure that we position 
Saskatchewan’s interests and to ensure that the other interests of 
the nation are overall collaborated, in the fashion that we put 
forward a fairly good package on behalf of Canadians overall. 
We understand that role and we’ve collaborated very well with 
the federal government. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, had 
discussions gone on in your department to bring forward a 
comprehensive enough Bill that would ensure that 
Saskatchewan foresters would have a distinct advantage over 
our interprovincial competitors rather than coming with what 
you feel is just enough and allowing the federal government to 
negotiate from that position for us? 
 
We’re trying to understand, Mr. Minister, is that if the Bill 
would have been comprehensive enough to address, very 
clearly, very succinctly, Mr. Minister, all the concerns raised by 
DoC, is that Saskatchewan would have been in a distinct 
advantage over all our competitors to have the trade injury tariff 
dropped. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
We would point out that it’s very, very important that of course 
we are certainly . . . Paramount to us is protecting 
Saskatchewan’s interests, but working really closely, you know, 
with other provinces as well. 
 
So the Bill that we have designed is clearly to, we feel, have the 
contents to deal fairly and flexibly . . . or with flexibility to 
make sure that we get rid of the duties and that we have good 
free and fair trade with the Americans. And that’s what the 
Bill’s designed to do. And we feel, given all the components of 
the Bill, that our negotiators can position Saskatchewan well. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well I thank you, Mr. Minister, for the 
clarifications on the Bill as a whole. What I would like to do at 
this time, Mr. Chair, is as you’re reading the Bill down, when 
we come to certain different sections, I would like to interject at 
that time and just read in some information regarding that. And 
that gives you an opportunity to explain at that time. Would that 
be all right, Mr. Minister? 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, may I try to get some clarification 
from the minister on clause 4? Is it too late? 
 
The Chair: — Is leave granted for the member to ask questions 
on clause 4? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank 
you to the colleagues in the House here. 
 
Mr. Minister, in clause 4 when we’re referring to the licensing 
of our forests for harvesting purposes, this clause as I 
understand it is to harvest forest products. And as we know, Mr. 
Minister, there’s a multitude of products that are coming out of 
our forests and yet we’re trying to understand it, and we’ve 
been working this afternoon that this Bill is to do somewhat 
exclusively with the softwood lumber issue. 
 
And why then is there in this clause the broad spectrum of 
licensing for all of the forest products when the hardwoods of 
course are not subject to the trade tariff vis-à-vis the OSB 
(oriented strand board) products and certainly some of the 
softwood products such as the ply boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I’ll just point out is that as you allocate FMAs . . . We 
don’t allocate an FMA separate for softwood sawlogs or for 
hardwood. An FMA is allocated for an entire forest. 
 
And thus in terms of discussion, just to point out that while the 
agreement is specific for softwood through rules and 
regulations, we’ll certainly work our way through those 
processes. We’ve agreed you know to do that. But again the 
FMA that we’re making reference to talks about both hardwood 
and softwood and we don’t have a separate FMA for hardwood 
and a separate FMA for hardwood . . . softwood. It’s an entire 
forest as a whole. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. In clause 5, I guess this is the one where we want to 
start getting into some more . . . the more specific nuts and bolts 
of this Bill. 
 
And it talks about the minister may invite offers to pay a bonus. 
I’m wondering if you can explain to me how the wording of this 
clause is going to help our Saskatchewan forest products . . . 
forest producers to start to work their way around this . . . the 
issues raised by DoC in regards to adequate information about 
pricing that they want provided to everyone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Clause 5 is already in the Act as section 25(1). It’s now in this 
Act because the provision section 25 was renumbered. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Minister, one of the concerns raised by 
our customer in the United States, our customers and certainly 
our competitors in the United States, is that we have a single 
establishment for stumpage fees in this province. And we’re 

wondering if clauses such as this alleviate the concerns that 
have been raised by our competitors because of . . . forest 
companies must adhere to dealing strictly with the government 
on a single basis for fees, for payback to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And with terms such as “may” in here, really leaves the clause 
very much wide open for interpretation. And we’re wondering, 
Mr. Minister, why not, when we’re looking at the concerns 
raised by DoC, this clause was not addressed in a more stronger 
form. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for your 
question. I just want to point out the Americans want 
competitive bids and that’s kind of what . . . one of the issues 
that they’ve raised. 
 
With FMAs, the new Act is stronger. Section 33, if you move 
ahead, 33.1 provides the new FMAs that must go to public 
tender. Section 25 refers to the lesser licences, TSLs (term 
supply licence) and the forest products permit. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll move on to 
section 6 here. There’s . . . We’re trying to get on record the 
thoughts of your department on why section 31 is repealed and 
the significant following has been substituted. Has this section 
been brought forward to more closely fall in line with some of 
the practices that forestry companies had been starting to do in 
this province already and the government is simply catching up 
to that practice now? Or why has this clause been amended to 
this form? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just to point out that the purpose of the 
clause is that’s one of the conditions that the Americans wanted, 
and we added that easy transferability of licence. That’s one of 
the things that the Americans wanted and it’s part of our 
negotiations, and that’s the reasons why it’s in the Bill. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To the 
minister, in clause 7 where you are repealing section 33 . . . this 
is the clause that talks about the specific putting to tender 
portions of Crown land for bid purposes, and to establish the 
benchmark for what our forest lands are worth, and getting 
beyond American fears that we are unfairly, as a government in 
Saskatchewan, subsidizing the forestry industry, as we 
understand it over here, Mr. Minister. 
 
We’re trying to understand, Mr. Minister, why your department 
was not . . . wanted to be clear in this clause the specific 
percentages, the specific percentages, Mr. Minister, of the . . . of 
our Crown leased land that would be put up for bid. And I don’t 
know what you’re looking at, Mr. Minister. Maybe you can 
clarify that also. 
 
Is there some percentages you’re looking at? Do you feel that 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

by . . . Are you going to deal with these percentages in 
regulations, and are they going to be on an annual, or a 
biannual, or a triannual basis, or what are you looking at, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I’d point out, Mr. Chairman, that we 
are fully allocated in the province of Saskatchewan. And I guess 
the answer to the question when it comes and certainly if it 
comes, and that provision is there for that purpose. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, under 
clause 8(36.1)(3) it states: 
 

Any term of a licence that requires the licensee to obtain 
the prior approval or authorization of the minister to export 
softwood sawlogs from Saskatchewan is void and of no 
effect. 

 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, is the minister giving away 
control of the export of softwood sawlogs from Saskatchewan 
in this case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just to point out that we don’t have any 
rules and regulations in reference to this particular activity. We 
don’t of course have much control over it. We understand 
there’s not much of it happening in Saskatchewan as a whole. 
So one of the conditions that DoC would like to have inserted in 
our particular forest management Act is that component as well, 
to which we are going to comply. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, just below that, no. 
(4): 
 

Any term of a licence that authorizes the minister to 
periodically review and reduce the timber volumes 
available to the licensee or to decrease the licence area, 
based on evidence that the licensee will require less timber 
than provided for pursuant to the licence, is void and of no 
effect. 

 
In regarding that, Mr. Minister, is the minister giving away his 
ability to reduce the licensee’s volume, area or volume, even if 
it is determined that the licence does not require the volume 
versus area? This means that supposedly good things for 
Saskatchewan will happen . . . happened in 1999 and will never 
happen again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer is yes. That’s one of the 
conditions that the Americans had wanted. They wanted the 
minimum cut process done away with, and so that process was 
to satisfy the Americans. 
 
But clearly I think one of the things you want to do is . . . kind 
of the other issues that obviously the Americans would like to 
see other companies in the good, competitive scenarios set up in 
Saskatchewan. So I think, in terms of having a public tender on 
some of the lands that aren’t being used for a variety of reasons, 
that option is there as well. But clearly the minimum cut issue 
was as a result of some of the DoC bulletin needs that we had to 

address. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. And on 36.2 
where it states: 
 

(1) This section applies to softwood sawlogs: 
 

and 36.2(1): 
 
(a) that have been harvested 

 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, in regarding that, should that 
read unharvested instead of harvested? If you have put out the 
cost of harvesting, paying dues and fees, and hauling the wood 
home, you can bet that a person is planning to utilize it. If it is 
rotten in the yard, then no one has any concern. 
 
There should also be specific timelines laid out as to how long 
the timber can remain unharvested before the province steps in 
and forces sale on it. They’re talking somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of a five-year cycle or something like that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
We may create a . . . (inaudible) . . . of log sales in the market. 
In doing that, we may direct sale of harvested wood rather than 
unallocated wood. 
 
In order for a licensee to legally sell the wood under the Act, it 
must be harvested and the dues and fees must be paid. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. One final comment, 
Mr. Minister, under section 9(1)(f) respecting the exporting of 
forest products other than softwood sawlogs. Again, Mr. 
Minister, is this giving away some control of the export of 
Saskatchewan sawlogs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer is, if we have to. One of 
the things that’s important is we only had one load in seven 
years that has gone to the States and what we want to do at the 
end of the day is be able to control hardwood exports by 
regulation. So again, to respond to your question, the answer is, 
if we have to. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 and 11 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, to you 
and your officials, I just want to say that we’ve held this Bill up 
a little bit just for a time so that the opposition can actually get 
out there what’s actually regarding the Bill. I know there’s a 
presence out there to get this Bill forward to help with the 
problem we have with the softwood lumber issue. And I just 
want to thank the officials and you, Mr. Minister, for this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

 

Again I welcome the scrutiny of the opposition and to point out 
that the purpose of the Bill is to make sure we position 
Saskatchewan companies well. 
 
And I think one of the most important aspects that business 
would like is stability. And what I think this Bill does is 
provides that stability and assurance that the US markets will be 
there for our softwood industry for many, many years. 
 
Obviously negotiations and applications and all these processes 
have to unfold, and we’re certainly trying to move forward as 
quick as we can — and to point out that BC and Ontario have 
moved and Saskatchewan wants to move. And certainly from 
our perspective we feel the Bill is necessary and move forward 
we shall in the hopes of again making sure we position our 
forestry companies to have a lasting and profitable future in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(15:30) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to proceed to motions for returns (debatable). 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 50 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 
to motion for return (debatable) no. 1 which deals with the 
questions around the mega bingo scandal that was one of the 
major issues that was debated in this legislature this session. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is sad to say that we started questioning 
about this issue back in March in Crown Corporations 
Committee meeting, and since that time have continued to ask 
questions of the government and of the minister of Liquor and 
Gaming, and we have received a variety of answers to 
questions, or a lack of answers to questions. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there continues to be many unknowns 
around this whole issue and many questions in the minds of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the main issues is around the whole 
issue of who had the technical expertise to actually award the 
contracts, whether it was Wascana Gaming that had the 
technical expertise and that they actually awarded themselves 
the contract, or whether it was Western Canada Lottery, which 

on several instances I have written answers as well as responses 
from the minister and from his officials that indicated that the 
expertise lie within Western Canada Lottery. 
 
And yet Western Canada Lottery in their own RFP (request for 
proposal) which was put out on behalf of finding suppliers for 
mega bingo project indicates that they are not an expert in the 
work and consequently Western Canada Lottery will rely on the 
skill, expertise, judgment, and representation of the supplier. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are still ongoing questions around 
really who did have the expertise, who made the determining 
decision about who should actually be awarded the contract. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a variety of questions around 
what was the reason behind the original RFP and what was the 
additional dollars which the questions directly spoke . . . speak 
to. Question no. 1 and question no. 2 under returns (debatable) 
ask the question, why was Wascana Gaming paid an additional 
$169,500 in the year 2000-2001 and why were they paid an 
additional $254,250 in the year 2001-2002? This was after the 
mega bingo scandal, after the mega bingo project had been 
halted by the government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in one instance the answer was that the 
reason that they were paid these dollars was because they were 
part of the original RFP; that it was for the cash and paper 
management under the original RFP, which in order to be 
awarded this RFP you had to be able to answer to both the 
linked bingo game and also to provide cash and paper 
management. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know today that the cash and paper 
management part of the original RFP was never completed and 
yet the dollars were paid out. Not only were those dollars paid 
out of the original RFP of 1.2 million but additional over 
400,000 was also paid to Wascana Gaming. And at one point it 
was indicated that that was what the additional money was for, 
it was for further . . . to pay them for their work on the cash and 
paper management which we know today was never ever 
completed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at another time it was indicated by written 
answer that it was to pay for access for information that 
Wascana Gaming was able to provide about software for a new 
bingo game. And then in June, Mr. Speaker, when questioned 
by the media, minister of Liquor and Gaming nor Wascana 
Gaming would answer the question of the media, what were the 
additional dollars used for? What was the $400,000 in 
additional monies paid to Wascana Gaming, what was that to 
pay for? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there continues to be questions around 
what was the $400,000 in additional dollars that were paid to 
Wascana Gaming, what were they actually for? Who authorized 
the payment of them? What were they for? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s actually a lot of questions around the 
whole issue of Wascana Gaming. Not only do they provide 
expertise, according to their Web site, about mega bingo and 
linked bingo projects and about cash and paper management but 
they also indicate that they are experts and can provide software 
in the whole avenue and interest of electronic information for 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

election campaigns and for voter ID (identification). 
 
And if you go to their Web site, Mr. Speaker — and their one 
Web site is Wascana Gaming and it then goes to TouchStar 
Systems, which is their other parent body — and it indicates on 
their Web site that they are primarily responsible for obtaining, 
and I’m reading from their Web site: 
 

(They’re) . . . primarily responsible for obtaining patents 
for bingo cash and paper management system, and was one 
of the main architects of the interlinked bingo software 
application. 

 
Mr. Khaladkar, who is the president and CEO, indicates that he 
has also been actively involved in the development of the 
UniLink and CasePro programs and has experience in various 
election campaigns and at all levels including campaign 
manager. 
 
He further goes on to speak to what his company is all about 
and identifies what UniLink actually is and indicates that: 
 

UniLink was used in three election campaigns during the 
1999 Saskatchewan general election. The candidates who 
used UniLink outpolled their party’s performance by a 
wide margin and each of them went on to win landslide 
victories. All of them using UniLink and CasePro on a 
daily basis. 

 
And I’m quoting . . . I continue to quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

UniLink was also used in a by-election held in April 2000 
in a mixed rural/urban constituency. The candidate who 
used the software program was able to increase his showing 
from a distant third in the 1999 election to a much closer 
second place finish in the by-election. His constituency 
association will be using UniLink on an ongoing basis until 
the next election. 
 
UniLink has been endorsed as a software program of 
choice by the Canadian Labour Congress & Western 
Region, and will be made available to all of their political 
action workers in ensuing elections. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, so it brings to question the whole issue of 
. . . Because we have never received an answer to what was 
really the whole . . . what was behind the whole mega bingo 
issue. And, more importantly, Mr. Speaker, we have received a 
variety of answers to many questions bringing us to wonder, 
and the public of Saskatchewan, what is actually the answer to 
the questions that we have asked surrounding Wascana Gaming 
and, in particular, what the additional $400,000 was used for, 
what it was to pay for following the mega bingo being shut 
down in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 50 showing: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: (1) the services that were provided by Wascana 
Gaming incorporated in 2000-2001 for the 169,500 paid to 
that firm by SLGA; and (2) whether this work was awarded 
based on tender or request for proposal. 

And it was seconded by the member from Wood River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the government will provide 
the answer to the question being asked by the hon. member. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 51 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this pertains to 
the issue that I just spoke to and so I moved that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 51 showing: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: (1) the services that were provided by Wascana 
Gaming incorporated in 2001-2002 for the $254,250 paid 
to that firm by SLGA; and (2) whether this work was 
awarded based on a tender or request for proposal. 

 
And the motion is moved and seconded by the member from 
Wood River. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 52 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 52 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: in 2002-2003 (1) the 
flights that were charged to the Department of Environment 
by Courtesy Air; (2) the departure points, all stops and final 
destination of each flight; (3) the date of each flight; and 
(4) the people who were aboard each flight. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 56 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The whole issue 
around no. 4 was simply a question — and also no. 5, no. 6, and 
no. 7 — were questions asking for how many full-time 
equivalents were now working in the following branches at 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
this is a very fair question; a question that could easily have 
been answered and which the public of Saskatchewan has a 
right to know. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it brings into question why the government 
would not want to answer this question. And I wonder if it 
might be that in the last six years that office space occupied by 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming which used to be two floors 
in their office building is now four and a half floors. Is this the 
reason why the government decided that they did not want to 
answer this; they did not want the public of Saskatchewan know 
that their administration in this department is out of control and 
there is certainly blatant misuse of public money? 
 
I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 
56 showing: 
 

To the minister, Liquor and Gaming Authority: In fiscal 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

 

year 2000-2001, the number of employees and full-time 
equivalents that are found in each of the following branches 
and/or divisions of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming . . . 
 

And can I take the rest as read, Mr. Speaker? Read it all? 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to read the entire 
motion to the . . . 
 
Ms. Bakken: — 
 

In the fiscal year 2000-2001, the number of employees and 
full-time equivalents that are found in each of the following 
branches and/or divisions of the SLGA: the president’s 
office; corporate services division; financial services 
branch; management services branch; information services 
branch; special services branch; special project office; audit 
services branch; human relations division; human resources 
branch; organizational development branch; 
communications branch; policy and planning division; 
policy and legislation branch; planning and research 
branch; operations division; regional management; retail 
services branch; distribution branch; regulatory compliance 
division; liquor licensing branch; operations division, 
Saskatoon; corporate services division, Saskatoon; audit 
services branch, Saskatoon; regulatory compliance, 
Saskatoon; inspection services branch, Saskatoon; horse 
racing branch, Saskatoon; charitable gaming licensing; 
strategic services branch; compliance branch; community 
liaison branch; gaming operations branch; and Liquor and 
Gaming Licensing Commission. 
 

I move, and seconded by the member from Swift Current. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. 
member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the words “each of” be deleted. 
 

I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 
Return No. 57 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I put forward 
a written question asking for the number of employees and 
full-time equivalents that are found in each of the following 
branches of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. 
 
And as has just been indicated by the government that they are 
not willing to tell the people of Saskatchewan the number of 
employees that are in each of the following divisions, Mr. 
Speaker, that I previously read. 
 
This is the open and accountable government of the NDP that 
stand up day after day and tell us how open and accountable 

they are. And it’s something as simple as the number of 
employees that they employ at Liquor and Gaming they do not 
want to reveal to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Again it brings into question why would they not want the 
people of Saskatchewan to know how many people they employ 
in each of these branches and divisions within Saskatchewan 
and Liquor and Gaming? What are they trying to hide? These 
people are paid for with taxpayers’ dollars and the people of 
this province have a right to know how many they are and in 
which division or which branch they are. 
 
I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 
57 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: in fiscal year 2001-2002, the number of 
employees and full-time equivalents that are found in each 
of the following branches and/or divisions of the SLGA: 
the president’s office; corporate services division; financial 
services branch; management services branch; information 
services branch; special services branch; special project 
office; audit services branch; human relations division; 
human resource branch; organizational development 
branch; communications branch; policy and planning 
division; policy and legislation branch; planning and 
research branch; operations division; regional management; 
retail services branch; distribution branch; regulatory 
compliance division; liquor licensing branch; operations 
division, Saskatoon; corporate services division, Saskatoon; 
audit services branch, Saskatoon; regulatory compliance, 
Saskatoon; inspection services branch, Saskatoon; horse 
racing branch, Saskatoon; charitable gaming licensing; 
strategic services branch; compliance branch; community 
liaison branch; gaming operations branch; and, Liquor and 
Gaming Licensing Commission. 
 

Seconded by the member from Swift Current. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. 
member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the words “each of” be deleted. 
 

I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 58 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
I asked the question that should be very straightforward and 
should be information that should be given to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They have a right to know how their tax dollars 
are being spent. They have a right to know how many 
employees there are in Liquor and Gaming. They have a right 
to know how each of those employees is employed. 
 
The government chooses not to give this information to the 
people of Saskatchewan. This is a government that time and 
time again stands in this legislature and tells us how open and 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

accountable they are. It begs the question, what could this 
government possibly be hiding by not being willing to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan how many people are employed in 
Liquor and Gaming and for what purpose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not much wonder that the people of 
Saskatchewan are sick and tired of the blatant abuse of their 
taxpayers’ dollars when this government will not even answer a 
simple question about how many employees there are at Liquor 
and Gaming and under what divisions they are working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
a return no. 58 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: in fiscal year 2002-2003, the number of 
employees and full-time equivalents that are found in each 
of the following branches and/or divisions of the SLGA: 
the president’s office; corporate services division; financial 
services branch; management services branch; information 
services branch; special services branch; special project 
office; audit services branch; human relations division; 
human resources branch; organizational development 
branch; communications branch; policy and planning 
division; policy and legislation branch; planning and 
research branch; operations division; regional management; 
retail services branch; distribution branch; regulatory 
compliance division; liquor licensing branch; operations 
division, Saskatoon; corporate services division, Saskatoon; 
audit services branch, Saskatoon; regulatory compliance, 
Saskatoon; inspection services branch, Saskatoon; horse 
racing branch, Saskatoon; charitable gaming licensing; 
strategic services branch; compliance branch; community 
liaison branch; gaming operations branch; and, Liquor and 
Gaming Licensing Commission. 
 

And this motion is seconded by the member from Swift 
Current. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
hon. member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the words “each of” be deleted. 
 

I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 59 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again we have 
. . . we are at the fourth question, asking the same question, 
only for the current fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I believe it was the Premier of this province, that following 
the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) scandal — when the minister that was responsible 
for SPUDCO came clean after six years, that he stood and said 
that he had misled the people of Saskatchewan for six years — 
that the Premier of this province held a news conference at 
which time he said his government from this day forward 

would be open and accountable. 
 
And today we see the display in this legislature which shows 
clearly that is not the intent of this government. We are asking 
simple questions that are merely asking for the number of 
full-time equivalents, the number of employees that are 
working in the various years, and what department they work 
in, for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. And the government, 
the NDP government of the day, refuses to give this 
information to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
No wonder the people of Saskatchewan question what really is 
going on in this government and what are they trying to hide. 
This is a government that time and time again stands in this 
legislature and tells us that they are open and accountable. And 
we had the Premier tell us that they were going to turn over a 
new leaf, that they were going to be open and accountable from 
that day forward. 
 
And today this is the fourth question in a row, asking for very 
simple numbers, when this government chooses to hide the 
facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 59 showing: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: currently the number of employees and full-time 
equivalents that are found in each of the following branches 
and/or divisions of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: president’s office; corporate services division; 
financial services branch; management services branch; 
information services branch; special services branch; 
special project office; audit services branch; human 
relations division; human resources branch; organizational 
development branch; communications branch; policy and 
planning division; policy and legislation branch; planning 
and research branch; operations division; regional 
management; retail services branch; distribution branch; 
regulatory compliance division; liquor licensing branch; 
operations division, Saskatoon; corporate services division, 
Saskatoon; audit services branch, Saskatoon; regulatory 
compliance, Saskatoon; inspection services branch, 
Saskatoon; horse racing branch, Saskatoon; charitable 
gaming licensing; strategic services branch; compliance 
branch; community liaison branch; gaming operations 
branch; and Liquor and Gaming Licensing Commission. 

 
I move, seconded by the member from Swift Current. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
hon. member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the words “each of” be deleted. 
 
I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
(16:00) 
 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

 

Return No. 60 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Estevan, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 60 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: the number of acres of 
Crown land in the province deemed critical habitat wildlife 
land; further to that, whether any critical habitat wildlife 
land has been sold to resolve TLE claims; if yes, what the 
land parcels are and which band or reserve has claimed 
them; if no, whether the government is looking at selling 
such land to resolve TLE claims. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 61 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The purpose of 
the next eight motions is to test whether this government has 
policies in place to deal with the anticipated rapid rise in the 
Aboriginal population of the province and whether their 
policies are facilitating the Aboriginal population to move 
through school and training in the workforce, and whether in 
fact we are any better off in terms of participation in education 
and the workforce than we were 10 or 20 years ago. 
 
So I move seconded by the hon. member for Cypress Hills that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 61 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: for the year 1972, the birth rate 
of the Aboriginal population; (2) the birth rate in the 
non-Aboriginal population; (3) the average life expectancy 
of Aboriginal people; (4) the average life expectancy of 
non-Aboriginal people; (5) the Aboriginal infant mortality 
rate; (6) the non-Aboriginal infant mortality rate. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 62 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I move, seconded by the hon. member for 
Cypress Hills to move that an order of the Assembly do issue 
for a return showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: for the year 1982, the birth rate 
of the Aboriginal population; (2) the birth rate of the 
non-Aboriginal population; (3) the average life expectancy 
of Aboriginal persons; (4) the average life expectancy of 
non-Aboriginal persons; (5) the Aboriginal infant mortality 
rate; (6) the non-Aboriginal infant mortality rate. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 63 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I continue to ask if 
we are moving forward through the decades with improvement 
in health indicators for the Aboriginal population versus 
non-Aboriginal and are the health indicators improving. 
 
So I move, seconded by the hon. member for Cypress Hills, 
that an order of the Assembly do issue showing: 

To the Minister of Health: for the year 1992, (1) the birth 
rate of the Aboriginal population; (2) the birth rate of the 
non-Aboriginal population; (3) the average life expectancy 
of Aboriginal people; (4) the average life expectancy of 
non-Aboriginal people; (5) the Aboriginal infant mortality 
rate; and (6) the non-Aboriginal infant mortality rate. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 64 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the hon. member for Cypress Hills, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: for the year 2002, (1) the birth 
rate of the Aboriginal population; (2) the birth rate of the 
non-Aboriginal population; (3) the average life expectancy 
of Aboriginal persons; (4) the average life expectancy of 
non-Aboriginal persons; (5) the Aboriginal infant mortality 
rate; and (6) the non-Aboriginal infant mortality rate. 
 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 65 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I move, seconded by the hon. member for 
Cypress Hills, that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 
return showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: for the year 1972, (1) the 
Aboriginal school-age population; (2) the Aboriginal high 
school enrolment; (3) the number of Aboriginal high school 
graduates; (4) the non-Aboriginal school population; (5) the 
non-Aboriginal high school enrolment; (6) the number of 
non-Aboriginal high school graduates; (7) the Aboriginal 
post-secondary enrolment; (8) the number of Aboriginal 
post-secondary graduates; (9) the non-Aboriginal 
post-secondary enrolment; (10) the number of 
non-Aboriginal and post-secondary graduates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 66 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member for Cypress Hills, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for a return showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: for the year 1982, (1) the 
Aboriginal school-age population; (2) the Aboriginal high 
school enrolment; (3) the number of high school graduates; 
(4) the non-Aboriginal school-age population; (5) the 
non-Aboriginal high school enrolment; (6) the number of 
non-Aboriginal high school graduates; (7) the Aboriginal 
post-secondary enrolment; (8) the number of Aboriginal 
post-secondary graduates; (9) the non-Aboriginal 
post-secondary enrolment; (10) the number of 
non-Aboriginal post-secondary graduates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard June 26, 2003 

 

Return No. 67 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the hon. member for Cypress Hills, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: for the year 1992, (1) the 
Aboriginal school-age population; (2) the Aboriginal high 
school enrolment; (3) the number of Aboriginal high school 
graduates; (4) the non-Aboriginal school population; (5) the 
non-Aboriginal high school enrolment; (6) the number of 
non-Aboriginal high school graduates; (7) the Aboriginal 
post-secondary enrolment; (8) the number of Aboriginal 
post-secondary graduates; (9) the non-Aboriginal 
post-secondary enrolment; (10) the number of 
non-Aboriginal post-secondary graduates. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 68 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: for the year 2002, (1) the 
Aboriginal school-age population; (2) the Aboriginal high 
school enrolment; (3) the number of Aboriginal high school 
graduates; (4) the non-Aboriginal school-age population; 
(5) the non-Aboriginal high school enrolment; (6) the 
number of non-Aboriginal high school graduates; (7) the 
Aboriginal post-secondary enrolment; (8) the number of 
Aboriginal post-secondary graduates; (9) the 
non-Aboriginal post-secondary enrolment; and (10) the 
number of non-Aboriginal post-secondary graduates. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 70 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the 
hon. member for Arm River, that by order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 70 showing: 
 

To the Premier: whether any provincial government 
departments or Crown agencies made any concrete 
proposals or conducted any discussions with the city of 
Saskatoon or any other Saskatoon entity regarding the 
future development of Saskatoon’s Gathercole property; if 
so, the nature of those proposals and/or discussions. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 71 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the 
hon. member for Arm River, that by order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 71 showing: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation: whether the corporation 
commissioned any feasibility or business plan or 
consultant’s report for the sound stage located at the corner 
of Broad Street and College Avenue in Regina; if so, 
whether the minister will table copies of those documents 
in the legislature. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Returns No. 72 — 380 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
Assembly that returns no. 72 to 380 inclusive be deemed as 
moved, seconded by the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena, 
and ordered. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 392 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the 
member for Cannington, that by order of the Assembly do issue 
for return no. 392 showing: 
 

To the Government of Saskatchewan: (1) the reason why 
the security against the SBLA loan to Jacqueline Currie of 
MILOS for $2,000 was discharged in 1996 when the loan 
payments were $1,057 in arrears; (2) the names of the 
officials at SEDCO and/or SOCO who authorized the 
discharge of the security; (3) whether the government or 
any agencies of the government requested the full payment 
that was eventually made on the loan on April 28, 2003. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 400 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to comment just a few words before we move into the motion, if 
I may. 
 
After my election, originally in 1999, I took the opportunity as 
the newly elected member for Cypress Hills to write each 
graduating student in my constituency a letter of 
congratulations. And as part of the letter I encouraged those 
students to not just remember Saskatchewan as a place they 
were from but to look at it as a place that they could contribute 
to in a very important way, either as students, or as later 
employees, or participants in the economy, and also as 
participants in the social fabric of this province. It was a 
pleasure to be able to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as part of the exercise I learned that there were many 
students from my constituency who never gave a single 
moment’s thought to pursuing post-secondary education in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Many of them were moving to 
Alberta almost automatically. 
 
Now that has a lot to do with proximity, Mr. Speaker, there’s no 
question about that. Medicine Hat is the largest community next 
to the Cypress Hills constituency and it has an automatic 



June 26, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

 

drawing capacity. They have a very good college program 
there. Many of the high school graduates move from our 
constituency right into the University of Lethbridge. Some go to 
the University of Alberta or Calgary. 
 
But it occurred to me, Mr. Speaker, that it was that type of 
drain, intellectual capacity lost to those Alberta institutions, that 
was having not just a negative effect on my own constituency, 
but on the province as a whole. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it came with some surprise and gratitude when 
the official opposition allowed me the privilege of becoming the 
critic for post-secondary education recently. And as a result of 
the opportunity that the Leader of the Opposition has given me I 
found tremendous opportunities available right here in 
Saskatchewan. And I’m gratified by the fact that we have such 
tremendously successful post-secondary institutions. And the 
graduates from these institutions have made their mark on the 
business world, on the social fabric of not just this province but 
all around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So having had this opportunity in the most . . . the best part of 
the last 12 months to be the critic for post-secondary education 
has been very gratifying. Along with the very positive things 
I’ve learned, I have understood or come to understand some of 
the difficulties that we are encountering in this province in 
terms of providing educational opportunities. 
 
One of the things that I found very disturbing, Mr. Speaker, 
came to my attention just a week or so ago, and that was when 
the member from Cannington asked the Minister of Learning 
how many individuals had applied to the Faculty of Education 
at the University of Regina. And in response, the answer given 
was 900. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that only 300 were 
admitted to that program. That means we have a ratio of 2:1 of 
applicants to those accepted. And, Mr. Speaker, I find that very 
disturbing. 
 
And if that in fact, if that particular piece of information is 
replicated through many of the other schools, the important 
schools of education and training at our post-secondary 
institutions, we have a very serious problem on our hands. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this particular motion speaks to the 
very critical need for expanding post-secondary opportunities 
for Saskatchewan students. And that’s why it gives me pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, to move, seconded by the member from 
Cannington, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return 
no. 400 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: for the academic year 
2002-2003, the number of students, who were otherwise 
qualified, that had their applications rejected from all 
programs offered at the University of Saskatchewan, the 
University of Regina, and all of the province’s SIAST 
campuses. 
 

I so move. 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move a 
superseding motion. 
 

That we go to second readings, item no. 1, Bill No. 201, 
The Oil and Gas Industry Recognition Week Act. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek, seconded by the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers: 
 

That we go to second readings, item no. 1, Bill No. 201, 
The Oil and Gas Industry Recognition Week Act. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Order. Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — To speak to the motion, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe, members, this superseding motion 
is not debatable, so I will once again conduct a vote. 
 
On the motion moved by the member for Thunder Creek, 
seconded by the member for Saskatchewan Rivers, is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Cypress Hills, seconded by 
the member for Cannington: 
 

That an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 400. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Motion is carried. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, after an incredible 
amount of activity and progress, I would want to move that this 
House would now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:23. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1981 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1982 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Willow Cree Healing Lodge 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1983 
 Saskatchewan Roughrider Statistics 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1984 
 Sandra Schmirler Olympic Gold Park 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1984 
 University of Saskatchewan Research Grants 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1984 
 Battlefords Children’s Choir 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1985 
 Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan Festival 
  Lorjé.........................................................................................................................................................................................1985 
 Humboldt Summer Sizzler 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1985 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Crown Investments Corporation Advisory Committee 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1985 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1986 
 Performance of Government and Opposition 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1987 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1987 
 Support for Beef Industry 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1987 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1987 
 Wildlife Habitat Land 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1988 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1988 
 Water and Sewer Infrastructure 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1989 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1989 
 Waiting Lists for Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1989 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1989 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Integrated Health Care Facility for Moosomin 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1990 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1990 
 
 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1991 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1991 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1991 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1991 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1992 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1997 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 Return No. 50 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1997 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1998 
 Return No. 51 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1998 
 Return No. 52 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1998 
 Return No. 56 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1998 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1999 
 Return No. 57 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1999 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1999 
 Return No. 58 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1999 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2000 
 Return No. 59 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2000 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2000 
 Return No. 60 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
 Return No. 61 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
 Return No. 62 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
 Return No. 63 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
 Return No. 64 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
 Return No. 65 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
 Return No. 66 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2001 
 Return No. 67 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
 Return No. 68 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
 Return No. 70 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
 Return No. 71 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
 Returns No. 72 — 380 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2002 
 Return No. 392 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
 Return No. 400 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2002 
 


