















































Hansard: April 01, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 293 
 April 1, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
my place again today to present a petition on behalf of 
producers and Crown grazing leaseholders in the constituency 
of Cypress Hills. Mr. Speaker, they’re very concerned about the 
renewal policy of the current government and they’ve asked me 
to present the petition on their behalf. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by citizens and 
producers from the area of Tompkins, Maple Creek, Eastend, 
Lancer, and Gull Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today with a petition to present on behalf of the citizens of 
Estevan who are very upset with the condition of Highway 47 
South. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by the good folks in Estevan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding crop insurance. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums for our struggling farmers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Rose Valley, 
Kelvington, and Naicam. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition today to present on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury and loss of life and 
to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the good people in the 
Eyebrow and Brownlee area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Undeterred by the 
provincial budget the people of Swift Current are still sending a 
message to the government about the state of the hospital. And 
this is the latest petition from people in my hometown. And the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new, a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by . . . exclusively by 
residents of the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition about . . . from citizens concerned 
about rural school closures. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be influenced to stay the closure of Major 
School unit until the departments of Rural Revitalization 
and Education can put together a plan on a uniformed front 
for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Major. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about Highway 42. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the petition is signed by residents of Central Butte, 
Riverhurst, and Chaplin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition. This one is with reference to Highway 42 and . . . 
(inaudible) . . . require for an improvement. And we know that 
that’s very important to the economy and the communities of 
the area. I would like to read the . . . I would like to read the 
petition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
And this is signed by good people from the communities of 
Central Butte and Riverhurst, a beautiful part of our province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition from members of the constituency of 
Kindersley, and they’re worried about school closures. 
 
They’re worried specifically that the viability of rural 
Saskatchewan depends on the availability of scholastic 
opportunity in our area, and specifically that the closure of the 
Major School will ultimately mean the closure of the town and 
the community of Major; and that the closure of Major School 
and the sacrifice of a vibrant community are in direct 
contradiction with the principles of rural revitalization; and 
further, that the cost savings in the Landswest School Division 
by the closure of Major School will be more than offset by the 
loss of businesses, families, and investment in the area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 
Assembly may be influenced to stay the closure of Major 
School until the departments of Rural Revitalization and 
Education can put together a plan on a uniformed front for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Major, Saskatchewan, and Compeer. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with prescription drug costs. 
 
The Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan: the petition 
of the undersigned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly show that prescription drugs and the maintaining and 
improving quality of life for many Saskatchewan residents and 
their families; that these individuals are already facing serious 
financial pressures from bearing other costs of living including 

health care or residing in Saskatchewan; that the current 
administration must not be allowed to balance its deficit budget 
by removing the annual deductible amount for prescription 
drugs for Saskatchewan residents and their families. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Bladworth and Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens that are concerned about fair Crown leaseholders. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Shellbrook and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Mr. Speaker, a petition to improve highways, 
Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be petitioned to cause the government to 
make necessary repairs on Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life, to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in this area. 
 
So we humbly pray. 

 
From the residents of Central Butte. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the 
condition of Highway 22, particularly from Junction 6 to 
Junction 20. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Strasbourg, Earl Grey, and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

 

in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure Crown 
land lessees maintain their first option to renew those 
leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Medstead 
and Glenbush. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning the closure of Major School; and 
 
Previously tabled petitions being addendums to sessional 
paper nos. 12, 13, and 19. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Social Services: how much funding did 
the Kids First program receive in the fiscal year 
2001-2002? 
 

And I have similar questions for the fiscal year of 2002 and 
2003. 
 
Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: in reference to the $32.4 
million to be expended under the Education Infrastructure 
Financing Corporation in 2003-2004, what is the split 
between K to 12 and post-secondary capital projects; and 
what is the amortization rate under this program for these 
projects? 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: were 
managers at the Regina correctional facility warned by 
guards as to the danger of holding inmates in the 
auditorium from which recent inmate escapes occurred? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
legislature, 14 students from the Rainbow Youth Centre’s road 
to employment program. They’re accompanied today by Jen 
Reid. 
 
I had the very good pleasure of meeting with them last year. 
Raylene’s not here this year but we’ll have to say hello to her 
anyway. But I hope you enjoy today’s proceedings and that we 
have a good visit later on. And I’d urge all members to say a big 
welcome and a big Ta wow to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, I’d like to join 
with the member in welcoming the young people from Rainbow 
Youth Centre and we trust that you’ll find this afternoon very 
informative. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 
great pleasure that I rise today in this House to introduce two 
people sitting in your gallery. They are guests of one of our 
caucus researchers, Jessica Waiser. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Daniela Roschinski and Katja Blasche are visiting 
Saskatchewan all the way from Magdeburg, Germany. 
 
Last Friday Ms. Roschinski successfully defended her master’s 
thesis in history at the University of Saskatchewan. For the last 
three years, under the guidance of Dr. Bill Waiser of the 
university’s Department of History, Daniela has been working 
on her thesis, “Wild vs. Mild West: A Binary or Symbiotic 
Unit?” One year was spent in Saskatoon and the last two in 
Germany. Daniela has always exhibited a keen curiosity for 
Canada and the West, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is Katja’s first visit to Canada. Later this month Katja 
is going to have an interview at the University of Calgary for a 
spot in their human resources development or human resources 
management Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) program. 
 
And so I ask all the members of the Assembly to welcome these 
two fine guests today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Women’s National Hockey Tournament 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Esso women’s 
national hockey tournament was held March 12 to 16 in 
Saskatoon with two local women, Laurie Alexander and Robin 
Nuttall, both from Pense, being key players on the 
Saskatchewan team. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Game one against Newfoundland proved to be a great opener as 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

Team Sask won 8 to nothing. Laurie Alexander was named 
player of the game with two goals, and Robin Nuttall shared the 
shutout with fellow netminder, Lenita Hanson. 
 
Game two against the defending champions, Quebec, was a 
challenge for Team Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 
women came up short with a loss of 3 to 2. Robin Nuttall was 
key in keeping Saskatchewan close and was awarded the player 
of the game for game two. 
 
Not bad — two games with both players of the game from 
Pense. 
 
Team Saskatchewan went on to win game three against Nova 
Scotia and game four against New Brunswick. 
 
In playoff action, Team Saskatchewan went on to play Team 
BC (British Columbia). Team BC, like several of the other 
teams in the tournament, had Olympic players on their roster. 
Nancy Drolet scored twice, with American Olympians Cammi 
Granato and Shelley Looney adding to the stats. Team BC won 
3-1 against Team Saskatchewan. 
 
Team Saskatchewan went on to finish in fifth place and Team 
Alberta won the tournament with no less than six Saskatchewan 
players on their roster. Laurie Alexander was quoted in the 
StarPhoenix as saying: 
 

We gave a WNHL team a run for their money. They train 
and compete together all year long . . . we’ve been together 
3 weekends total . . . Give us a whole year and maybe 
things would have been different. 

 
Congratulations to Team Saskatchewan women, and to Laurie 
Alexander and Robin Nuttall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investing in Healthy Families 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this government is 
committed to building for the future and that is why, Mr. 
Speaker, with this budget we are continuing our tradition of 
managing the province’s finances in a responsible, prudent 
manner, while at the same time meeting the needs of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
To us, Mr. Speaker, meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people 
means boosting health care to a record $2.5 billion in order to 
improve the health and well-being of families across the 
province. 
 
To us, Mr. Speaker, meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people 
means investing $19 million in funding for medical equipment. 
It means investing $74 million to support collective agreements 
for 30,000 health care professionals. It means a continued 
investment of $3 million for new initiatives to address 
recruitment and retention of health providers. And it means 
investing $61 million over the next two years in health care 
capital funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are investing across a broad range of health 
services to improve the health and self-reliance of 

Saskatchewan families. And we are investing to change the way 
services are delivered so that we can continue to meet the needs 
of Saskatchewan people as we build for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Hospital’s 90th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year marks the 
90th anniversary of the opening of Saskatchewan Hospital. 
 
It is the only long-term psychiatric facility in the province. At 
one time it was home to over 2,000 patients. Today with 
deinstitutionalization and advances in psychiatric medicine, it 
accommodates one-tenth that number. The facility is large, 
drab, and forbidding. Recently Glenn Wouters, a member of the 
North Prairie Regional Health Authority, said that the facility 
should either undergo major renovations or be replaced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that mental health treatment has evolved. 
We no longer institutionalize anywhere near the number of 
patients we did 90 years ago. Nonetheless there continues to be 
a need for a residential facility and for trained staff to care for 
the needs of psychiatric patients. 
 
The province is in the midst of phasing out the designation of 
registered psychiatric nurse. Mental health is supposed to be 
part of general nurse training, but significantly the nurses’ 
education program brochure makes no mention of psychiatric 
component. I question whether nursing students will be exposed 
to mental health care in the hope that some of them will choose 
to focus their careers on this aspect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Hospital was one of the first public 
facilities built in our then new province. The provision of a 
modern, pleasant facility with trained staff committed to their 
patients continues to be a priority we must respect. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Research and Development Programs 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our future is wide 
open. One way we ensure our quality of life, promote economic 
growth, and maintain our competitive standing is through an 
aggressive and innovative research and development program. 
I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, that this budget provides more than 
$145 million to fund research in the major segments of our 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the synchrotron at the University of Saskatchewan 
is scheduled to open this January, an investment that will 
generate even more investment, more research, and more direct 
jobs in existing and new technology . . . high-tech companies. 
 
Next door to the university is Innovation Place. There and at the 
university, $12.6 million is being directed to research for 
primary and value-added agriculture. Agriculture remains one 
of our industries R&D (research and development) is bringing 
into the 21st century. 
 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

 

Mr. Speaker, one reason our oil and gas industry is revitalized is 
the work being done at the Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre at the University of Regina which this budget continues 
to support. 
 
The Saskatchewan Forest Centre in Prince Albert will ensure a 
continuing forest industry through development of new 
technologies and improved reforestation programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget gives funding to new road construction 
materials, ongoing new scientific, and the list goes on and on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a forward-looking budget for a province 
with a great wide open future, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Whitetail and Mule Deer Producers 
Association Convention 

 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the weekend I had the pleasure of attending the Saskatchewan 
Whitetail and Mule Deer Producers Association convention in 
Saskatoon. Other MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
attending from this side of the House were the members from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, Shellbrook-Spiritwood, and Redberry 
Lake. 
 
Aside from sampling some delicious venison, cold cuts, and 
sausage, we also heard lectures on trophy ranching, value added 
to venison, and cost-effective rationing. Further, Mr. Speaker, 
the convention updated the association’s strategy for dealing 
with chronic wasting disease. The Saskatchewan association 
has been recognized internationally as a leader in monitoring 
this disastrous disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite members to join with me in 
congratulating SWAMDPA (Saskatchewan Whitetail and Mule 
Deer Producers Association) for its convention and ongoing 
success. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melville Millionaires Win Sherwood Conference 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 
congratulate the Melville Millionaires junior hockey team. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I decided to use the proper forum for politicians 
— the legislature — not four minutes between periods. 
 
Last Friday the Millionaires added another chapter to their 
Cinderella comeback this season by winning the Sherwood 
Conference of the SJHL (Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League). 
 
Mr. Speaker, hockey in rural Saskatchewan communities is 
more than just one team against another, it is also one town 
against another. The winner of the game gives residents of a 
particular town bragging rights. This is a time-honoured 
Saskatchewan tradition. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the weekend’s version of this tradition is 
really a tale of two cities — one being Melville and the other 
Yorkton, the home of the Deputy Premier. Friday night in a 
typical battle of Highway 10, the Mills put the series to bed 
with a 12-1 victory in game number six to finish the series four 
games to two. And that was without me speaking at ice level or 
cheering them on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And tonight, Mr. Speaker, the Millionaires roll into Humboldt 
with two winning series under their belt to take on the Broncos 
in the provincial championship. Good luck in Humboldt to the 
Mills organization, the players, Steve Young and his staff, and 
his fans. Go Mills go. Right on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assiniboia Southern Rebels Advance to Keystone Cup 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I would like to congratulate the Assiniboia Junior 
Southern Rebels on winning the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, en route to the championship the Southern Rebels 
defeated the Regina Capitals in a best of seven series and then 
went on to the provincial playoffs against Warman Valley 
Crusaders where they won three straight games to advance to 
the Keystone Cup. And, Mr. Speaker, the Keystone Cup will be 
held in Portage la Prairie, Manitoba, the week of April 10 to 13. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 11 years of operation, the Assiniboia 
Southern Rebels have won the league in seven of those years 
and they have won five consecutive league champions . . . 
championships. The top scorer of the Assiniboia Rebels was 
Mr. Dan Cristo, a local Assiniboia boy, and the top defenceman 
was Chase Schafer, who is from Tugaske. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to offer congratulations to the team: the 
president, Dale Lessmeister; the manager, Randy Cuthill; 
coaches Jerry Volsky and Paul Tendler; and all of the 
personnel, the players, and the families that supported the 
Assiniboia Southern Rebels. In addition I’d like to pay a special 
tribute to Marg Erfle who is better known to hockey fans in 
Assiniboia as Grandma Dynamite. She’s in her 80s and is 
basically the team mascot and a very good supporter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to offer congratulations and good luck to 
the Assiniboia Southern Rebels at the Keystone Cup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Harassment Allegations Against Civil Servant 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
The front page of today’s StarPhoenix tells the story of 
Murdoch Carriere, director of the fire management branch in 
Prince Albert, who has been harassing female employees for 
years. Last October six of those female employees filed 
harassment complaints against Murdoch Carriere. So the 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

government hired an independent investigator who concluded in 
December that Mr. Carriere has been sexually harassing and 
intimidating female employees for years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did the NDP government do about it? 
Well according to a memo written by the deputy minister on 
February 12, 2003, the NDP decided to make Mr. Murdoch 
Carriere a senior adviser to the Environment department at 
$85,000 per year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t the NDP fire Murdoch Carriere after 
they found out that he was sexually harassing women? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As minister of 
the Public Service Commission I’m going to premise my 
remarks with something that might be interpreted to be a bit 
personal but it is as well the official policy of this government 
— and that is that I find and that we find sexual harassment in 
the workplace outrageous and completely unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, we do have a zero 
tolerance policy and we, in fact, put this policy in place in 1993. 
And we’re a government who believes it’s important to have 
labour laws, including occupational health and safety, which 
give employees a forum to bring forward complaints of this 
nature. 
 
Now we put this policy in place in 1993. We further 
strengthened it, Mr. Speaker, in 1999. And I will affirm today 
that this policy is being followed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, when the government does nothing 
about the violation of harassment policy, it is as much as 
condoning it, so they cannot say and should not say that they 
have zero tolerance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as director of the fire management and forest 
protection branch, Mr. Carriere is responsible for more than 140 
staff, many of whom are women. Last October, six of those 
women complained that Murdoch Carriere has harassed them 
and after two months of investigation, Robert Gillies concluded 
that Mr. Carriere had been harassing his female employees for 
years. And I quote: 
 

. . . both in terms of abuse of authority and in terms of 
inappropriate sexual behaviour. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is the responsibility of the Premier of this 
province and his government to ensure harassment-free 
workplaces for all government employees. Yet the NDP has 
decided to keep Murdoch Carriere and make him a senior 
adviser to the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is Murdoch Carriere still working for the 
NDP government? What message does that send to the women 
who have been humiliated, intimidated, and sexually harassed 
by this man for years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I would just say that complaints are investigated 
from the date they’re received because until then they aren’t 
complaints. 
 
The second thing I will say is that in any situation the person is 
removed from the workplace when an investigation is taking 
place, and this would be the case in I believe any situation that 
the member might be referring to. 
 
So I can assure this House that we take it completely seriously, 
that the employee is removed from the workplace, and that the 
entire procedure has to be followed because this may, in any 
particular allegation, be true or not true. But I think everybody 
deserves a process to be followed before they are judged and 
disciplined, and that would be what would happen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister is overlooking is 
that the investigator’s report has validated that this sexual 
harassment complaint was true and has validation to it. The 
points were made to the investigator, the investigator gave his 
report, and turned it over to the government. There is no 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of that investigation into the actions 
of Murdoch Carriere the investigator interviewed Duncan 
Campbell, the human resources contact in the fire management 
and forest protection branch. And Mr. Campbell said many 
employees in the Prince Albert office have complained about 
harassment by Murdoch Carriere. According to the 
investigator’s report, and I quote: 
 

“. . . there have been complaints of Murdoch kissing staff, 
touching them, and acting inappropriately. 
 
Usually staff . . . (don’t want) to make a formal complaint 
because they fear . . . (they’re going) to lose their job. Staff 
have a genuine fear of retaliation.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, Murdoch Carriere has been harassing and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member proceed to her question. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what does 
it take for the Premier to do the right thing and terminate the 
government employment of Murdoch Carriere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to mention 
that this policy first existed in 1993, was further strengthened in 
’99, and continues to be strengthened as we find ways. There 
are typical measures that can be applied when violations occur. 
They would include things like assignment of new duties, 
suspension without pay, anti-harassment counselling and 
training, and yes, it can include termination of employment. 
 
But I will say, Mr. Speaker, that an employee who’s under 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

 

investigation is removed from the workplace and would 
continue to be removed from the workplace until all 
investigations are completed, and at that point final 
determination would be made on disciplinary action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s excuses ring shallow, 
I’m sure, in the ears of the many employees who have been 
sexually violated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, on February 12, 2003 the deputy 
minister of Environment wrote a memo to all six women who 
complained about Murdoch Carriere. And in that memo the 
deputy minister said he had concluded that Murdoch Carriere 
had harassed these women, and the deputy minister indicated 
that Mr. Carriere would be reassigned with the Environment 
department. 
 
On that same day, Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister wrote to all 
fire management and forest protection branch employees, and in 
that memo he announced Murdoch Carriere was being 
appointed senior adviser to the assistant deputy minister, 
beginning in May. He went on to praise Mr. Carriere for his 
leadership and valuable contribution to the branch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did the NDP decide that Murdoch 
Carriere should keep his $85,000 government salary, they 
actually made him a senior adviser to the NDP government. 
 
So I ask today, Mr. Speaker, which one of the Premier’s cabinet 
ministers over there was responsible for the decision to promote 
Murdoch Carriere instead of firing him for harassing his 
employees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will reiterate 
that myself and our government have zero tolerance for sexual 
harassment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And when the process of all 
investigations is completed, there will be a final outcome of 
disciplinary action. We are not there yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing I will say is one of the very reasons why the 
occupational health and safety code requires confidentiality is 
to protect people from fear of coming forward. When people 
breach that confidentiality, they put at risk the comfort level of 
people in coming forward with allegations. So I ask the 
members to, once in a while, consider what it is they do when 
they so freely breach confidentiality in all cases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the six women who were sexually 
violated I’m sure will take offence with that minister’s 
comments. 
 

And that minister needs to be charged with her own 
government’s cover-up and hiding of everything from 
SPUDCO to this case, and many other things included for years 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has known since December 
that Murdoch Carriere has been harassing female employees for 
years. And yet someone in the NDP government made the 
decision to give Mr. Carriere a promotion and make him a 
senior adviser to that government. Someone decided the 
punishment for years of harassing female employees was that 
Mr. Carriere should keep his $85,000 salary and move to 
Regina. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, does the Premier have no honour? Will the 
Premier fire the Minister of the Environment for condoning 
sexual harassment in his department and consenting to punish 
Murdock Carriere by making him a senior adviser to the 
government at $85,000 per year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I will reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that I 
assure this House that we have zero tolerance. I will further 
assure this House that because of confidentiality, I became 
aware of the facts they became aware of in the newspaper today 
— the same way they became aware of them. And I will further 
say that the appropriate action of removal from the workplace 
will be in place until all investigations are completed, at which 
point a final determination on appropriate disciplinary action 
would be taken. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister had a report handed to that government, to her or to the 
Minister of the Environment — it should have been to the 
whole government — in December last. 
 
And I would like to make one more comment. The minister 
keeps talking about zero tolerance. Well action or inaction 
speaks much louder than words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the women who complained about . . . 
Murdoch called her at home a number of times and then invited 
himself over to her house. She told the investigator that she had 
allowed him to come over because, and I quote: 
 

“I wanted the job so bad, I guess I just thought to myself 
just do this, and get it over with, and maybe he’ll get me 
the job.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, Murdoch Carriere did go over to her house and 
once there he pulled her down onto the couch attempting to kiss 
her. She states that she felt intimidated, but that since her 
diagnosis of breast cancer Mr. Carriere has left her alone. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, does the Premier think that this kind of 
behaviour should be rewarded with a promotion? Why would 
the NDP government reward Mr. Carriere’s harassment of 
many women over a period of years by making him a senior 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

adviser to the government at $85,000 per year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I give the House 
my insurance that we have a zero tolerance policy. We will 
ensure that that policy is followed. But I will confirm, for the 
members opposite, the reason why personal information is 
protected under occupational health and safety is so that all the 
people whose hands information might come into, do not then, 
in the common course of activity, accidentally gossip about it or 
tell someone. 
 
I was privy to this information when I looked at the newspaper 
this morning, and there are reasons for that, Mr. Speaker. The 
reasons are because until these investigations are completed and 
disciplinary action is decided, the process is not complete. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this question, this final 
question should go to the Minister of the Environment because 
he is the one that is responsible for this, he is the boss of these 
people who . . . especially this man who was his director. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another woman who complained about Mr. 
Carriere’s harassment said he forced himself on her in a car 
after a golf game. She told the investigator that on another 
occasion he told her she should go home from an office golf 
tournament early because he wanted to come over. He then 
went to her house and waited there until 1 a.m. However, she 
had decided not to return home that night and the next day she 
said Mr. Carriere called her and demanded to know why she 
hadn’t come home that night. He said he was upset because he 
had waited until 1 o’clock in the morning in front of her house 
because he had a gift for her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of behaviour by Mr. Carriere in relation 
to a female employee is totally unacceptable. It’s clear 
harassment. And when added to a dozen other events, I’m . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member, would the member go 
directly to the question, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Why hasn’t the NDP done the right thing and fired 
Murdoch Carriere? I ask that of the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that no 
one feels more strongly about this or takes it more seriously 
than I do. I find sexual harassment to be repugnant and totally 
out of date with the times we live in. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, there is a policy. There is a 
process. There was an investigation; there may be further 
investigation. And until that process is completed and a final 
determination is made, I will just reiterate that our policy is zero 
tolerance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the investigator’s report includes 

some very serious allegations — allegations that may constitute 
sexual assault. According to the newspaper, one of the women 
has filed a complaint with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police). 
 
My question to the government, Mr. Speaker, is: has the 
government turned the investigator’s report over to the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House that I 
am aware that the RCMP is conducting an investigation into the 
allegations of Mr. Carriere. I also would like to say that it will 
be the position of this government and this minister that we will 
allow the police to do the investigation in the course of their 
duties. We will not be commenting upon the allegations against 
Mr. Carriere. 
 
And I would also add, Mr. Speaker, that every person who 
believes in the due process of law will support that individuals 
should be investigated by the police, tried by the courts, and not 
tried in the Legislative Assembly or in the court of public 
opinion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, on May 8, 2001, the NDP House 
Leader made the following statement, and I quote: 
 

. . . (if) any member of this legislature or any member of 
the general public has any, any, any evidence to suggest . . . 
inappropriate . . . (behaviour), they have a responsibility to 
forward that to the proper process, which is the police. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has been in possession of 
this harassment report since December 20 of last year. Why 
wasn’t it turned over to the police? Why is the NDP more 
interested in protecting a sexual harasser than protecting its 
victims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I realize that the member has 
his scripted questions and that was his second question. But in 
the first answer, Mr. Speaker, I have already advised that 
member that I am aware that the RCMP is conducting an 
investigation into the allegations against Mr. Carriere. 
 
The member has asked, has the matter been referred to the 
RCMP? The question has been answered. Yes, the matter has 
been referred to the RCMP, Mr. Speaker. The RCMP will now 
investigate the matter as is their duty. That’s their job. It’s not 
the job of the opposition; it’s not my job. It’s the job of the 
police, and the police will do their job and they will do it very 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are not nearly as 
well scripted as the Minister of Justice. If he’d been paying 
attention to them, he would have noticed that I would ask the 
question . . . and I will repeat it. I’ll keep it short and simple for 
the minister. Why has this government not turned over the 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

 

report issued to it in regards to Murdoch Carriere to the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, what has been turned over to 
the RCMP or not turned over to the RCMP or the manner in 
which the RCMP is conducting their investigation or the 
evidence that they may or may not have is a matter for the 
RCMP. And we are not going to get into the business of 
discussing with members through this House or in the court of 
public opinion how the investigation of the RCMP is 
progressing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RCMP is the body that should investigate 
allegations of criminal activity against any citizen in this 
province. That is what they are doing and that they will do their 
job very well without any assistance in their investigatory 
techniques from that member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the report alleges that Mr. 
Carriere used his position and his political connections in the 
NDP Party to intimidate and sexually harass women. The report 
found him guilty of sexually harassing female employees. The 
incidents that involved . . . with incidents that involved 
unwanted physical contact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this man should have been fired. Instead he keeps 
his job at $85,000 a year and the NDP government withheld the 
report from the RCMP. It makes you wonder exactly what kind 
of political connections he has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Why is this 
government protecting a sexual harasser? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I find it disturbing that there 
is a pattern in this House over the last few years that every time 
there is an allegation made against someone in this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, every time there is an 
allegation made against someone in this province, it seems to be 
the role of the opposition party to jump to conclusions and to 
try to try the person in the court of public opinion or in the 
Legislative Assembly. And most people who are reasonable, 
Mr. Speaker, will know that there are processes to deal with 
allegations against individuals. 
 
The member repeatedly gets up and says that the RCMP doesn’t 
have access to some report. The member should be aware, Mr. 
Speaker, that the RCMP have powers of subpoena and search 
warrant. And if there is a report that the RCMP wants, the 
RCMP will get that report and do their investigation without the 
very helpful advice of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. But 
what is most important is the due process of law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP have a 
report. They sit on it for months. Suddenly the report is made 
public and then they say they have zero tolerance to sexual 
harassment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this man preyed on women. And I don’t claim to 
understand how those women may have felt but, Mr. Speaker, I 
have a daughter. My colleagues, many of them, have daughters. 
And I want to commit to the people of Saskatchewan that if we 
win the next election, we will not be like the NDP . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — . . . and allow this type of misbehaviour to 
occur. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we believe that every female 
employee of the government should be treated the way we want 
our own loved ones to be treated. Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, every woman employee of 
the government should be protected by its government from 
sexual harassment. They should be treated with respect and 
dignity. Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP not only follow their 
sexual harassment policy but protect an employee and promote 
an employee that they knew was sexually harassing women? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a member of this 
Assembly that does not take the issue of sexual harassment 
seriously. The only difference between members on that side of 
the House and this side of the House is that we’re not going to 
try to take political advantage of an unfortunate situation the 
way in which we saw the Leader of the Opposition just do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is a serious matter that is being taken seriously by 
government, that is being investigated by the RCMP, Mr. 
Speaker, that is being investigated under due process in the 
Public Service Commission. It is not a matter to be playing 
politics with and it is not a matter in which the Leader of the 
Opposition should grandstand in a very political way as he just 
did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
are asking, what do you have to do in that NDP government to 
get fired? Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader sits 
there, was responsible for $28 million of taxpayers’ money to 
be lost, to be squandered, and he wasn’t fired. He covered it up 
for six years and he wasn’t fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance leaked the budget a full 
week prior to its announcement. The Minister of Finance was 
not fired. 
 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we find out that the Minister of 
Environment knew that he had a sexual predator as an 
employee. He had a report on his desk. The report has been 
leaked. And the Minister of Environment did nothing, has done 
nothing. And now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP suffers the disgrace 
of a cover-up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the employee still has the job and the Minister of 
Environment still has his job. I want to hear from the NDP 
government, what do they have to do in Saskatchewan to get 
fired for incompetence and doing a lousy job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is an individual in this 
House who clearly will stop at nothing to gain power. That is 
quite clear, Mr. Speaker. This is an individual who will make 
all kinds of allegations against citizens in this province in order 
to gain power, Mr. Speaker. And one needs look no further than 
today’s StarPhoenix where the Leader of the Opposition says, 
in reference to Mr. Grant Schmidt, quote: 
 

I think most people in the Saskatchewan Party (listen to 
this, Mr. Speaker) didn’t feel they would trust Grant 
Schmidt with their family, their business interests, (and) . . . 
their finances. They just didn’t feel they could make that 
commitment. 

 
That is a shameful, baseless allegation because this is an 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, that will stop at nothing in order to 
gain power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please, 
members. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 8, The Youth Justice Administration Act, be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The division bells rang from 14:24 until 14:34. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 26 
 
Hermanson Toth Heppner 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 

Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Elhard 
Wakefield Stewart Harpauer 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Huyghebaert 
Dearborn Brkich Wiberg 
Weekes Lorenz Hart 
Allchurch Hillson  
 

Nays — 28 
 
Addley Crofford Hagel 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Osika 
Lorjé Kasperski Goulet 
Van Mulligen Belanger Thomson 
Junor Nilson Atkinson 
Hamilton Harper Forbes 
Jones Higgins Trew 
Wartman Yates McCall 
Iwanchuk   
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased 
this afternoon to stand on behalf of the government and table a 
written response to question no. 7. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to question 7 has been tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 
amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to 
stand today to respond to the budget speech of 2003 on behalf 
of the people from the Kelvington-Wadena constituency. I’d 
like to begin by congratulating the two new members of this 
Assembly, the member from Saskatoon Fairview and the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife 
convincingly won his by-election with an exceptionally large 
turnout. Everyone in that constituency knows that he’s a 
well-respected man and part of his win can be contributed to the 
respect and hard work of our leader, the member from 
Rosetown. Also part of the win is the acceptance of the plan and 
the vision of the Saskatchewan Party for growing the province 
and shaping a positive future for our children. 
 
So I congratulate both of these people and welcome them into 
the Assembly. 
 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

 

This is the eighth budget speech I have heard since my election 
in 1995, and truthfully, Mr. Speaker, I believe there has never 
been one delivered that caused less excitement. Of course you 
know the speech was leaked a week early, so the actual budget 
was rather anticlimactic for everyone except those involved in 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the leak indicated that agriculture would see a $40 
million increase in funding this year. In actual fact, for the 
second straight year, we saw a $40 million decrease in the 
Department of Agriculture. But those involved in agriculture 
have learned to expect nothing from this government — that 
way they are never disappointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government was elected in 1991 by 
people who were told that we had no future in this province 
until we dealt with the debt and the deficit that had a 
stranglehold on our future. We were told that the debt has 
skyrocketed to an unbelievable $12.1 billion and that we’re 
leaving our children with a legacy of mismanagement. So we 
were supposed to tighten our belts. We had to work together for 
the good of the province. 
 
So over the next 10 years we saw over 55 hospitals close in 
Saskatchewan. We saw schools close in the name of efficiency. 
We saw our proud and esteemed university fight for survival in 
a competitive environment where the odds were stacked against 
them. We saw our highways crumble and our municipal road 
structure abused. We saw our water and sewer systems decay to 
the point that people’s lives were endangered. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we lost our children and our neighbours as they moved 
to provinces outside of Saskatchewan to build their lives and 
their future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we watched all this happen with dismay but also 
with hope that the sacrifice would be worth it in the long run. 
We hoped that when the day came that this government actually 
spent less money than they took in, that the people would 
finally reap some reward for their work and their sacrifices. 
 
Actually, Mr. Speaker, we dared to dream that we’d have some 
choices in our own lives, that government would accept their 
responsibility to provide infrastructure and environment for 
business, and that we could finally begin to build a future for 
ourselves. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, instead we found ourselves with a coalition 
government that wasn’t elected by the people — a coalition that 
had just days before campaigned against each other on 
platforms that were diametrically opposite and then decided in 
the dead of the night that they would . . . they had the moral 
authority to govern. Shortly after that we had a new Premier 
who was also not elected as Premier leading this coalition 
government who was not elected by the people. 
 
And last Friday, Mr. Speaker, we had the second budget 
brought down by this non-elected leader with no mandate who, 
by their very own admission, have spent $1 million a day more 
than they’ve taken in — that’s $1.1 billion deficit since this 
Premier took office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debt this government has run up since the new 
Premier took power is over $12.2 billion total. All the work and 

the sacrifices that people incurred during the ’90s is down the 
tube. The future under this government today is as bleak as it 
was in 1991. Actually it’s worse because our infrastructure has 
decayed in the meantime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that people are apathetical. They’ve 
been told for over a decade that, well nine-tenths of Canadians 
saw economic growth that was between average and 
phenomenal, and that if we continued to bite the bullet we 
would become nearly average. And now we find ourselves with 
a government that has an out-of-control spending habit, 
spending our money. 
 
They didn’t just spend our money here at home, Mr. Speaker. 
They took it out of country, overseas, wherever there seemed to 
be an exciting place to gamble — that’s where our hard-earned 
tax dollars were spent. In the meantime people just stayed at 
home with their nose to the grindstone with not enough energy 
left at the end of the day to fight. 
 
It’s not surprising to me, Mr. Speaker, that few people were 
really interested in this budget. It was more than apparent on 
budget day that even with all the invitations and the hoopla 
made of the budget day address, that the galleries were not full, 
that the overflow rooms were empty, and that many of the 
familiar faces that we came to expect to see on budget day were 
not here. 
 
The most asked question on budget day . . . well, maybe it was 
the second most asked question was, when’s the next election? I 
think the most asked question was how in the world did this 
new Minister of Finance come up with a figure of 6.8 per cent 
economic growth? It’s pretty unbelievable when you think that 
it’s over twice as high as any of the other industrialized nations 
are predicting. 
 
Can you imagine what response would be from this government 
if the Saskatchewan Party would suggest that we would have 
this type of growth? This current government would go ballistic 
saying that we were unreasonable, that the figures couldn’t be 
substantiated. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that the majority of families 
sit around the breakfast table and talk about the economic 
growth potential of Saskatchewan, and they probably don’t care 
that the Finance minister is basing his economic projections on 
totally unrealistic numbers. But I do know they’re going to 
figure out, when next year the debt is larger than the $500 
million the minister is projecting and their taxes will either 
increase or they will again have fewer services, that there was a 
real problem with this budget. 
 
My colleagues have discussed many of the various aspects of 
the budget but I want to elaborate on one important issue that’s 
been brought up many times in the newspapers and in articles. 
It’s been bragged about as being an important part of this 
government’s spending but it’s never really been discussed in 
detail and this government has given misinformation to every 
citizen of this wonderful province about this issue, and that’s 
the issue of K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) education. 
 
First of all let me remind members that Saskatchewan holds the 
dubious title of expecting taxpayers owning property to pay 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

more of the cost of education than any other province — nearly 
60 per cent of the cost of education is borne by property 
owners. This issue was not addressed in the budget by anything 
other than a statement: this government will study the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government, SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association), LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), SASBO 
(Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials), STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), and citizens have been 
discussing and studying this issue for years. The government’s 
commitment to yet another study is nothing short of a stalling 
tactic to put the issue on hold for another period of time. 
 
Many people around this province are not aware that last year 
there were 18 school divisions in Saskatchewan that received 
absolutely no funding from the provincial government — not a 
nickel, nothing. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Many other school divisions received just a pittance. 
Somewhere between 10 and 30 per cent of their funding comes 
from the province; the remaining costs are covered by property 
owners. Every school trustee and every property owner knows 
that there is no room for more tax increases on property, 
whether it be rural or urban areas. 
 
The latest budget increases the equalization factor to point four 
per cent which means that in areas with high assessments and 
declining enrolments, the amount of provincial funding will 
decrease. This seemingly small change in the formula will 
actually amount to $15 million more that will have to be picked 
up by local taxpayers. 
 
I’ve asked for the information on the number of school boards 
who will be affected by this change, but I have not received the 
information yet. But I do expect that increasing the equalization 
factor will put more boards in a zero grant position after 
January of 2004. 
 
The former minister of Learning, now the Minister of Finance, 
never really seemed to grasp the fact that high assessments, 
high property values, does not necessarily equate to a high 
income or a cash flow. 
 
Farmers whose land values have been increased due to 
reassessment, but have seen their income drop dramatically 
because of drought or frost or whatever reason, are cash 
strapped. Education tax is considered an input cost yet it has 
nothing to do with the cost of farming as a whole. It’s a cost of 
farming in Saskatchewan. 
 
I have heard people say, well it’s deductible. Well guess what? 
You have to be paying taxes before that matters. 
 
The same can be said for property owners in urban centres. 
Should you be paying more in education tax because your home 
is more valuable than your neighbour’s? Should you be 
penalized for caring enough to look after your property? Who 
decides, and on what criteria is that decision based on what . . . 
and the value made? 
 

Until this government recognizes its responsibility and pays for 
the cost of educating our children, there can be no fairness. 
 
In the past 10 years the government has made changes to the 
foundation operating grant which shifts the cost of education 
from various stakeholders to another group of stakeholders. It 
shifts the priorities of government from various aspects of 
education to others such as special education per pupil rates 
between urban and rural centres, or even emphasizing one 
aspect of education like on-line learning from others. But this 
government has never taken a financial responsibility for those 
decisions. 
 
Shifting these responsibilities gives the government the chance 
to brag about new money for new initiatives. This would only 
be true if more new money was actually put into the budget 
than was required to cover the expenses. This hasn’t happened. 
 
The only thing this government does is cut the pieces of pie in 
different sizes. It never increases the size of the pie. 
 
The minister of Learning, or Education as he used to be called 
over the past number of years, likes to stand in this House and 
brag about covering the cost of the collective agreement with 
our teachers. What they fail to mention is that while the overall 
dollars put into education may amount to the amount of the 
money negotiated in the agreement, less than 40 per cent of 
school divisions receive even close to the increase in salaries 
because of the foundation operating grant formula. 
 
The FOG (foundation operating grant) grant, which is very 
appropriately named since it does leave most people in a fog, 
uses the assessment of the school divisions and the number of 
students as part of the determining factors of the amount of 
money divisions will get from the government. 
 
This year the increase in salaries through the collective 
agreement settlement amount to $23.6 million. The government 
did put $23.6 million in that they claim to pay for salaries, but 
because of the grant formula putting responsibility on property 
owners, they are not paying for the whole cost of salary 
increases in every division. Instead the government gets to 
spend part of that $23.6 million twice. First, by announcing they 
are paying for the salaries and then, because there is money left 
over through the allocation of the FOG grant, the government 
can announce funding for community schools, changes in the 
per student grant for urban versus rural schools, on-line 
learning, and the list goes on. 
 
This year’s increase in K to 12 funding falls far short of the 
estimated school board expenses for the year. The teachers’ 
salaries, increments and reclassifications, and administration 
allowances will cost $25.4 million. Administration and support 
staff salaries will increase $8.7 million. The increase in utilities, 
insurance, transportation, etc., will be nearly $4 million for an 
overall cost increase in K to 12 education of $38.4 million. 
 
This government has supposedly allocated 32 million more in 
this year’s budget. However, of that 32 million, there’s already 
been 16.2 million of that spent on salaries for September to 
March of this budget year through special warrants. 
 
For the government to keep its promise to even pay the salary 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

 

increase for the year, the entire 16.2 million would have to be 
spent in April to December, leaving no money for the balance 
of the year. There is absolutely no money allocated for the $15 
million of costs above salaries. There is no new money for new 
programs or initiatives. 
 
In the area of capital funding we see the Education 
Infrastructure Finance Corporation has been dissolved and 
spending for capital is put back into department expenditures. 
The capital funding announced in the budget for new work is 
$16.215 million. That’s about half of the commitment made last 
year. On top of that, the school restoration program has been 
delayed another year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago this government sought and paid for 
an extensive review of the role of the school. It was determined 
by stakeholders, teachers, parents, students, school boards, and 
integrated agencies that a model based on the community 
school concept would best suit our children in this society as we 
move into the new millennium. 
 
This budget speech failed to make any significant inroads into 
the implementation of the SchoolPLUS initiative, yet four 
ministers of the Crown signed an agreement to work towards 
implementing the program. We’re not seeing any true 
integration of departments to address the issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is planning for a decline in the 
student population of Saskatchewan of 30,000 students by the 
end of this decade. One of the huge differences between this 
government and the Saskatchewan Party is this: we are not 
planning on managing a decline, we are planning to grow this 
province. We know that the growth will mean more students, 
more teachers, increasing the number of schools and 
communities working together to plan their future. 
 
We recognize the value of the SchoolPLUS model and we know 
that by integrating services, we’ll not just save money as we cut 
back on duplication, but we will ensure the most efficient use of 
the time and skills of our professionals. 
 
We know that education is the key to success for individuals 
and for the province as a whole. We must ensure that funding is 
available to ensure all students have access to public education. 
 
We believe that school boards must remain autonomous. 
Decisions on amalgamation must be made on the basis of 
improved education for students, not threats from this 
government. 
 
Parents must have more access to their board members, more 
choices for their children’s education, and more involvement in 
their children’s school life. It takes a whole community to raise 
a child, no matter what community or country you live in. 
 
The education of our Aboriginal children must be a priority for 
all governments in order to grow our province and our 
economy. 
 
This government is playing a shell game with the finances of 
this province. We must work diligently to ensure our children 
have bright futures in this province or wherever they may 
choose to live. 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment, and I will not 
be supporting the original motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased and it’s 
always an honour to be in this House to be debating the budget 
speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously on this budget speech, I’ll be strongly 
supporting the government motion supporting the budget and 
I’ll be voting against the amendment of the Sask Party that 
presents a doom and gloom argument and a spirit of negativity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to cover my presentation vis-à-vis the 
general aspect of the budget as well as the specifics in regards 
to the North and Aboriginal people, and in between also making 
a commentary in Cree explaining the budget as well as doing 
some concluding remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at the budget, you know, for this year, 
and I’ve looked at, of course, many budgets over the years, this 
is our, of course, 10th consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And as I looked at our balanced budget, I 
looked at the balanced approach not only in regards to the 
finances of the province but in regards to the life of the 
province in the economic realm, in the social realm, in the 
cultural realm, the health realm. And, Mr. Speaker, as I looked 
at the budget, this was good news in many areas, and 
particularly in health, education, municipalities, and also a 
growing partnership with northerners and First Nations and 
Métis people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I looked at the health budget, the facts speak for 
themselves. On the health side we have a record $2.5 billion. 
This is an 8 per cent increase. This 8 per cent increase includes 
27 million in capital and $19 million on medical equipment. 
Mr. Speaker, this is leading the way in Canada amongst the 
different provinces. 
 
We also are looking at the fact that as I look back on the Sask 
Party statements over the years, and particularly in the last 
election, this opposition who are now making all kinds of 
promises which a lot of people are not trusting, they’re making 
a lot of promises but in fact they said they would freeze health 
care. 
 
Secondly, when I look at another major item on the budget, 
there is also the aspect of education. On the education budget 
we have a record $1.2 billion. Mr. Speaker, this is a 5.2 per cent 
increase in the operating budget. Mr. Speaker, as I looked at the 
education budget, I noticed that there was also $76 million on 
capital. And also for the students out there, in regards to the 
student loan, it’s been increased to 66 million for the 17,000 
students that are out there in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a continuation of our efforts in 
highways at $296 million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as well, we have the increase of the 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

municipalities. The municipal revenue-sharing grant is and has 
been increased by 15.4 per cent this year. This is the second of 
three $10 million increases and we have a three-year total of 
$60 million to the municipalities. And, Mr. Speaker, I must say 
that in a matter of fairness, the North — which was completely 
left out by the Tories — they were cut back in many situations, 
including municipalities. We didn’t see . . . Housing was cut 
back, sewer and water was cut back; it was nonexistent when 
the Tories and the right wingers took over. 
 
What we are seeing is an increase here of approximately 
$800,000 on a northern revenue-sharing fund. We are now close 
to $6 billion, you know, for the communities of the North. And 
I believe that this is a very, very important aspect of it. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, those are my general comments. But 
before I move into my more specific comments I wanted to look 
at some . . . one other aspect that I thought was very, very 
important. We have, in regards to the social development side, 
we have been talking about for many years daycare spaces. And 
I was very pleased, you know, when our government this year 
made sure that we were dealing with this issue. 
 
And over the next four years, Mr. Speaker, we will have 1,200 
new daycare spaces in this province — 500 of this will be this 
year and I think that’s very, very important in regards to the 
budget. I know that as we look, you know, back into the history 
and we look back into the . . . to the record, the NDP 
government has been very strong on this issue. I know what it 
was like during Tory times because during that time issues such 
as this were treated in a very negative light. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, I would speak a few words in Cree on 
the general aspects of the budget. Mr. Speaker, with due respect 
to all languages . . . 
 
(15:00) 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was doing the overview of the budget in Cree, 
I made sure that I explained very clearly, you know, what are 
not only the basis of the budget but the intent and the impact of 
the budget in the many areas of importance — particularly in 
health, education, and municipalities, and so on — in relation to 
the strong partnership with First Nations and also with Métis 
people and also northerners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I looked at the issue, I turn now to the debate 
on the Sask Party. For me as I looked at the debate on the Sask 
Party . . . I’ve been in the House now for over 16 years and I 
have seen the history during the Grant Devine period, and also 
the shift when the Saskatchewan Party was a little bit worried 
about the politics of the Grant Devine PC (Progressive 
Conservative) Party because of the problems that they had in 
terms of financial mismanagement, that they would have to 
change their name. So they changed their name to the 
Saskatchewan Party. But I’ll tell you, it didn’t fool the people in 
the North. 
 
It hasn’t fooled a lot of Aboriginal people basically because 
they’ve seen the same thing operate at the federal level — the 
federal level with Jim Pankiw, etc., when the Reform Party 

were there. They know their attitude against First Nations and 
Métis people. 
 
And the reason why they don’t get fooled is that because they 
see a similar sort of pattern happening federally and 
provincially. Reform Party changed their name to the Canadian 
Alliance. Did it change who they were? Not very much. They’re 
the still same Reform Party with the right-wing policies. When 
they did the change from the PC Tories to the Saskatchewan 
Party, have they made a change? The answer is not very much. 
It’s much the same, the same formula is there. 
 
I heard time and again when Grant Devine was in the House — 
and I had to watch him and bear him for five years — that he 
would say exactly the same mantra, that indeed what he would 
do is cut taxes and spend more. And he was going on and on at 
that all the time. Pretty soon this province became just about 
bankrupt. A lot of people had all kinds of words as legalized 
highway robbery; all kinds of strong words were done during 
that period in time. 
 
And in many, in many ways we saw that happen because we 
lost money in the highways program as well. They sold off $40 
million and gave away that much equipment. And in many 
cases for many years they ruined our highways budget and our 
highway system. 
 
And I remember them talking about the taxation. They cut off 
the gasoline tax at that time but I know one thing: they said they 
promised they would deal with it forever; all of a sudden when 
they were going in the hole for many years, guess what, he 
brought back the gasoline tax and then it was even higher than 
ever. 
 
And when I talk about the taxes this year, from the NDP side 
we have looked at a sustainable approach on taxation. We have 
looked at cutting taxes. We knew . . . We cut taxes for a lot of 
people on personal income. Personal income tax — we’ve cut 
over about $4 million on the taxation side on that over the past 
three years. 
 
And I think that is very, very important in regards to a lot of our 
people from the province — our working people, our small 
businesses, and a lot of our people putting food on the table for 
their children, and also in regards to buying a lot of the 
equipment. And I think that’s a very, very important aspect. 
And a lot of the members of across are always very sensitive 
when I connect Grant Devine, when I connect Grant Devine 
with the Sask Party; basically because they try and run away 
from it, they try and hide away from it, but they can’t. It stares 
at them in the face even on their trying times with Grant 
Schmidt these days. 
 
You know, I heard one of the reasons why a lot of the First 
Nations and Métis people and northerners don’t trust the 
Saskatchewan Party is that they say one thing but they do 
another. When they say one thing and they did another, we saw 
that in very, very clear terms because as I looked back at the — 
and the Saskatchewan Party members get a little fidgety when I 
say that — they said that indeed they would support, for 
example on the question of SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority), you know . . . and this is what the 
Saskatchewan Party leader said. 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

 

He delivered a speech to the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) in February 2002, and I quote: 
 

Hermanson praised the FSIN for running a successful 
gaming business and complimented it for addressing 
“governance challenges” at SIGA . . . 

 
It goes on in his speech: 
 

(The Leader of the Opposition said) . . . the financial 
success of . . . SIGA is one of the great and largely untold 
business success stories in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, of course they get all excited over there because of 
their connections to the old Tories. And they like to say that 
they’re not old Tories. Mr. Speaker, just by the reaction out 
there, I have hit a nerve. Because yet they are always that way. 
Mr. Speaker, because here it is their leader says one thing in 
front of the chiefs. He goes in front of the chiefs, he tells them 
SIGA is great, SIGA is good, then he comes back in the House 
and he pounces away and tries to destroy the 25-year 
agreement. 
 
Every single one of the Sask Party members voted against that 
SIGA agreement. The member from Humboldt, etc., may make 
good comments on SIGA with individual members out there, 
but she herself voted against the agreement. And they can’t 
have it both ways. For example, they try and make a few 
positive comments and a lot of people couldn’t trust you. As I 
looked at the facts over the years, that’s exactly what has 
happened. 
 
And when I looked at the questions that they always raise into 
Aboriginal and First Nations people, the reason is this, the 
reason is this, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of positive stuff that’s 
happening with the development. There’s Aboriginal people 
involved in business development. They’re involved in 
educational development. 
 
We have SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) 
building which the member from Weyburn was tearing down a 
little while ago, two weeks ago, saying that the money that was 
put into that building was wasted. And I said to myself, the 
shame of that member from Weyburn shooting down the work 
that has been done on the SIFC building, because in that 
building they were putting a tepee with respect for veterans who 
died for this country. They died for this country and they were 
being honoured on the tepee image, and it was part of the initial 
plan, and they were moving forward with it. 
 
What does the Saskatchewan Party do? They tear it down. They 
tear down that aspect and that’s the reason why, in many cases, 
First Nations and Métis people simply don’t trust what you do. 
 
And as I look back, they look at the different type of 
agreements. This year, on the First Nations side, we will be 
dealing with a TLE (Treaty Land Entitlement) Agreement. This 
year, it’ll be $22.3 million that we will be spending. And over 
the years, our commitment has been this way. Took us six 
months to get into government, Mr. Speaker, when we signed 
the TLE Agreement. And every year we have the budget to 
spend money on the TLE Agreement, guess who votes against 
it? The Saskatchewan Party. They’re always voting against the 

budget that provides money for TLE. Yet when you hear them 
talk: oh, we’re for treaty rights, we’re for this, and we’re for 
that. But they vote against that budget every single year on 
TLE. They can speak and say we support it. On the other hand, 
their actions speak louder than words. They attack it. 
 
And of course, the member for Maple Creek is talking from his 
seat and I notice that we were trying to do an approach where it 
was very, very important on the Great Sand Hills case. They 
were trying to sound as if they were supporting . . . they were 
supporting the position of First Nations. All of sudden when the 
ranchers showed up in the audience, they had a different 
position. They were supporting now the ranchers. Here we were 
trying to create a situation where there was a fair process taking 
place and that’s what they were doing, and that’s exactly what 
they were doing. And that’s the reason why there is little 
support out there and little trust out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that . . . I believe that as we are moving 
forward, there’s a lot of the debate vis-á-vis on the House on the 
Sask Party side. I would . . . just looked at one of their major 
debates as I was on the floor. They were saying that indeed the 
6.8 per cent growth would be there. But indeed as I looked 
about the information, we had excellent information vis-à-vis 
that response. They were talking about The Conference Board. 
The Conference Board of Canada said that if we get a normal 
crop: 
 

I don’t think 6.8 per cent economic growth is overly 
optimistic. It is based on the assumption of a normal crop. 
 

And that was by David Madani from The Conference Board of 
Canada, Regina Leader-Post, March 29, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am close to the end of my speech so I’ll make a 
couple of comments on the North. 
 
On the North we have some improvements. We’ve got training 
spaces — we’ve got 40 additional training spaces for health and 
science training for the North. We also have 40 seats in regards 
to the aspect of nursing training in the North. I heard the 
members from across saying nothing was happening. That 
means they don’t recognize that people are being trained in the 
North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we took over from the Tories there was 
about 1,000 people that were being trained. With NDP now in 
office for 10 years, we have over 2,600 people in 
post-secondary education in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was other improvements. We had a $4.9 
million for the water system up in the north country. We also 
have improvements on the highways. We also had 
improvements for our libraries up north. I will read a quick 
quote on that. It says, this boost that they got . . . 

 
And I will quote this from Pahkisimon Nuye?ah Library 
System: 
 

This boost will inspire them to continue in their efforts to 
provide excellent library service to their communities. 
 

I just received this letter, Mr. Speaker, and I will be tabling that 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

for my budget speech. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I look around we are helping the people in 
the North. I notice that in regards to a small fund — even on 
history — I notice that there’s going to be $75,000 for the 
Cumberland House Historic Park upgrades. 1974, my home 
community — it’s very . . . a very historic part of the 
community. It was the first inland settlement of the Hudson Bay 
Company, and it is very, very important that with the historic 
site that’s there, there needs to be some upgrading, which we do 
in other parts of the province as well, Mr. Speaker, but I wanted 
to mention that. 
 
So as I look back, Mr. Speaker, this year’s Throne Speech has 
been very, very good throughout this province and for the North 
and our continued partnerships with First Nations and Métis 
people. 
 
And I would say that the negativism of the Saskatchewan Party, 
the doom and gloom attitude is not what is part of our 
government. We firmly believe in our people of this province. 
We have faith and trust in our people that indeed we will move 
forward. This budget presents another step forward in this new 
century. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving of course to 
supporting the motion of the government and going against the 
amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to say 
that it’s a pleasure to be on my feet once again in this Assembly 
to address the most recent document put forward by the 
government of the day — the recent budget. 
 
When I stood to speak a week or so ago in response to the 
Speech from the Throne, I didn’t realize that I would have an 
opportunity to once again make an appeal to the people of this 
House and to the people of the province and my own 
constituency on some of the areas that I think are significant 
and very important, and some that were left completely 
unaddressed in the most recent budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do recall, however, that I didn’t take the opportunity when I 
was addressing the Speech from the Throne to comment about 
the great people and constituency as a whole of Cypress Hills. 
 
You know, every day that I’m in this legislature I am reminded 
again of the responsibility that those of us who are elected to 
represent our various constituencies have in this great Chamber. 
And I am awed frankly by the level of responsibility that this 
position, this elected position, has imbued on me personally and 
on each of us as individuals who represent large constituencies, 
small constituencies, wonderful places all around this province. 
 
But without any exaggeration, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say 
the most wonderful place in the province of Saskatchewan is 
the area of Cypress Hills. There isn’t a biased bone in my body 
when I say that. But I do want to bring to the attention of this 
House how great the area of Cypress Hills is, how wonderful 

the people are, and the great diversity of the region. 
 
I talk to more and more people who say they have visited the 
area and have been surprisingly impressed. Now I think that’s 
sort of a problem for me because I’m never surprised that 
they’re impressed. But if they’re surprised with how impressed 
they are when they get to Cypress Hills, I think that it’s . . . it 
behooves every person in this province to visit the constituency 
and find out for themselves why, why Cypress Hills is such an 
impressive area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the beauty of the hills themselves — an 
area that is so unique geographically and in many other 
respects. In terms of flora and fauna I’m told that there is no 
place like the Cypress Hills anywhere else in North America. If 
you want to find similar types of species of animals and plants, 
you may have to go as far as Siberia to find similarities. It’s a 
completely unique area in North America. 
 
And on the north side of the No. 1 we have The Great Sand 
Hills, an area that has been the subject of quite a bit of 
controversy lately. There’s a lot of very environmentally 
important sensitivity that needs to be regarded in terms of the 
Sand Hills but there’s also vast riches there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have the Sand Hills as almost a 
juxtaposition in its barrenness to the beauty and the grandeur 
and the lushness of the Cypress Hills. And so within a very 
short driving distance — 100 miles at the very most — you 
have, you know, polar ends of the experience in nature in the 
Cypress Hills. 
 
But one of the most fundamental elements of that constituency, 
Mr. Speaker, really has to be the people. I don’t know that the 
spirit of independence is alive and well to the extent that it is in 
the people of the Cypress Hills region. 
 
Now I know that we are a different breed down there. I know 
that our proximity to the Montana border and the Alberta border 
and the North Saskatchewan River have created a separation 
and certainly a different mentality I think in the people of the 
area. 
 
But nevertheless as independent and as determined as the 
people of Cypress Hills are to achieve, to thrive, to do more 
than survive, Mr. Speaker, to really benefit themselves and their 
communities and their families, they are also committed to this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as sparsely populated as the Cypress Hills 
constituency is, there is a disproportionate amount of benefit 
that accrues to this province through the initiative of the people 
of Cypress Hills. And I’d like to laud the people for their effort 
and their deliberate willingness to contribute to the well-being 
of the province as a whole, at this opportunity today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move now to some comments in regard 
to the budget that was presented by the new Finance minister 
late last week. I just think that it’s important to kind of get a 
grasp on, on sort of what the overall thrust of that budget might 
be. 
 
I had a title for the Throne Speech. I haven’t bothered to title 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

 

the budget speech or my response to it. But I listened to it. I 
read some of the fine print, the details, well, the intricacies of 
the budget. And it seems to me that this budget has really 
provided a plethora of options. 
 
Now before members on the government side think that that’s a 
compliment, let me just ask you what you think of this, Mr. 
Speaker. All of the options that appeared in this budget could be 
summed up in these few words. It was full of could-dos, 
would-dos, ought-to-dos, did-dos, might-dos, thinking about 
dos and won’t dos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t a lot of substance in this budget. 
Once you got beyond the commitment of a certain amount of 
money to health care and a certain amount of money to 
education, there really wasn’t much of substance. There was a 
complete recitation of all of the things that the government has 
done and what they might do and, if they ever have the money, 
they would like to do. But there wasn’t a whole lot of substance 
beyond those two points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a sign of good government that they 
would make . . . in a speech such as the budget speech or the 
Throne Speech, they would make tough decisions all the while 
offending the least amount of people. But this budget made no 
tough decisions and managed to offend a vast cross-section of 
groups that represented the largest percentage of people in this 
province. 
 
Let’s look at some of the groups that responded almost 
immediately to the disappointment of the budget. 
 
I would refer first of all, Mr. Speaker, to the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association and the mayors of the large 
cities. What they have said in response to the budget provisions 
for large cities and the urban communities of our province is 
well documented. It’s on record. In fact, I believe it’s on 
videotape playing on the Web site belonging to the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. They have a 
very clear voice of response and it’s been a negative one, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so, we have 80 per cent of the people in this province 
represented by urban municipalities and the government in their 
budget just kind of stuck a stick in their eye and said, I’m sorry, 
you’re going to have to wait another few years before you’re 
going to get any money from us. And then the government has 
the temerity to wonder why the big city mayors are offended by 
their actions. 
 
They didn’t put enough money in that budget to assuage any of 
their concerns. And one thing for certain, Mr. Speaker, there 
wasn’t enough money there, there wasn’t enough money there 
to prevent tax increases to every property tax or property owner 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the big city mayors and the small community 
mayors are falling further and further behind in terms of the 
cost of upkeep where it relates to infrastructure, whether it’s 
roads or sewer or water facilities. They are falling further and 
further behind in terms of service provision to their people. 
 
And if the provincial government is not going to share the 

revenues that they so gladly talked about — the increased 
revenues from oil and gas and sales tax revenues — if they’re 
not willing to share those revenues with the communities of this 
province, the communities have no choice but to go back to 
their taxpayers, their property owners and ask them for more 
money. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the mayors have made a very 
good case of the fact that they’re at a breaking point with their 
citizens on the property tax issue. There is just no more money 
to be squeezed out of property tax in this province. 
 
And so if the government is somewhat surprised by the 
response of the big city mayors and of the mayors of the other 
municipalities, they oughtn’t to be because this is something 
that could have been expected, knowing how tight things have 
been in the past and how much costs have increased in the last 
12 months or the last couple of years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we had SUMA’s (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) response and the response of the 
big city mayors. 
 
Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I need to clarify that. There was one 
apparently, one big city mayor who decided he could throw his 
support behind the government budget and that was the mayor 
of Moose Jaw. Now I wonder why. You know, this government 
has virtually bought the city of Moose Jaw with various 
investments in that community over the last couple of years. 
They own it — lock, stock, and barrel. No wonder the mayor of 
Moose Jaw is happy with the money that they got in this 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SSTA, Mr. Speaker, the SSTA is another group 
that . . . particularly offended by this particular budget. The 
SSTA, Mr. Speaker, has been . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Member will be 
permitted to speak. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think that I’d like 
to quote Shakespeare at this point if I could: methinks the 
member doth protest too much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they apparently are unaware of literary licence. 
Mr. Speaker, they are quite unaware of literary licence — or at 
least unwilling to give us the opportunity to use literary licence 
because they are very free with the truth whenever they speak 
themselves. 
 
And I think that I haven’t misspoke myself. I think that 
anybody with a common shred of understanding would be 
understanding of the intent of the comment. So I’m not going to 
retract them. 
 
It is a known fact, Mr. Speaker, that the government of the day 
has not put enough money into urban governance in this 
province. And they’re going to suffer the consequences of that. 
I will defer to the wisdom of the people in the next election in 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

that regard. 
 
Returning to my text, Mr. Speaker, the SSTA didn’t have a 
whole lot of good things to say about the budget either. Because 
as it turns out, while the increases that go to education will 
cover some of the incremental costs associated with the 
teachers’ contract, it will not be enough to provide the money 
necessary to meet the other needs and obligations of the school 
districts in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other people employed by school 
districts that have had wage increases, that they are . . . that are 
expecting some kind of increase as a result of their salary 
negotiations and the contract, and there are added costs 
associated with running a school district. Well you know, the 
government talks about how much money they put into 
education but in reality it will not be enough to meet the needs 
of the school districts in this province. 
 
So once again they will be required to go back to the taxpayers, 
the property owners of this province, and they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. I would ask the members all to take a deep breath 
and then open their ears and let’s hear what the member for 
Cypress Hills has to say. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to continue. Mr. Speaker, the SSTA clearly said 
that the budget was insufficient to meet the needs of their 
organization and their members around the province. And once 
again the taxpayer, the property owner in various communities 
will be the one to carry the burden for this government’s 
budgetary decisions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to go to an editorial that showed 
up in The StarPhoenix, today as a matter of fact. And well I find 
this very interesting, but the title of this particular editorial is 
“Critics right to pan budget.” 
 
Now we’ve talked about the SUMA response. We’ve talked 
about the SSTA’s response. Without reading the whole 
editorial, I do want to point out here that they do talk about 
farm groups, business leaders, and research groups at 
universities. Their refrain was all the same: 
 

Any additional money they received, while sorely needed, 
fell far short of what’s required. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was one area where there was 
increase in spending, and as is often the case I think it’s 
important to give credit where credit is due. But I want to, I 
want to point out that not all is well in the increased monies that 
have gone to health care. 
 
While there are some equipment purchases that are going to be 
made as a result of this, while there’s going to be some 
increased training opportunities, I notice that one of the areas 
where the health increases fell short was in the provision of 
recruitment and retention capabilities for health care 
professionals. And I think that that is one of the most serious 
issues facing health care in this province. 
 

We have had members of the health care profession say 
repeatedly that the roadblocks in health care provision in this 
province are largely related to the loss of professionals. And I 
think that until a serious plan is put forward to retrain . . . I’m 
sorry, to retain, to train, and to provide a good operating 
experience for health care professionals in this province, we’re 
going to continue having that particular difficulty. 
 
(15:30) 
 
I noticed the news story in last Friday’s paper in which, if I 
might, I want to quote the Minister of Health. I know the 
minister made this comment in the most sort of non-maligning 
way he possibly could. I know that it was well intended. But it 
says here that the minister says that there is no advantage to 
training more nurses if other provinces can hire them when they 
graduate. 
 
I know what he meant. I know what the intention of that 
comment was; I’m certain I do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I 
guess I’d like to follow that comment through to its logical 
conclusion because if in fact what the minister was saying was 
followed logically to the end of the argument, the best position 
this government could take, that this province could take, was 
to train no nurses so we wouldn’t lose any nurses. I think that 
that’s where the government’s vision of the way to run this 
province and our vision of how this province ought to be run 
differs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a campaign going on right now that says 
we have a wide open future. We have not just a wide open 
future, we have tremendous need in this province. And if we’re 
not going to address the need at the most critical point, it 
doesn’t really matter what else we do around the edges. The 
problems will remain. 
 
I think that the training of nurses is not less important because 
we’re losing them; the training of nurses becomes more 
important because we’re losing so many of them. But not only 
does the training become more important, so does the absolute 
necessity of creating an environment in this province where 
nurses want to stay here and work. 
 
And to that end I would ask that maybe the Minister of Health, 
maybe his government would sit down with the unions in this 
province, the health care professionals, and the health districts, 
to work out a process, a procedure, a plan whereby newly 
graduating nursing students can get full-time employment in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things I hear repeatedly is that when nurses graduate 
from their degree programs and try to find work in 
Saskatchewan, all they’re offered is part-time work. And I think 
that that’s one of the reasons why we lose so many of our 
nursing students. Our graduates are looking for full-time work. 
They want to put the skills that they’ve acquired after four or 
five years of training to the best use, and getting a part-time 
position is not the way they’re going to get the best experience. 
 
And if you have an option as a newly minted graduate to go to a 
community or a province or a state or some foreign jurisdiction 
where you can get a full-time job and use all the skills you’ve 
been taught over the previous three or four or five years, you’re 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

 

going to take that opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You’re not 
going to stay in Saskatchewan and work at a part-time position 
just because you like it here, just because your family’s here. 
We need to be competitive in that regard and until we are, I’m 
sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to continue losing these 
newly minted grads. 
 
One of the other things I do know is that retirement is likely to 
create a nursing shortage of roughly 600 to 650 individuals a 
year in the near future. And if we don’t increase our training 
seats for nurses, not only are we going to lose, not only are we 
going to lose those young people who prefer to go elsewhere or 
are forced to go elsewhere, we’re going to lose big time because 
we won’t have the people to replace all of the early retirements. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the problems with this budget, I 
felt, was the very optimistic growth projection of 6.8 per cent in 
the GDP (gross domestic product). And, Mr. Speaker, I know 
that there might be some economic model somewhere that the 
Minister of Finance and his colleagues could drag out to say 
this is entirely possible. I assume that at some point or other it 
has happened in the past. 
 
But I noticed that the government has hinged a lot of its excuses 
for its financial performance and its future financial 
performance on one issue, and that is the impact of drought in 
this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to go to the, if you’re going 
to go to the farm problem as the excuse you need to have to 
justify your financial shenanigans, maybe you could use a farm 
analogy to justify or to deal with this whole thing. I’ve been 
around rural people and farmers just long enough to know that 
they say, anybody who’s going to grow a crop will say, you 
never lose a crop in February; you never lose a crop in March; 
you probably never lose a crop in April. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, neither do those prudent farmers ever sell their entire 
crop before it’s in the bin. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this particular Finance minister has not 
only assured us that he’s going to see an average or a better than 
average crop grow, he’s also based his entire financial 
predictions on selling the crop before it’s even come out of the 
ground. 
 
That is not very prudent, Mr. Speaker, and I think that the 
minister is really erring on the side of extreme optimism — not 
just a little bit of optimism, but extreme optimism. And it’s not 
. . . It’s imprudent, frankly, for him to make that kind of a jump. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there many, many other areas where I would like 
to go on this budget debate, but I think in the interests of time I 
will conclude my comments by saying that I’m going to be 
supporting the amendment because I don’t feel that this budget 
provides the blueprint for this province that we really need. 
 
You know one last comment about the future wide open 
campaign. You know as I drive from my constituency to 
Regina, I drive quite an area. If I drive from my office to the 
north end of my constituency, I drive quite an area. It’s a vast, 
open area. The future is wide open in the Cypress Hills. The 
future is wide open but the people have left. 
 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is an auction house based 
in Medicine Hat who conducts most of the farm auctions in my 
constituency. I’m told that they have so many farm auctions 
from among the people of Cypress Hills that they quit taking 
dates because they could not accommodate any more sales. 
 
Not only is our future wide open in Cypress Hills, it’s 
unpopulated, it’s empty. And I’m looking forward to the day 
when we have a government in place, when we have a budget in 
place, when we have a plan in place that will not just stop the 
out-migration from my constituency but will actually see people 
wanting to move back into that area and take up productive 
farming and ranching activities and business activities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment and 
voting against the budget. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment I am pleased to take part in the 
debate on this, the 2003-04 budget, our government’s 10th 
consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this year’s provincial budget, approximately 
$606 million is allocated to the newly structured and newly 
named Department of Community Resources and Employment. 
And as part of the restructuring that occurred with the addition 
of career and employment services and the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation to the former Department of Social 
Services, a new vision was created for the department. 
 
And that vision is this, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
regardless of differences in needs or circumstances have the 
opportunity to contribute and be included in the economic and 
social life of the province. And that vision tells us that the 
department’s role is to focus our efforts on helping individuals 
and families address issues which affect their ability to fully 
participate in the economy and social aspects of life within their 
communities and the province. 
 
It directs us to shift our efforts from constantly responding to 
crises to working with our clients to help them develop 
long-term solutions to the issues they face. And we do that 
because we know that healthy families and communities are the 
building blocks of a healthy and vibrant society. 
 
That vision also sets two new goals for our department, Mr. 
Speaker. The first is economic independence and self-reliance. 
Mr. Speaker, in my conversations with social assistance clients, 
I’ve never had one tell me that they wanted to stay on welfare. 
What they tell me they want, Mr. Speaker, is to be independent, 
to support themselves and their families by working, to live 
with dignity. But many of them also tell me that they need some 
help to make the often-challenging transition from welfare to 
work, and we have provided that help. 
 
Through the Building Independence program and our career and 
employment services program, we’re helping literally thousands 
of people including Employment Insurance clients enter or 
return to the workforce. As a result, Mr. Speaker, more than 
5,700 people participated in the Jobs First program in 2002, its 
first full year of operation. And as a result of our Building 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

Independence initiatives, more than 6,000 families with 
children have moved from welfare to the workforce. 
 
As more and more families move from social assistance to the 
workplace, they can, like all low-income working families in 
Saskatchewan, take advantage of the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement. Mr. Speaker, in 2002, an average of 
7,900 low-income working families in this province received a 
Saskatchewan employment supplement benefit each month to 
help them with the child-related or other costs of going to work. 
 
And in the first year, as a part of my department, career and 
employment services across the province provided services to 
more than 24,000 Saskatchewan people. In partnership with 
over 535 organizations, including employers, career and 
employment services delivered employment programs to more 
than 1,600 individuals and communities across Saskatchewan, 
with fully two-thirds of those participating finding employment 
or going on to further education or training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, simply put, Saskatchewan people want to work. 
They’re proud and fiercely independent. They want to work and 
they want to become economically independent. 
 
But they have things to tell us and by listening we’ve learned 
that there are two areas which can present challenges as they 
strive for that economic independence. Those two areas, Mr. 
Speaker, are: one, adequate and affordable housing; and two, 
quality accessible child care. 
 
I’m pleased to say that for the 2003-04 budget year, along with 
the federal and municipal governments, the budget for the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment 
provides $40 million to construct 1,400 affordable housing units 
over the next four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, conditional commitments 
will be made to CBOs (community-based organization) for 
construction of over 400 new homes in 2003-04 at a public cost 
of $12 million. Because of the high need for housing in the 
northern part of our province, at least $3 million from the 
federal government and $3 million from the province will be 
specifically allocated for northern housing needs. This 
translates to new affordable housing for approximately 116 
northern families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said a moment ago, a second challenge 
to employment for many people is the availability of quality 
child care. Last week I announced to this House the largest 
investment in child care in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, over the next four years, 
child care Saskatchewan will make 1,200 new child care spaces 
available to Saskatchewan families — 1,200 new spaces, Mr. 
Speaker. And because children are a priority of this government 
— indeed they are the future of this province — we added an 
additional $2.2 million to the 800,000 provided by the federal 
government for 2003-04. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this means we will be developing, providing early 
childhood services grant funding for 500 new child care spaces 
this year, in addition to 250 currently existing spaces that were 
not receiving the grant but will, Mr. Speaker, starting today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge the appreciation and 
the recognition of the significance of the commitment we made, 
in the letter . . . an e-mail sent by the Saskatchewan Early Child 
Care Directors Association last Thursday to the Premier, and in 
which the statement was made, and I quote: 
 

. . . I am celebrating what your gov’t is (going to be) doing 
for the children of Saskatchewan. Your gov’t has ‘dared to 
care’. 

 
Mr. Speaker, affordable housing and child care — these are just 
two ways that Saskatchewan supports working families. The 
Saskatchewan child benefit, family health benefits, the 
employment supplement, and the only universal child tax credit 
in the country — Mr. Speaker, let me repeat that, the only 
universal child tax credit in the country — Mr. Speaker, all of 
these support working families and children. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, we’re moving away from our 
traditional social services role. When people approach the 
department, we sit down with them to identify the kinds of 
support and assistance they need and then do our best to 
respond accordingly. And when they get on their feet, Mr. 
Speaker, we take a step back as they move toward economic 
and social independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our strategy is working. Fewer children are living 
in poverty and our social assistance caseloads continue their 
steady, year-over-year decline, having now dropped year, after 
year, after year, after year — for eight consecutive years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of people working in Saskatchewan in 
2002 was the second highest on record. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy to report that since introducing the Building 
Independence program in 1998, most importantly there are 
13,000 fewer kids growing up on welfare in Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second goal for the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment is inclusion in families and 
communities. In addition, providing access to high quality 
support systems that address the needs of our youngest and 
most vulnerable citizens and their families is a priority for this 
government. 
 
Saskatchewan’s Kids First program targets . . . it targets . . . it 
services primarily to low-income neighbourhoods and 
communities and involves partnerships with the Aboriginal 
community health districts, school boards, and others. In 
2002-03, the Kids First program provided services to 447 
families. 
 
For 2003-04, Kids First will receive total funding in the amount 
of $11.3 million of which 9.8 million will go to targeted 
communities. As evidence of the joint federal-provincial 
commitment to vulnerable children, this represents an 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

 

incredible 45 per cent increase over last year’s budget. 
 
And part of this funding will be used to develop 80 child care 
spaces for children participating in the Kids First program. 
These spaces are in addition to the 500 child care spaces I’ve 
already talked about. Mr. Speaker, this new funding will allow 
us to double the number of families participating in the Kids 
First program in 2003-04. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Child and Family Services 
Act will make kinship care or care by a member of a child’s 
extended family the option of choice, where a child’s safety and 
well-being are at risk and he or she must be removed from the 
home. These amendments also require the province to support 
the kinship care including providing financial support. I want to 
assure the House, Mr. Speaker, that no child will be placed in a 
situation which presents a risk to the child’s safety. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our streets can pose a serious risk to a child 
or young person’s safety and well-being. As I’ve said 
repeatedly, the sexual abuse and exploitation of our children on 
the streets of our cities is child abuse, pure and simple, and it 
will not be tolerated. We have undertaken many initiatives over 
the past few years and particularly last year to address this 
reprehensible situation, one of which was a safe house in 
Saskatoon as a response. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our community partners and in particularly our 
First Nations and Métis partners felt it was essential to develop 
a safe house in Regina as well. Mr. Speaker, we have developed 
a very strong partnership with the FSIN to make the 
development of a Regina safe house for sexually exploited 
children and youth a reality. A well respected First Nations 
agency will deliver the safe house program in Regina and, Mr. 
Speaker, Treaty Four Urban Services anticipates that the Regina 
safe house will open in June of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one more way our government is working 
on behalf of Saskatchewan children and youth. It is part of our 
strategy to keep our children safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the disability action plan developed by the 
Saskatchewan Council on Disability Issues emphasizes full 
citizenship for people with disabilities — a goal shared by our 
government and reflected in our strategic plan for the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment. 
 
I’m pleased to say that in response to the council’s 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker, the Community Resources and 
Employment budget will provide over 4 million new dollars in 
supports and assistance for persons with disabilities. Across 
government nearly $6 million has been allocated to addressing 
issues raised by the disability community in addition to amounts 
spent in the previous budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities who are able to work, 
want to work. And if there’s anything that has been made clear 
to me since I’ve come to this portfolio, it has been that fact. 
Therefore, of the department’s $4 million in . . . 4 million new 
dollars for 2003-04, $1.85 million will be directed to providing 
individualized, flexible employment supports to accommodate 
the needs of persons with disabilities to help address barriers to 
mainstream employment. 

In addition, $1 million will allow my department’s community 
living division to address increased demand for services to 
enable people with disabilities to remain in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further $1 million will be provided for an 
increase of $10 in the monthly disability allowance for people 
with disabilities who are on social assistance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, $300,000 will be targeted to support to 
mainstream employers to enable them to accommodate 
employees with disabilities. 
 
The disability community has identified the loss of health 
benefits as a major barrier to leaving social assistance. And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will extend health coverage for the 
first year to persons with disabilities who leave social assistance 
in order to enter the labour force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to acknowledge the important news 
release put out by the Saskatchewan Voice of People with 
Disabilities on Friday, on budget day, entitled, “Good news 
budget for people with disabilities.” And in referring to the 
Voice’s news release, Mr. Speaker, if I could just quote a 
couple of . . . a couple of sentences. In the lead sentence the 
Voice says this: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan is to be commended for 
its commitment to advancing the full citizenship of people 
with disabilities in Saskatchewan. 

 
And they go on in their news release, Mr. Speaker, to 
acknowledge another item I’ve not yet referred to. And they 
say, and I quote: 
 

The Voice would also like to congratulate the government 
in recognizing the need for additional money for 
Special-Needs Transit in the province by infusing an 
additional $715,000 to replace 12 Paratransit vehicles in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it means a great deal to me that those who are the 
voice for people with disabilities in our province have labelled 
this as a “Good news budget for people with disabilities.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, last week our Premier talked about the 
vision of our government. A vision of a province filled with 
opportunities — opportunities for anyone prepared to dream big 
and plan well and work hard. A vision of a healthy and growing 
economy which includes all, all Saskatchewan people. My 
department shares that vision, Mr. Speaker, as I believe do most 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I believe we’re on the right track and moving in the right 
direction and we’re on a bit of a roll. Saskatchewan people are 
looking forward to and building for the future. A future which 
includes everyone — “A Future Wide Open.” 
 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting in favour of 
this well-balanced budget. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

Deputy Speaker, I have a lot of admiration for the member from 
Moose Jaw North as an orator. I find he is very eloquent and by 
some fate of the gods, this is the second time I have had to 
follow him in the House. And as a fairly new member, it’s 
possible that I would be somewhat intimidated. I think he is one 
of the best speakers that this Assembly has. 
 
But fortunately, Mr. Speaker, I was comforted by the fact that 
he would be speaking on fiscal matters. And as the content of 
his speech would be largely nonsensical, that intimidation was 
able to fade away. 
 
It’s clear, Mr. Speaker — after Friday — that it’s budgets as 
well as Baghdad that coalitions can bomb. This budget was 
based on fantasy, primarily on two fronts; first, the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, and second, the growth production predicted 
at 6.8 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this unelected Premier has assumed the 
reins, the debt has risen by $1 million a day — $1 million a day, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a debt that I will have to pay and my 
children will have to pay. 
 
It’s this government’s position, Mr. Speaker, to blame the 
entirety of this province’s debt on a Premier who was elected 
when myself and the member from Elphinstone were in the 
fourth grade. This is how out of touch this Premier is with fiscal 
reality. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, he appointed a physician to the 
ministry of Finance in hoping that he could doctor the books. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, mission accomplished — except for two 
small problems. One is the additional half a billion dollars 
added to the provincial debt and the other problem, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the people of Saskatchewan. That’s right, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are not misled by fancy 
haircuts, budget doctoring, or the unelected million dollar man. 
 
When revenues exceed expenditures you have a deficit. No 
imaginary fund removes these facts. When you run a business 
and spend more than you take in, you have losses regardless of 
whether you utilize a credit line or not. This government, this 
government, Mr. Speaker, will spend more than it takes in — 
that is deficit. There is nothing . . . there is no other word for it. 
 
I do not trust doctoring with the budget, Mr. Speaker, not from 
a former political leader who presided over a party that he led 
hundreds of thousands of dollars into debt. 
 
The debt is now higher than when the NDP administration took 
office in 1991. The problem here, Mr. Speaker, this is a deficit 
budget. The debt is rising by the tune of half a billion dollars. 
It’s shameful. It’s shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no way anyone in the world can justify saying it is a 
balanced budget because we used a fund that had no money in 
it. This is like me at the end of the year, Mr. Speaker, going to 
the banker and saying, I only grew this much grain, I spent this 
much money, but I paid all my bills because I’ve got a line of 
credit. And the banker, they won’t buy that. I’m sure the 
bankers in New York won’t buy that. It’s a fallacy. 
 
The second thing, Mr. Speaker — and this is even, this is even 

more disturbing — is the fallacy of this budget with its 
prediction of 6.8 per cent growth in GDP. This growth rate is 
farcical. It’s construed only to hide the true nature of the 
massive, massive debt. 
 
What does 6.8 per cent growth really mean? It means and it 
presupposes growth in the agricultural section . . . sector. And 
although the agricultural sector is currently pegged at only 23 
per cent of GDP, this number is derived from the government’s 
determination that every 10 per cent reduction on average crop 
will affect the GDP negatively by 2.3 per cent. 
 
This does beg the question of what type of growth does the 
government expect from agriculture when it is only 33 per cent 
of the GDP? Further, how is this to be fostered, Mr. Speaker, 
when the province announces a $40 million cut to Sask Ag and 
Food? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers just don’t add up. For 33 per cent 
of the economy to bolster the economy to a rate of 6.8 per cent 
of GDP growth means realized growth in the agricultural sector 
has to be in the neighbourhood of around 16 per cent. 
 
And although the Finance minister misquoted a number of 
Canadian banking institutions — as none of them, Mr. Speaker, 
none of them claimed Saskatchewan’s growth rate would even 
near 6.8 per cent — I can tell you unequivocally there is not a 
bank in Saskatchewan, there is not a credit union, there is not a 
bookie, there is not a grandfather that would lend money to a 
farmer based on a 16 per cent growth production. This is a pure 
fallacy and it’s an insult to the farmers of this province. 
 
And it’s an insult — it’s an insult; it’s an insult — to all the 
members of this House that this would be portrayed as what the 
actual growth is going to be. 
 
The member opposite says it’s happened before because . . . and 
the assumption here is that there’s been shrinking for two years 
in the sector and suddenly it’s going to rebound to average to 
above average and this is going to make up the growth. There is 
not a financial institution in this country that is predicting 16 
per cent growth in the ag sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
Your government has based its numbers on pure magic. That is 
a fallacy. It is not going to happen. 
 
Commodity prices are currently falling, Mr. Speaker. There is 
no doubt, there is no . . . the PROs (Pool return outlook), the 
PROs in wheat, Mr. Speaker, are going down; the PROs in peas 
are going down; the PROs in mustard are going down. It’s a 
shame, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite don’t hire some 
pros to actually work these out or take seriously the predictions 
from senior economists at the banks. 
 
They quoted, they misquoted the banks a number of time. There 
will be some growth but it is not going to come close to the 16 
per cent required to grow up the GDP to 6.8 per cent. The 
budget is doctored, Mr. Speaker. It is unrealistic. 
 
Here’s another thing. This government expects that 6.8 per cent 
growth to be achieved on the backs of the petrol industry. 
 
I’ll explain something with regards to new drilling, Mr. 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

 

Speaker. Fourth quarter drilling by the oil and gas companies 
may not sustain their present rate due to the falling gas and oil 
prices. The fourth quarter drilling that we saw last year was in 
part propelled by high petrol prices which — in the 
summertime — which pushed up earnings and profit-takings in 
the third quarter. 
 
It followed from that, as there were still earnings in the third 
quarter, meant there was more money left over that was put into 
exploration for fourth quarters for the oil companies to balance 
off their books. That’s why we saw a great gain, especially in 
the gas industry, in new wells, many of them throughout the 
Kindersley region. 
 
There is no reason to think that this is going to be sustained, Mr. 
Speaker. One of the main reasons for this is that Operation Iraqi 
Freedom, and its inevitable, just, swift, and victorious 
conclusion will see the stabilization of oil prices and hence, a 
slowing of new drilling in our province. It will slow down. New 
drilling will slow. 
 
The government applauds themself on reducing the royalties 
and this it credits in part for new drilling. And this is probably 
true, Mr. Speaker, but what a concept. After years of having the 
highest royalty rates in North America, we’re seeing a cut and 
we’re seeing some increase in drilling. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And this begs the question, Mr. Speaker, how well would the 
rest of the economy do if the NDP were out of the henhouse and 
the market didn’t have to fear the socialist fox? It’s tragic, Mr. 
Speaker, that Alberta has a Heritage Fund. While Wilbert 
Aberhart realized the oil wasn’t better off left in the ground, 
whereas Tommy the commie set our province backwards 50 
years because . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Would members please 
come to order and ensure that the language is parliamentary. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . because he 
thought the oil was better off left in the ground. 
 
And what do we have now? We have the longest surgical 
waiting list in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is blessed with more natural 
resources than any province in this country. 
 
And socialism in the past 50 and 60 years has left our 
population stagnant, has left us in a have-not-province situation 
and that’s an embarrassment for the people of Saskatchewan, an 
embarrassment for Canada. And after the next election that’s 
going to change, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to see things grow. 
 
Our economy is constantly hampered by the intervention of our 
Crown corporations into the private sector. The government 
claims that the Crowns pay massive dividends to the province 
every year. What they fail to mention, Mr. Speaker, is that as 
Crowns they pay no income tax, they pay no PST (provincial 
sales tax), the dividends they pay are not based on after-tax net 
income. And this fact inhibits our economy. 
 

No successful jurisdiction in the world, Mr. Speaker, has this 
level of intervention by their governments into the private 
sector. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because in a market economy, 
supply and demand affect the price of goods. When you have 
government intervention you’re affecting not only the supply 
but the demand as well. It is a big monkey wrench into the way 
that the market functions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a problem that has existed in 
Saskatchewan and it continues to exist under this present 
administration. 
 
It’s also, Mr. Speaker, the fact that no other, no other 
jurisdiction in the world has this much government intervention 
in their economies and are successful. This is the reason, Mr. 
Speaker, that The Economist magazine calls the highest growth 
for the top industrial countries in the world as Australia peaking 
at 4.1 per cent for the coming year. But somehow Saskatchewan 
will top out at 6.8 per cent. 
 
There’s no doubt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Alan Greenspan, 
the chairman of the Federal Reserve, must be worried that he’ll 
be replaced by a Saskatchewan physician, as he can outproduce 
the US (United States) economy by more than two times over. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, as well, is that in March 2004 we 
may be pleased to see the debt increase by only half a billion 
dollars. If the GDP grows only by 3 per cent, it will mean an 
addition of another $250 million to our provincial debt. This 
would entail an increase of $750 million — three-quarters of a 
billion dollars — to the overall debt for the year 2003-2004. 
Such a situation, Mr. Speaker, with a million-dollars-a-day-debt 
Premier extrapolated over another term would leave 
Saskatchewan with the worst debt to GDP ratio in Canada. 
 
A long story short, Mr. Speaker, the current path is 
unsustainable. There is zero credibility. This is the third fudged 
budget using a fund which doesn’t exist to try and balance off 
the books. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will not tolerate this. 
An election will remedy the situation and put us back on the 
long overdue path to prosperity. 
 
One of the things that’s coming out of this, Mr. Speaker, is the 
need for summary financial statements. This is something the 
Saskatchewan Party and the member for Canora-Pelly has been 
calling for, for quite some time. 
 
What the Finance minister failed to note in his address to this 
Legislative Assembly on Friday was the chartered accountants’ 
association of Canada has made this a mandatory move. It was 
not the intent of this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to move 
to summary financial statements. Their hand has been forced. 
 
And what this means is this is going to be the last smoke and 
mirrors budget that we’re going to see where red ink is claimed 
as black. It won’t happen in the future, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
going to have summary financial statements and we’re going to 
see how much money the Crowns have borrowed. We’re going 
to see once and for all that revenues are less than expenditures. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, in the whole picture of things is going to 
demonstrate that that is a deficit budget. 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

The final thing I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, has to do 
with, again, government intervention in the private sector with 
regards to the Crown corporations. 
 
I had . . . A local newspaper ran a article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
about SaskTel’s venture into cable television. More or less, Mr. 
Speaker, what they were able to conclude with the number of 
dollars spent on this project and the number of subscribers that 
had signed up for this new cable television package, which was 
around 4,000, that it was around $5,000 spent per subscription. 
 
Well it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that that’s probably 
about the price of a big screen TV and somehow I missed — 
and I know that SaskTel is never short on their expenditures for 
advertising — when the free big screen TV giveaway was, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because spending $5,000 per subscription for something which 
already exists in the private sector and very well, I might add, 
also in the satellite capacity as many rural subscribers use, this 
was a complete waste of government money. It was a complete 
waste of SaskTel resources, specifically, Mr. Speaker, when we 
have large holes in the cell coverage in my area. And it really 
could be used for something better. 
 
And everything being said and done, Mr. Speaker, this will 
continue to scare off private enterprise coming into the province 
and finding that they’ve got to compete against the company 
that uses taxpayers’ money, against the company that pays no 
taxes, against the company that pays no provincial PST. 
They’re not even forced to pay local taxes. Instead they pay 
grants in lieu and often these don’t match up to what local 
taxation would be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this needs to change. We need new direction. We 
need growth. This is not a budget about growth. It claims 6.8 
per cent, but that is farcical. And secondly we’re dealing with 
the 17th consecutive quarter now of population loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for real economic growth to occur we do need 
further tax cuts to spur the economy forward. This is the only 
factor that has a proven track record in other jurisdictions of 
raising population. By increasing the population base we will 
expand our tax base which will allow us to pay for the services 
all of us dearly want. Instead of having two and a half year 
waiting list for hip surgery, as members of my constituency 
have, we could get those numbers down. We are not going to be 
able to do that with this interventionist, central planning 
economic approach that the government has been taking. 
 
To expand the economy the only proven method is tax cuts, Mr. 
Speaker. And these tax cuts have to be fair and they have to be 
targeted. This is the kind of growth that the Saskatchewan Party 
will be producing. 
 
And we will not only see this growth correlate into population 
growth of 100,000 people over the next 10 years, those 100,000 
people, Mr. Speaker, are not going to be only in Saskatoon and 
Regina. They’re going to be in Major, Saskatchewan, in Eston, 
Saskatchewan, in Eatonia, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will cease now. I will be voting in favour of the 
amendment. I will be voting against the budget. And I thank 

you for your time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank my 
colleagues for that welcome. Mr. Speaker, budget debates are 
fairly predictable. The government says we essentially got it 
right, and the opposition essentially says we got it wrong. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one thing I noted from the previous speaker 
that we agree on, the right wing says — and they’ve said for 50 
years now — Tommy did it, Tommy did it. That’s what they 
say, Tommy did it. And the left wingers say, with a great deal 
of pride, Tommy did it. So we’re in agreement. Tommy did 
many, many things — great things we say; right wingers say 
something different. And this defines sort of where we’re at. 
 
But budget speeches, government essentially says we’re on the 
right track; opposition essentially says we’re not. And budgets, 
Mr. Speaker, are really all about choices. 
 
So I was thinking about this particular budget and this particular 
debate and how I might help my constituents or my friends or 
my family or even myself to understand, is it good or is it bad. 
Because at the end of the day that’s what we have to decide. Is 
it a good budget? Does it represent my values, my interests, my 
constituents’ interests, or does it not? 
 
So I started looking at what is our one area that we’re the 
proudest of and have consistently been proud of, both CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and New 
Democrats? And the answer of course, Mr. Speaker, is health 
care. Health care is the one, the keynote area that defines us 
from them. We believe in a publicly funded, publicly accessible 
health system that’s equally accessible to everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in health this year’s budget is $284 million higher 
than it was last year — $284 million higher. The biggest policy 
concern of my constituents is health. The biggest policy 
concern of most of our constituents . . . and I venture to . . . I 
dare say members of the opposition as well as members of the 
government, the biggest single concern that they’ve identified 
day after day, month after month, year after year, is health care, 
Mr. Speaker — health care. 
 
What’s our response? We are working every day in every way 
to make health care as good as it can be possibly be. And I can 
see 284 million reasons why health care is going to be better 
next year or this year that we’re in than it was last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Regina Coronation Park, my 
constituency, has a fairly significant number of students, many 
of them in the K to 12 area. But we also, this being a university 
city with the University of Regina and SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) with Wascana 
Campus, we have a fair number of post-secondary students as 
well. 
 
And it would come as no surprise that in the working north end 
of the city, young or middle-aged families, that many of us have 
children that are attending post-secondary. I’m probably . . . 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

 

Our household is probably a little bit over-represented in that 
this year there’s three family and household members that will 
qualify for the income tax credit that kicks in, Mr. Speaker, as 
they file this year’s income tax, and it’s $350 per student that 
graduates this year. And I can tell you, in our household, that’s 
a pretty darn welcome amount if you do the math — three times 
$350. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this, I want to point out, is available to students 
that graduate, but it’s available to students that earn their 
income in Saskatchewan. It’s available to students who choose 
to take advantage of the millions of opportunities that we have 
right here in this wonderful province that we have. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m delighted to say that there’s many, many 
thousands of students that are starting to benefit from this $350 
tax credit program this year and that will . . . There’s many, 
many more thousands of students that will graduate in coming 
years, next year, and beyond that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m real proud of what we’re doing for young 
people, right here, in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget we’ve also done an 
extension for the student loan program. You can earn 
scholarship exemption money. It used to be you could earn 
$600. We’ve tripled that. It’s now $1,800 that you can earn in 
scholarships before it affects your student loan. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a huge benefit to students, post-secondary students, right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:15) 
 
We’ve also increased the earning exemption before it kicks into 
student loans. It used to be that you were exempt for the first 
$600 that you earn. That’s now been increased, nearly tripled. 
It’s $1,700 that a student can earn and keep. This is 1,200 more 
of their own resources, $1,200 more that each post-secondary 
student is capable of having without it affecting their student 
loan in any way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker. This is a real 
support. 
 
And it, combined with . . . We’ve got $66 million available for 
student loans this year — 66 million, big number. But get this, 
Mr. Speaker. Over half of it, more than 33 million of that $66 
million, is available in bursaries and in forgiveness of student 
loans. The net result, Mr. Speaker, is at the end of the day, right 
here in Saskatchewan, our post-secondary students will 
graduate and will enjoy amongst the lowest student debt of any 
students in any province in this great country of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is leading the way in 
post-secondary education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked a bit about health. I’ve 
talked a little bit about education and how this affects us all. 
Health concerns us all. Education, at one point or another, 
affects us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go to the other end of the spectrum 

now — young, young, very young people. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
added $1.8 million in this budget. We’re creating 500 new 
daycare spaces this year alone, Mr. Speaker — 500 new daycare 
spaces. I couldn’t be prouder of this government’s record. 
 
In fact, there’s a widely quoted e-mail that we all have access to 
and I have it in my pile of paper here. But we got a very nice 
e-mail thank you from someone who works in the daycare 
industry, thanking — it was directed at the Premier — thanking 
him for leading a government that, I quote, “dares to care.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we dare to care and we’ve acted and we’ve got 1.8 
million reasons why people with children should be very 
pleased — 500 more daycare spaces is most, most welcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget I’ve heard some concern about 
agriculture and of course there is concern all around with the 
state of us coming off our second year of drought. I want to 
point out a couple of things that for me I’m quite proud of. 
 
We have a Crown corporation, Crop Insurance, that, Mr. 
Speaker, have had two years of either . . . I think this year was 
record expenditure, if I can describe it that way, and last year 
wasn’t very far behind. The turnaround has been, has been close 
to three-quarters of $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Crop Insurance started off this year with over $280 million 
accumulated surplus because it goes over years to year. Today 
it’s got a little over a half a billion or $500 million debt — 
that’s in one year. And that’s debt that shows up on the Minister 
of Finance’s total debt books. This is part of the money, Mr. 
Speaker, that naysayers can say, well you’re driving the debt 
up. Well yes, and you know I don’t think we apologize for 
standing behind our farmers in an incredibly dry year. We’re 
very proud of that. 
 
I contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with what the opposition say they 
will do if they form government, and they’re very bold and 
proud of this. They say they’re going to eliminate Crown 
corporations. Eliminate it — imagine. I just described a process 
that got hundreds and hundreds . . . well, about 7, $800 million 
into farmers’ pockets this year. And the opposition say, oh well, 
we’d throw that Crown corporation away; we’d get rid of that. 
Mr. Speaker, it never ceases to amaze me, it never ceases to 
amaze me what will come out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one other thing that I just have to comment 
on while I’m on Crowns and this is SaskTel which, of course, 
we’ve taken dividends in from SaskTel over the years. It’s been 
a great Crown corporation. It’s provided just tremendous 
service to Saskatchewan people. We’ve got the highest level of 
service . . . like more . . . a higher portion of our province, of 
our population, is served by telephone than . . . percentage-wise, 
than any other province in Canada. 
 
Notwithstanding this, notwithstanding the terrific job that 
SaskTel does and the opposition’s cries that what we need is to 
get the Crown corporations out of the way of private firms, 
notwithstanding that, I have noted a number of opposition 
members that have been crying about SaskTel cellular coverage 
doesn’t cover 100 per cent of their constituency. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it interesting because we’ve had 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

telephone competition in Saskatchewan for a number of years 
now. There’s not one thing preventing any of those private 
companies from putting up a cell tower anywhere they want; 
not one thing preventing their private companies from 
providing that cell coverage except . . . I will say it, there is one 
thing, Mr. Speaker. The private telcos have always operated in 
Saskatchewan where they say, you pay, SaskTel, you pay, you 
put in the infrastructure and we’ll bleed off the profits. That’s 
what the privates say. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan are wise 
to that trick. And it’s shown by the high portion of people that 
are supporting SaskTel as opposed to any of the private options 
that there are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoke about some of the things this budget 
does for my constituents, for my friends, for my family. 
Something I’ve . . . I did not mention yet is the twinning of the 
highways, the . . . where we’re going to have the Yellowhead 
and the Trans-Canada Highway all done, border to border, all 
done by 2007. That is bouncing it ahead of the schedule as it 
was and I’m proud of that. I am somewhat distressed that it took 
as long as it has to get it done. 
 
But I want to remind people, particularly opposition members, 
that it was not this government but the forerunner of this 
government that got elected — the right-wing government that 
got elected, the Grant Devine government got elected — 
promising that they were going to twin No. 1 Highway. And it 
didn’t happen. The job was left for us to finish it. And I’m very, 
very pleased that we’ve been able, despite the fiscal handcuffs 
that that government left the people of Saskatchewan, we’ve 
been able to get to the point where we can actually see that light 
at the end of the tunnel, Mr. Speaker, and we can almost taste 
the final layer of pavement going on those highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I close I want to briefly mention that I’m 
very pleased about a new program that was announced in this 
year’s budget and it’s one that deals with jobs for people with 
disabilities. This is an area, Mr. Speaker, that I have wanted us 
to move quicker on for many years now, and I see some really 
terrific steps being taken in this year’s budget. And there’s 
summer internships for programs . . . for students, graduates, 
students with disabilities. And there’s more. It’s on-line. It’s 
just . . . I’m very proud of those first steps that we’re taking in 
that this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m about to take my place. I just want to wrap up 
by . . . sort of where I came in. The left-wingers on this side, the 
right wingers on that side, have some agreement that . . . we 
have some agreement that Tommy did it. Mr. Speaker, we 
agree. Tommy electrified Saskatchewan. Tommy and 
successive governments have really helped build this province. 
We’ve got Crown corporations going, we’ve got Highway 
department that we’re very proud of, we’ve got a civil service 
that’s professional and that we’re intensely proud of the job that 
they do day after day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you contrast that with what the opposition want to 
do. They want to cut and slash the civil service. They want to 
take over the justice system. They want to eliminate the 
Crowns. They want to drive us into the depths of despair, the 
very despair that we inherited — if I can describe it that way — 

in 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, isn’t it amazing. Isn’t it amazing. Every time the 
right wingers get into power, they say, well government doesn’t 
work. And they get elected. They get elected and then they 
prove that government doesn’t work. When they get the place, 
the province in enough of a mess, Mr. Speaker, we have an 
election. Socialists get back into power and we’re charged with 
cleaning up their mess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that we’ve cleaned up the mess but 
there’s very, very much more we can do. I am intensely proud 
of this budget and the many steps forward it’s taken. I will be 
voting against the amendment and proudly voting for this 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I found it 
interesting listening to the previous member. And he’s got it 
right. The left-wing element has taken over in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we’ve seen it over the last year and a half, 
two years in fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting listening to the members opposite 
and all the platitudes they’re trying to lay before the people of 
Saskatchewan, trying to dig themselves out of the hole that they 
continually finding themselves falling into and actually 
crumbling around them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just make a few comments first of all 
regarding the constituency of Moosomin, and the budget that 
was just presented to us just a few short days ago by the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in the constituency of Moosomin — right 
across the constituency — were certainly following this 
budgetary process. I know that municipal councillors through 
SUMA, through SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), they heard the Premier, and they heard the 
minister responsible for Municipal Government make 
presentations, and suggesting that they should wait for the 
budgetary address and there’d be some very good news for 
them in this budget. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen is each and every one 
of them . . . and in fact we saw it last Friday morning. There 
was a real letdown in the municipal government across the 
province — and not just municipal government, but boards of 
education as well. 
 
And why would I say there was a letdown, Mr. Speaker? 
Because these levels of government have had an off-load placed 
on their shoulders over the past 10, 11 years in the province of 
Saskatchewan that they’ve been asked to carry. And they’ve 
been asked to provide the services and to maintain the facilities 
in their communities. And they’ve been finding that the weight 
of the off-load on their backs, which they’ve had to pass on to 
the property tax payer, is something that they’re not prepared to 
bear any more. 
 
And so they were waiting with bated breath for the 
announcements that the Minister of Finance would have for 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

 

them. And, Mr. Speaker, the $10 million that was offered 
certainly didn’t come close to meeting the needs that these local 
governments have. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, either local 
governments are going to have to cut services more or else 
we’re going to see mill rates increase. 
 
And that’s one of the major concerns that people across the 
constituency of Moosomin have, and I’m certain across this 
province have as they look at their local governments and the 
services, and they look at their property . . . look where the 
property taxes are today and wonder where they’ll be 
tomorrow. 
 
In fact, both major cities are presently in major budget debate in 
their councils to try and address how they’re going to continue 
to provide these services. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the constituency of Moosomin and 
certainly highways has been a priority issue in that constituency 
for the past number of years. And while we want to 
acknowledge that there have been some improvements that have 
been taking place — certainly No. 8 Highway south of 
Moosomin down to No. 48 — we want to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
the constituents in that area and people who travel No. 8 in that 
area are certainly pleased to see that we finally had . . . the 
improvements have been made. And this year I believe the final 
surfacing of that stretch of highway will be completed, creating 
a nice tributary from the southern end of the constituency up to 
No. 1 Highway. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there are issues related to highways that 
need to be addressed and we need a long-term plan and strategy 
in order to address these needs. And we’re pleased to hear that 
twinning of No. 1 is going to continue and this year we will see 
grading of No. 1 right through to the community of Grenfell, 
and paving of what was done last year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to see that there is finally a commitment . . . 
And I must add that it’s about time the federal government 
actually put some money into the highway projects in this 
province as, when we look at the level of tax dollars that leave 
the province of Saskatchewan as a result of federal taxes on 
fuel, on gasoline, and the fact that we receive a pittance in 
return, so the $82 million that was announced just recently by 
the Prime Minister was certainly welcome news and it enhances 
the completion of the twinning of No. 1 and the Yellowhead 
much more quickly. 
 
It was something, Mr. Speaker, which I might add, was a part of 
the Saskatchewan Party election platform in 1999. And I would 
have to say, Mr. Speaker, when you look at a number of the 
election platforms of 1999, unfortunately . . . Mr. Speaker, 
we’re pleased that we brought . . . took a platform to the people 
of Saskatchewan in 1999. 
 
While we came within a hair of forming government, in fact 
had more electoral votes than the government of the day, the 
government of the day, well they said no, you can’t reduce 
taxes; no, you can’t put more money into highways. They 
finally realized that people of Saskatchewan believed you 
could. And I’ll give the ministers of Finance a compliment for 

the fact that they’ve realized taxes are a tax burden and they 
really take away from stimulating the economy. So they’ve 
actually moved forward in some of those ideas and we want to 
say thank you to the governments for those initiatives that have 
been taken. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, this government and the ideas that it’s 
presented to the people of Saskatchewan have been very 
limited. Unfortunately they’ve been always looking to 
somebody else for new ideas. They were devoid of ideas when 
they went into the 1999 election campaign. And we see today, 
as a result of the recent Throne Speech and certainly the 
budgetary address that was presented the other day, Mr. 
Speaker, we see a government that really is floundering, that 
doesn’t know where it’s going. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is look at some of the 
issues that have come forward in the past few weeks. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, one would have to surmise . . . And I think 
the media and a lot of people were believing that this would be 
a very short session, that the government . . . the budget that 
was presented last Friday was going to be a pre-election budget, 
and that this government was sailing on into an election where 
they were expecting that the people of Saskatchewan would 
return them with a majority. 
 
However what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, what has happened in 
the last month? We’ve seen SPUDCO has risen its ugly head 
and as a result, the government’s had to deal with that issue. We 
sealed the . . . We see the fact that the government has come 
forward with another budget that really is a flop. In fact it’s 
dropped like a lead balloon, Mr. Speaker. And we know how 
balloons float if they’ve got lead in them. They don’t rise very 
high, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today the Minister of Culture and Youth stands in this 
Assembly and tells us of how committed they are of protecting 
the rights of women and standing up for women. And yet the 
actions of this government just do not indicate that they’re 
really standing up for the rights of women in the case that’s just 
been brought before us today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s been so many things in the past few days that 
certainly would indicate that this was anything but a 
pre-election budget. In fact the actions of the Premier would 
indicate that he hasn’t been very pleased with how his 
government has performed and how his ministers have 
performed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the . . . When we look at the 
budget, and all we have to do is look at the headlines. I think 
the government . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, when I think back to 
last Thursday and the Premier and the minister responsible for, 
well, what was Social Services, announced to the people of 
Saskatchewan a program that would be putting money into 
daycare spots in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I thought at the time that was very interesting considering 
the budget was coming down the next morning, that an 
announcement of that nature would be probably something 
they’d want to have in their budget so that they’d have a little 
positive to bring out of the budget. 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

But I think what we saw, Mr. Speaker, was the Premier and the 
ministers saw that really their budget was going south so 
quickly that they figured they’d better grasp the one little straw, 
the one little straw they had that — regarding daycare centres 
and spaces — that they better get it out ahead of the budget so 
that they get a little bit from it. 
 
However we haven’t seen a lot and that’s why a lot of the 
members today . . . And unfortunately I’ve been giving them a 
few platitudes for those spots as well. But they’re important for 
people — young people who have been desperately looking for 
something new, something exciting; desperately looking for job 
opportunities that would really address their family needs so 
that they wouldn’t always have to be looking to government for 
daycare spots or whatever to address the issues they have in 
regards to family finances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the budget and what do the headlines 
read: 
 

Gov’t downplays negative reviews. 
 
. . . last week’s provincial budget hit the deck like a lead 
balloon . . . 
 
“‘The Canadian Taxpayers’ Federation said the NDP is 
living in fantasy land. Most importantly the people of 
Saskatchewan we spoke to over the weekend said this 
budget has no plan and no credibility.” 

 
Another headline: “Melenchuk defends ‘fantasy’ forecast.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s present . . . the Minister of 
Finance’s presentation about a balanced budget is anything but 
and certainly it’s misleading to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
When the Minister of Finance was asked exactly how . . . what 
would happen if the government didn’t reach its 6.8 growth rate 
the minister responded: 
 

Finance officials haven’t calculated what another year of 
drought would mean, Melenchuk told a scrum of reporters 
outside the legislature. 

 
In fact I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this government’s 
view of growth and its ability to achieve 6.8 per cent growth, it 
all basically stems from agriculture and their view that 
agriculture is going to carry them out of their doldrums. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I think what we see, and I think the 
minister indicated that as well, he made the comment about: 
 

I think we are a little more diversified than we were in the 
past. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all acknowledge the fact that 
agriculture certainly plays an important role in the economy of 
Saskatchewan but it does not have as significant an impact on 
the economy in the province of Saskatchewan as it did in the 
past. 
 
And to think that a turnaround in agriculture would lift the 
growth target to 6.8 per cent I think is something, as we’ve seen 
in the papers, living in fantasyland. And maybe it has a lot to do 

with the new hairdo that the Minister of Finance, we saw him 
sporting this past week, living actually in fantasyland. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government and this Minister of Finance come clear 
with the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, when we see the 
headlines — “Melenchuk defends ‘fantasy’ forecast” it says; 
“No option B if there is a drought” — even the economists and 
the profs in our universities are calling the plan this government 
has brought forward as unsustainable. 
 
In fact let me see what one of the professors that responded to 
the budgetary address said. He said: 
 

The financial plan outlined in the provincial budget 
unveiled by Finance Minister Jim Melenchuk last week is 
unsustainable . . . 

 
That comes from four University of Regina professors. 
 
One of the professors said: 
 

“We have a $392-million deficit,” . . . 
 
(Mr.) Tompkins isn’t impressed by Melenchuk’s claim that 
he can draw down money from the province’s fiscal 
stabilization fund and thus claim he has produced a 
balanced budget. 

 
In fact this economics professor goes on to say: 
 

Enron executives in the U.S. went to jail for financial 
misrepresentations that weren’t much worse . . . 
 

Another economics professor says: 
 

The budget is “misleading” . . . adding that the province has 
a deficit budget by any normal accounting procedure. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at this budget, and my colleague the 
member from Canora-Pelly I believe summed it up very 
carefully, this budget is certainly a budget based on numbers 
drawn from fantasyland and this budget does not really speak to 
the real economic plight of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to quote a couple of paragraphs from another article: 
“Provincial budget’s impact unlikely to be lasting,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

. . . yesterday’s pre-budget announcement of $3 million for 
child care, including $1.8 million for 500 additional 
licensed child-care spaces, more money for early childhood 
services and an increase to child-care subsidies (was 
certainly something positive). 
 
Beyond the fact (however) . . . the coalition government is 
again spending more than it is taking in (this, despite the 
expected revenue increases), the budget will add . . . 
(another) $400 million to the provincial debt. 
 
Added to the $800 million in debt already rung up by the 
government since Lorne Calvert became premier in January 
2001, Saskatchewan’s debt will have increased by roughly 



April 1, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

 

$1 million each and every day Calvert has been in office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pundits all across this province have looked at 
the budget and they’ve found it wanting. They’ve found this 
budget wanting in many respects. And unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, what we’ve seen in this budget as well is the fact that 
this budget and the presentation the Minister of Finance has 
made hasn’t really been upfront and truthful for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To lead the people of Saskatchewan believing that we have a 
little better than a $2 million surplus as a result of this budget is 
unrealistic, is unthinkable, in view of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
this budget actually adds to the debt of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think that’s the most important aspect that 
has to be raised in regards to this budget that was presented last 
Friday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know what it is like to live in a situation 
where we’re actually spending more than our revenues, the 
revenues that were coming in. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that 
at the end of the day we don’t have a Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
to draw from. If we do, it’s the line of credit that we go to the 
bank to draw from, Mr. Speaker. And that line of credit just 
adds to personal debt, and we see that growing, not only across 
this province but across this country. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for the people of Saskatchewan 
to note that this budget does nothing to build confidence in the 
province of Saskatchewan or build confidence in people’s 
hearts and minds so that they would look at this, at 
Saskatchewan as a place where they would want to come and 
invest in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are looking for 
somebody who will place a dream. They’re looking for 
someone who will give them some hope of, a hope that 
tomorrow will be a brighter day. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget 
certainly fell far short in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any time a government begins to rely or relies on 
gambling profits to meet its needs, Mr. Speaker, we see a 
government that falls deeper and deeper into the gambling habit 
themselves — gambling on the hope that the resources down 
the road or the agriculture or the resource sector will grow at 
rates far exceeding any rate predictions of growth that any 
economist or the banks across this country would even suggest 
are plausible or possible at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at all the predictions regarding economic 
growth across this country, and I think the best one that I’ve 
seen so far is around 3 per cent growth — 3 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. And yet this Finance minister believes he can just 
reach into his magical hat and pull out 6.8 per cent growth in 
the province of Saskatchewan — 6.8 per cent growth. No 
wonder the economists in the province of Saskatchewan are 
saying it’s unsustainable, because we take a look across this 
country and every province and even the country of Canada, 3 
per cent is certainly . . . would be a lot more achievable. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the level that we achieve . . . is 
— I think I heard a comment something like 2.7 per cent, 3 per 
cent — if that’s what we achieve, we’re 3.8 per cent short of the 

goal and one has to ask ourselves, Mr. Speaker, where are we 
going to be at the end of this fiscal year, having fallen short of 
our predicted economic growth of 3.8 per cent? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might add that one of the positive points that the 
Minister of Finance came forward with was bringing forward 
summary financial statements and, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 
important. 
 
(16:45) 
 
That’s another area that over the past number of years my 
colleagues and I have been talking about the fact that it is 
important that the province come forward with budget . . . with 
summary financial statements. Why, Mr. Speaker? So that the 
people, the taxpayers of this province, know exactly where they 
stand when it comes to the finances in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Monday, March 31, The StarPhoenix headline was, “Budget 
reform overdue move.” And they were talking about the 
government’s pledge to provide a summary financial plan as 
part of the budget is great news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about this for a number of years. Mr. 
Speaker, the auditor of this province has talked about summary 
financial plans for years. And the fact that the Minister of 
Finance has mentioned that this is something that we will . . . 
that their government is going to head into or down the road 
we’re going to head in that direction, certainly is great news. 
 
And why is it? I’d like to read this line from the . . . this, I 
know, article in the paper: 
 

Under a system that produces a spending document such as 
the one Melenchuk presented Friday, where a supposedly 
balanced budget for next year could end up adding . . . 500 
million to Saskatchewan’s debt if his projections hold true, 
the public remains (as) clueless as to the true state of the 
province’s finances. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the importance of summary financial statements 
cannot be underscored. Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we 
present the whole fiscal picture, not just the general revenue 
pool over here, and then someday down the road we get . . . we 
bring the figures from the Crown corporations. And as we have 
seen for time, time in eternity, if a government is running a debt 
in the general revenue pool, they’ll pull something out of the 
Crown corporations through a dividend from CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) or, as we’ve seen 
over the last few years, actually borrowing money from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund where money does not exist. 
 
And so that’s why it’s so important that we move to summary 
financial statements in order to, in order for the people of 
Saskatchewan to understand exactly what the finances of this 
province are, so when the Minister of Finance stands in his 
place, when he . . . any government member stands in their 
place, the people of Saskatchewan know exactly what they’re 
talking about. 
 
So we’ll give the Minister of Finance a platitude for the . . . 
suggesting that it’s time to move to summary financial 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2003 

 

statements. However, here again, Mr. Speaker, just another 
platform that the Saskatchewan Party has promoting for a long 
. . . been promoting for a long time, about bringing forward 
summary financial statements. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
been saying it long enough that the government members have 
finally heard. And while they’ve been maybe listening to the 
auditor, they’re also realizing that taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
are demanding the same thing. They’re demanding accounting. 
They’re demanding accountability from the elected officials in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could go on and on about this budget. We can 
talk about . . . and well we can talk about some of the positive 
aspects of the budget and there are areas though . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services just stood in this 
Assembly — and I’ll get his new department correct in the . . . 
shortly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Community Resources 
and Employment, exactly. He talked about meeting the needs of 
people with disabilities and opening up the doors for greater job 
opportunities. And in that regard I think that’s positive. That 
certainly is positive and we’ll give credit where credit is due. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do know that the minister and his office 
have been receiving a number of letters from communities like 
Prince Albert, communities like Esterhazy, and certainly the 
Moosomin community and areas around Moosomin as well 
where individuals on their own have gone to great lengths to 
raise the resources to provide some support mechanisms for 
families with people with . . . with young people with 
disabilities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m waiting for . . . till we get into, I guess 
when we get into greater debate on the budget speech — 
line-by-line debate — with the minister to see whether or not 
the minister has been listening to the people of Esterhazy, been 
listening to these families with children of disabilities, and has 
responded to their requests for some financing to address their  
needs to help them in providing some of that respite care that 
gives them a break, which they have on their own have had to 
do by raising the funds and actually getting local individuals to 
help them and assist them with providing care. 
 
And I think the minister was trying to catch my attention, I’m 
not exactly sure why. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s one other thing 
I have to actually . . . actually I have to mention before we get 
to that point and it’s this, Mr. Speaker. The one area that the 
community of Moosomin and the surrounding area have been 
working very deliberately towards is a new health facility, a 
new hospital. And as I was listening to the budget presentation 
by the Minister of Finance the other day, unfortunately the final 
approval and go-ahead did not come from the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
But I did hear the Minister of Finance suggest and say that the 
Minister of Health will be making some very important 
announcements in a number of communities over the next little 
while regarding worthwhile projects. And so the Moosomin 
community are certainly looking with anticipation, and looking 
forward with anticipation, to an announcement regarding that 
health facility in view of the fact that they have been working 
very diligently to provide their level of funding support for this 
health care facility. 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are so many other areas that I could get 
into and debate at length. However, I look forward to debating 
these issues when you get into line-by-line debate on . . . in 
regards to the budget. 
 
However, at this time, Mr. Speaker, I will certainly be more 
than prepared to take my place so that other members speak . . . 
by basically stating I really can’t support this budget but I will 
be in support of the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
look forward to entering the debate to support the budget but 
because of the time constraints, I’m going to ask that we now 
adjourn, Mr. Speaker, or I move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:53. 
 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................293 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................293 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................293 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................293 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................293 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................293 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................293 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................294 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................295 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................295 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................295 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................295 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................295 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................295 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................295 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Women’s National Hockey Tournament 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................295 
 Investing in Healthy Families 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................296 
 Saskatchewan Hospital’s 90th Anniversary 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................296 
 Research and Development Programs 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................296 
 Saskatchewan Whitetail and Mule Deer Producers Association Convention 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................297 
 Melville Millionaires Win Sherwood Conference 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................297 
 Assiniboia Southern Rebels Advance to Keystone Cup 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................297 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Harassment Allegations Against Civil Servant 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................297 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................298 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................300 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................300 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................301 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................302 
 Recorded Division (house adjournment) ....................................................................................................................................302 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................302 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................305 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................308 



 

 

  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................311 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................313 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................316 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................318 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................322 
 
 
 


