















































Hansard: April 24, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 683 
 April 24, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today . . . to stand today, rather, to present petitions on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who would like to see the 
government take every possible opportunity to reduce the 
education tax burden carried by Saskatchewan residents. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition here regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation; their announcement that the 2003 premiums 
charged to farmers will increase by up to 52 per cent and 
further. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore 
affordable crop insurance premiums to our struggling 
farmers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the Lucky 
Lake area and from Weyburn. 
 
And I’m pleased to present it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of my constituents who are 
concerned about Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and 
surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed the petition are from Kelvington, 
Okla, and Lintlaw. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation announcing 
premium hikes for the 2003 crop year in the range of 52 per 
cent, the petitioners from Mendham, Saskatchewan have asked 

the following: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
this afternoon, the prayer of relief which reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister of 
Highways preserve the old bridges between Battleford and 
North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners come from Battleford and Cando. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
alarming lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens all from the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I have a petition to present on behalf of people of my 
constituency regarding the condition of the highway. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make the necessary repairs to 
Highway 47 South in order to avoid serious injury and 
property damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Estevan and Torquay. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are very concerned about all the 
highways in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 13, 35, 18, 28, 6, 34, 334, 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

and 36 in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency in order to 
prevent injury or loss of life and to prevent the loss of 
economic opportunity in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Alida, and 
Colgate. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Eyebrow, Tugaske, Central 
Butte. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the huge increases to the crop 
insurance premiums. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition here to save the twin bridges between the North 
Battleford and Battleford: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all possible action to preserve the historic, original twin 
bridges between Battleford and North Battleford. 
 
And as is duly bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by Battleford and North Battleford 
citizens. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the condition 
of Highway 22. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey and Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 
that are concerned about the crop insurance premiums. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from Rabbit 
Lake, Spiritwood, and Whitkow. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
no. 12, 13, 18, 27, 36, and 40. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 30 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the minister of Government Relations and Aboriginal 
Affairs: how many First Nations in Saskatchewan have 
outstanding claims under the TLE, treaty land entitlement, 
and which First Nations are these; in the case of each First 
Nation, how much land is left to be claimed under TLE; 
and thirdly, how much land has been claimed so far in the 
TLE process in Saskatchewan? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly, in the west gallery, my brother 
Cameron Addley. He’s here visiting the legislature for the first 
time. He’s on the spring break from university. He’s joined with 
his three nephews, David, Eric, and Connor and I just would . . . 
I know that I will be well behaved because they are here. And 
then they will be off visiting the rest of Regina. So I would ask 
all hon. members to welcome them to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — To you and through you, it is my pleasure to 
introduce members of the public service seated in your gallery 
today. We have members from the Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization program; the Public Service Commission; 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

 

Health; Industry and Resources, Environment; and Social 
Services; and Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs. 
And I would ask all members in the House — as well as Labour 
and Justice — to join with me in welcoming these fine civil 
servants. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, I 
would like to introduce to you and all members of the 
Assembly, a group of Saskatchewan public servants who are 
seated in your gallery. I think we bumped into you guys a few 
times today in the cafeteria and other places. The participants 
are employees from the departments of Agriculture, Food and 
Rural Revitalization; the Public Service Commission; Health; 
Industry and Resources; Government Relations and Aboriginal 
Affairs; Labour; Community Resources and Employment; 
Justice; and Saskatchewan Environment. And I look forward to 
meeting with you just a little bit later. And I ask all members of 
the Assembly to welcome these folks who do so much good 
work for the public to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, Mr. Alfred Rogalsky. Mr. Rogalsky 
is seated in your gallery. 
 
He is originally from Alberta but he has been on the road since 
1958. And he’s currently residing in Regina for a period of 30 
months. He came here from Iqaluit, which is the capital of 
Nunavut, where he lived for a period of 30 months. Prior to that 
he lived in Edmonton for 30 months, and prior to that in 
Fredericton for 30 months, and prior to that in Yellowknife for 
30 months, and prior to that in Charlottetown for 30 months, 
and prior to that in Whitehorse for 30 months, and prior to that 
in Halifax for 30 months. Prior to that in Victoria for 30 months 
and before that, Mr. Speaker, he lived in St. John’s, 
Newfoundland for 30 months. 
 
Now do you see a pattern here, Mr. Speaker? The pattern is 
provincial and territorial capitals and residency of 30 months. 
His goal is to spend 30 months in each of the provincial and 
territorial capitals as a means of experiencing all that this 
wonderful country has to offer. He has lived here for two 
months already. We can expect to see Mr. Rogalsky regularly in 
our Chamber. 
 
Please join me in extending a warm welcome to Alfred 
Rogalsky. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the House, 
some visitors here this afternoon in your west gallery. Now two 
of them are constituents, Jerry Zumstein and his son 
Christopher, but they have with them a special guest that came 
from a ways away, an exchange student, Simon Beie from 
Nuremberg, Germany. 
 
Simon is staying in Moose Jaw and attending Vanier Collegiate 

until he returns to Germany in the beginning of July, I believe. 
So welcome to Canada. I hope you enjoy your stay in Moose 
Jaw and Saskatchewan. And I would like all members to help 
welcome these guests to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
kind of a good day, sort of a Moose Jaw day. And I spot in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, three constituents 
of mine, John and Valerie McWilliams and their son Peter. 
 
Now I would like to believe that they came to watch their MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) at work, but I’m a 
realist, Mr. Speaker. I realize that they have a stronger interest 
than that. John and Valerie happen to be the parents of one of 
our pages, Luke McWilliams, and I would like all members to 
join in expressing our appreciation for the good work that Luke 
does and welcome to the McWilliams from Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Snowbirds’ Air Show 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Canadian Forces, the Snowbirds 431 Air 
Demonstration Squadron, performed their annual acceptance 
show at 15 Wing Moose Jaw before departing on their show 
season early this morning. The show was approved by the 
commander of 1 Canadian Air Division, Major General Mark 
Dumais. 
 
This year’s show has incorporated a number of new 
manoeuvres and reconstituted a few that were performed in past 
years. There are several breathtaking crossovers by the solo 
pilots, awe-inspiring formation bursts, and the ever-present 
grace and beauty of the formation aerobatics, a true ballet in the 
sky. 
 
Now in their 33rd season, the Snowbirds have flown 1,835 
shows for over 100 million spectators across North America. 
This year, 65 shows at 41 locations will be performed, in 
addition to 100 flypasts in commemoration of the 100th 
anniversary of flight in Canada. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the day’s events concluded last night with a 
formal dinner where the guest of honour — Lieutenant General, 
retired, Sutherland — spoke about the traditions, heritage, 
history, and legacy of the Snowbirds. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Major Stephen Will and all of the 
Snowbird team for their outstanding performances and a 
fantastic start to their 33rd year. For the upcoming show season, 
may they have blue skies and favourable winds. I would ask all 
members of the Assembly to join me in wishing the team a safe 
and enjoyable air show season. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

Major Saskatchewan Projects 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s future is wide 
open. Last week I spoke of good economic times all around us. 
Then as now, the only things falling are welfare rates and the 
. . . welfare caseloads, rather, and the faces of the Sask Party 
members because their doom and gloom predictions are just 
wrong. 
 
Job numbers are up, manufacturing shipments are up, exports 
are up, housing starts are up. Mr. Speaker, many people and 
many companies recognize and are benefiting by investing in 
Saskatchewan. We are on a roll. 
 
Here’s a few of this year’s over 250 major projects valued at 
over $7 billion. Marlin Farms, a 20,000 head cattle feedlot at 
Mossbank, $10 million. Newfield Seeds, a seed plant in 
Nipawin, $7 million. Days Inn, the new hotel in Moose Jaw, 
$4.8 million. Staples Business Depot, a new store, Saskatoon, 
$2 million. Babcock and Wilcox, boiler supply, piping supply, 
Melville, $26 million. Nexans Canada Ltd., cable supply, 
Weyburn, $60 million. No doom and gloom here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s growing confidence in Saskatchewan. We will continue 
to be proud of Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 
companies. We are on a roll. Our future is wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Candidate —  
Athabasca Constituency 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, well, Mr. 
Speaker, I have actual good news for the people of 
Saskatchewan and especially the good citizens of Athabasca 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday evening, April 22, 
2003, a historical event took place in Beauval, Saskatchewan. 
An event so magnificent that the current NDP member for 
Athabasca has been left pondering his own political relevance. 
 
The winds of change are blowing across all parts of 
Saskatchewan as decades of NDP rhetoric is now falling on ears 
that have been opened to hope and excitement. For our fair 
province, not only has rural and urban Saskatchewan seen the 
light, Mr. Speaker, but much to the chagrin of the NDP Party, 
northern Saskatchewan has also seen the light. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 250 people packed the Beauval Arena to select a 
Saskatchewan Party candidate for the pending provincial 
election. The buzz of excitement at the meeting almost 
overshadowed the quality of the three people vying for the 
nomination. Unfortunately only one person could be selected, 
much to the displeasure of the crowd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to announce that Greg Ross, the 
mayor of Pinehouse, was chosen to be the Saskatchewan Party 
candidate, beating out Bobby Woods, the mayor from Buffalo 
Narrows, and Paul Daigneault, an entrepreneur from Beauval. 
 

Three impressive speeches followed by an enthusiastic 
presentation by the member from Lloydminster had the crowd 
of 250 literally on their feet. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all 
members on this side of the House are considerably more 
excited about the selection of Greg Ross than those members on 
the government side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Female Board Members in Saskatchewan  
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise in 
this Assembly and give recognition where it is due. This time I 
am particularly proud to make the following announcement as it 
carries exceptionally positive news for Saskatchewan women. 
 
A recent census, Mr. Speaker, produced and released by 
Women Board Directors of Canada, shows Saskatchewan leads 
the country in the percentage of board seats held by women 
directors in Canadian-owned Financial Post 500 companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Saskatchewan businesses can be proud of 
their leadership in recruiting women to sit on their boards, and 
here are some examples. Out of 10 members on SGI’s 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) board, four are women. 
Of all the Farm Credit Corporation’s Board of Directors, half 
are women. Currently there are four female members on 
SaskPower’s 11-member board. The list goes on. 
 
This is clearly an indication of not only strength, dedication, 
entrepreneurial spirit of Saskatchewan women as they move 
into prominent positions in the workplace, but is also 
representative of the kind of society we live in, Mr. Speaker — 
an egalitarian society. Evidently, Mr. Speaker, the future is 
wide open for Saskatchewan entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Awards 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on April 15 
Humboldt hosted the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League 
Awards. Many people were recognized throughout that evening 
for their talents and abilities. And Bob Beatty of the Humboldt 
Broncos and Don Chesney of the Yorkton Terriers were chosen 
to share the Coach of the Year Award. 
 
Beatty guided the Broncos to the league pennant with 87 points 
during the regular season followed by their first SJHL 
(Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) championship since 
1989. Beatty is in his sixth full season with the Broncos. 
Notably, Mr. Speaker, he played hockey for 23 years, including 
six seasons in the minor pro ranks. 
 
Chesney, the coach of the Terriers, took his team that finished 
at the bottom in the Sherwood Conference last season and 
helped raise them to second place this year — a most 
commendable feat. 
 
Other individual awards were presented to Garett Cameron of 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

 

the Melfort Mustangs, he was the most valuable player and top 
scorer; to Sean Connors of the Kindersley Klippers, he was the 
top goalie. Drew Bagnall of the Battlefords North Stars was the 
top defenceman; Jeff Marshall of the La Ronge Ice Wolves was 
the top rookie. 
 
And the Graham Christie Memorial Award for the player who 
displays inspirational leadership and dedication on and off the 
ice went to Conrad Wilgenbusch of the Flin Flon Bombers. The 
Kresse-Kruger-Mantyka Scholar Athlete went to Mitch 
Stephens of the Yorkton Terriers and the Royal Bank 
scholarship went to Andrew Mievre of the Nipawin Hawks. 
And the Hockey Ministries International Roger Neilson Award 
went to Ryan Martin of the Nipawin Hawks. 
 
Congratulations to all those winners of the SJHL awards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural High-Speed Internet 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the reasons 
my constituents and the people of the Saskatchewan place a 
high value on the Crowns is because the Crowns are good 
citizens. 
 
SaskTel, for example, employs 3,800 people in over 50 
Saskatchewan communities. It partners with 140 Saskatchewan 
businesses. In 2002, SaskTel donated $1.8 million to more than 
1,600 not-for-profit organizations and spent more than $236 
million on materials and services from 4,200 Saskatchewan 
suppliers. 
 
But not only is SaskTel a good citizen, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is 
also very good at what it does. As a direct result of this 
government’s CommunityNet program, SaskTel has been able 
to expand its high-speed Internet service into rural areas much 
more quickly than was originally anticipated. 
 
Since 1995 SaskTel has invested more than $60 million to bring 
quality high-speed . . . price-competitive, high-speed Internet 
services to more than 74 per cent of Saskatchewan residents. In 
fact, SaskTel leads the way in Canada and possibly North 
America in deploying high-speed Internet into rural areas. And 
they are currently researching a combination wireless/wire-line 
service option to help achieve the corporation’s future goal of 
reaching 95 per cent of Saskatchewan’s population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan leads the way in this area because 
SaskTel, a Crown corporation, takes seriously its responsibility 
to provide the best possible service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moosomin Moose Raise Funds 
For Health Care Facility 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, April 19, more than 450 people gathered at the 
Moosomin Communiplex to say thank you to the Moosomin 
Moose rec hockey team — a group of individuals who so 
motivated and united Moosomin and surrounding regions in an 

effort to raise funds for the health care facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after a scrumptious roast hip of beef dinner it was 
time to meet the managers and players who initiated and then 
played in two Guinness Book record-breaking hockey games. 
While the newest record has again been broken, the most 
rewarding experience was to see the region band together 
raising over $330,000 as a result of the two hockey games for 
the new health care facility. Mr. Speaker, a special thank you to 
the Moose and everyone in the surrounding region for making 
this fundraising effort and dinner such a rousing success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I close by thanking the minister as well for giving 
serious consideration to attending this event. While the pressing 
holiday season didn’t allow the minister to attend, we certainly 
await an announcement from the province regarding their 
commitment to this project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Investment in Craig Wireless 
International Inc. 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we learned 
that the NDP lost at least 85 million taxpayers’ dollars with 
their Crown corporation investments outside of the province of 
Saskatchewan. One of these investments was Craig Wireless 
International Inc. The NDP invested $10 million in Craig 
Wireless to provide wireless Internet and cable services in 
Manitoba, British Columbia, and Palm Springs. Will the 
minister please tell us, Mr. Speaker, what is the status of this 
investment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well here we 
go again with the members from the Sask Party continually 
criticizing our Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let me say over the last 10 years our 
Crown corporations have paid to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
1.6 — I repeat, $1.6 billion — $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker. Last 
year, Mr. Speaker, last year they paid a dividend of $300 
million, Mr. Speaker, while at the same time providing 
high-quality service across our province, Mr. Speaker, at the — 
if not the lowest — amongst the lowest rates in Canada and 
North America, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What do they want to do? They want to dwell on doom and 
gloom and they want to dwell on what our start-up costs for 
launching these companies, Mr. Speaker. They need to look at 
the big picture and what our Crowns are doing for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — What we want, Mr. Speaker, what we want is for 
the government to be accountable and responsible to taxpayers 
for the investments that they have made in various companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to SaskTel’s annual report, the NDP’s 
$10 million investment in Craig Wireless is now worthless. The 
book value of this investment is now listed in the annual report 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

as zero. According to SaskTel, Craig Wireless has not been able 
to achieve its business plan objectives and can only continue to 
operate with further financial support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s Palm Springs cable company is now 
apparently worthless. It needs more money to even stay in 
business. 
 
Will the minister tell us, will he please tell us the current status 
of this $10 million taxpayer investment? Is it a complete 
write-off or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say it again. What our 
Crown corporations have done, Mr. Speaker, is returned to the 
people of Saskatchewan $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker — 1.6 
billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And they have done that while affording 
the people of Saskatchewan high-quality service at very, very 
low rates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I ask the Sask Party, what’s your position on the Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, I ask them what’s their policy. What 
is the Sask Party’s policy? 
 
I look through their platform document and I see on the Sask 
Party Crown corporation resolutions: bullet one, privatization; 
bullet two, privatization; bullet three, sale; number four, bullet 
four, privatization — so first four bullets, privatization, 
privatization, sale, privatization. Their agenda is clear. Why 
don’t they say it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, you know, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve been referring to this Craig Wireless investment as a 
Palm Springs cable company, and truth be told, it’s not really 
being fair to the minister or the government. Because as it turns 
out they didn’t just lose 10 million . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please, members. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because it turns out, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t just 
lose 10 million taxpayer dollars investing in cable television in 
Palm Springs, Mr. Speaker; it also turns out that this is a Hawaii 
cable company, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the minister even 
knows it. 
 
I’m sure Saskatchewan taxpayers will be pleased to know that 
their tax dollars are providing cable television to Palm Springs 
and Honolulu, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that the NDP have now 
lost at least 10 million taxpayer dollars providing cable TV to 
BC (British Columbia), Manitoba, Palm Springs, and now 
Honolulu? And if so, why was that never disclosed to the 

taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, let me be clear to the Sask 
Party and to the people of Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker, 
who I am sure are interested in this. In the last 10 years there 
has not been one tax dollar that has flowed from the General 
Revenue Fund to the Crown Investments Corporation — not 
one single tax dollar, Mr. Speaker. I ask again those members 
from the Sask Party to be clear on what their policy is for the 
Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at The Outlook of Monday, February 17, 
2003 and ask the Sask Party member from Swift Current to turn 
around and ask the person, the member behind him from Arm 
River, what he says. I’ll tell him what he says. He says: 
 

“There’s no set plan that’s written in stone,” admitted 
Brkich. “We’ll try a few different things and hopefully 
they’d work (out, Mr. Speaker). 

 
Hopefully they’d work out. Give me a break . . . (inaudible) . . . 
can have a plan for the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what happened. 
Apparently the Premier and the minister thought they could 
pretend to be Steve McGarrett and Magnum, Mr. Speaker; but it 
turns out all they turned out to be was Skipper and Gilligan, Mr. 
Speaker, on this particular investment. Because based on 
SaskTel’s annual report we know they have apparently 
completely written off 10 million taxpayer dollars in terms of 
the NDP’s investment in Craig Wireless. It’s now worthless. 
 
What we don’t know — what we don’t know — is if there were 
also operating losses that SaskTel is responsible for, then and 
now, Mr. Speaker. And that means that the NDP’s loss of $10 
million on this Honolulu cable company could be much, much 
higher. That’s the question for the minister. Are the losses of 
taxpayers’ dollars limited to the $10 million investment? What 
is the exposure of taxpayers going forward on the operations of 
this Honolulu cable TV company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want not only the Sask 
Party, but I want the Leader of the Opposition, to come clean on 
what his policy is on the Crown Investments Corporation as 
well, Mr. Speaker. He should come clean as well. You know I 
said before, they bob and they weave, Mr. Speaker, and they 
talk in code, Mr. Speaker, but their agenda is sell. It’s 
privatization, Mr. Speaker, that’s what their agenda is. You 
know and I think when I look at the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, 
of April 2, ’03, that’s of this year, Mr. Speaker, I read this quote 
and it says: 
 

But regardless of where or if he runs, (referring to) Schmidt 
said Tuesday he hopes the next government is a minority 
government because the Sask. Party just isn’t ready to run 
the province by itself yet. 
 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

 

“What the Sask. Party has shown is that it doesn’t appear 
capable of governing,” Schmidt said, adding that (the) 
Sask. Party MLAs don’t have enough experience or 
education and are too easily taken in by “simplistic, 
right-wing dogma” . . . (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you’ll 
remember the show Gilligan’s Island. There’s a lot of 
similarities with the NDP government currently. Remember on 
the show, the Skipper and Gilligan and all the rest of the 
castaways, they kept trying the same thing over and over again. 
They kept making the same mistakes and they couldn’t get off 
the island. 
 
The difference is with this group of castaways, Mr. Speaker . . . 
And the good news is that the people of the province are getting 
ready to vote them off the island. That’s the difference. That’s 
the difference. 
 
But it still leaves a very serious question that the minister hasn’t 
even come close to. He hasn’t even come close to accounting 
for the $10 million in taxpayers’ money that apparently they 
have now written off. 
 
The question to the minister is this: is this $10 million the total 
losses to taxpayers or is there further exposure in the ongoing 
operation of the company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered this 
question 100 times in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I say to the Sask Party — and if they want to listen 
they can, Mr. Speaker — our Crown Investments Corporation, 
Mr. Speaker has a multitude of investments. They have returned 
over the last 10 years $1.6 billion to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan — returned, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they’ve 
done. 
 
Last year they paid a $300 million dividend. I say to those 
members opposite, to those members of the Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker, what investments last year in their personal portfolios, 
Mr. Speaker, didn’t lose a little bit of money last year? 
 
If you look at investments across Canada and North America, 
you can pick any number of investments that lost money. The 
point is our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, operate 
high-quality service at amongst the lowest rates and at the same 
time have returned benefits to the people of Saskatchewan by 
way of a $300 million dividend last year, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that’s something we should be proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the cold, clear fact of all of this is 
that if it wasn’t for the NDP’s hare-brained schemes out of 
province, there would have been 85-plus million more dollars 
for health care and education and, Mr. Speaker, highways in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s what they don’t get. 
Everybody in the province but the NDP seems to understand 
that, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, two months ago the Premier released his own 
inquiry into SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company). He was forced to admit that they lost 
$28 million and that a minister didn’t tell the truth about the 
deal — for six long years, mind you. But he said . . . but the 
Premier said, we’ve learned our lesson; we’re going to be more 
forthcoming now. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently the Minister of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) didn’t get the 
message, because he stood in the House how many times today 
and refused to answer the question. 
 
Will the Premier please direct the minister to answer the 
question? Have the taxpayers lost only $10 million in this 
scheme or are they exposed for millions more in the operation 
of a Honolulu cable company, thanks to the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Would the 
Leader of the Sask Party please direct his members over there to 
listen to the answer, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And, Mr. Speaker, would the Leader of 
the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, would the Leader of the Sask 
Party and everyone over there, kindly get on the same page as it 
relates to Crown Investments Corporation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the member from Arm River who says 
that, when we get the best bang for the buck we’ll sell it, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve got the member from Swift Current over there, 
Mr. Speaker, who says, we’re going to do a review. 
 
We’ve got members over on the other side over there as well 
who say, we’re going to do reviews, Mr. Speaker. Is this BC’s 
review of core assets as well, Mr. Speaker, who many of them 
endorse as well, Mr. Speaker? Is that what this review is about? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say — but I wish they would say as well, Mr. 
Speaker — this is about privatization, this is about privatization, 
this is about privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister may be talking 
about his own annual report for CIC, because the only reason 
they were able to hand the Minister of Finance any money at all 
is because this NDP government further privatized its shares in 
Cameco, Mr. Speaker. That’s how they were able to afford the 
dividend they paid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a little bit ironic. This whole Craig Wireless 
Honolulu investment is a little bit ironic, because we know 
Craig Wireless Honolulu has about 8,300 customers. That 
means SaskTel has about twice as many cable subscribers in 
Honolulu than they do in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But they don’t get it, Mr. Speaker. This isn’t their money. This 
is taxpayers’ money, involuntary shareholders who don’t have 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

the right to sell their shares if they think the investments that are 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m just finding it difficult to hear. I’m 
finding it difficult to hear. Order. Order. If the member would 
proceed directly to his question, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers deserve to know how 
much money is being lost. Will the minister please answer that 
question as it relates to this Honolulu cable investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the privatization of 
Cameco shares — that is almost laughable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member from Swift Current from the Sask 
Party who worked as a key policy adviser for the minister of 
privatization in the Devine government doesn’t get what 
privatization is about, Mr. Speaker. I don’t believe it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cameco is a private company. All of the proceeds 
that were received from the sale of those shares went to the 
reduction of debt, Mr. Speaker. Does he have a problem with 
that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1980s that Sask Party and their cousins, the 
Conservative government, would take the proceeds from the 
sale of assets and direct it to all kinds of things for the buying of 
votes, Mr. Speaker. All kinds of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if he has a problem with what we’ve done with the 
sale of Cameco shares . . . By the way, I say as an aside, we 
sold them at their highest value, unlike what they advised us to 
do — selling them down here someplace, Mr. Speaker — and 
reduced the debt for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the 
minister actually knew that this investment by SaskTel was in 
part a Honolulu cable company. I don’t think he actually knew 
the facts of the matter. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, there’s a word in Hawaiian we 
were able to look up today that really encompasses this whole 
little story. It’s ahahanah. And it means at the same time, shame 
on you and you’re going to get it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And I can’t think of a better word to sum up this 
particular NDP debacle. 
 
But it is involving taxpayers’ money. It involves 10 million 
taxpayers’ dollars and maybe more. And so once again, once 
again to the minister who is supposed to be accountable to this 
House and to the people of the province for investments he’s 
made on their behalf through the Crowns, once again to him: 
will he confirm that the $10 million investment’s been written 
off completely and detail for taxpayers what their further 
exposure is in this investment? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
getting advice from that Sask Party is akin to getting advice 
from the Boston strangler advising you that your tie is too tight, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is incredulous. You know, Mr. Speaker, I look 
at the Times-Herald, the member from Thunder Creek, and 
here’s his position. He said, first and foremost we will review 
the four major Crowns. He said, we will return them to their 
core functions; that will stop them from competing with private 
business. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s going to stop them from competing. 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at this. Mr. Speaker, they’re going to put 
up walls outside our borders — our Crowns can’t go out and get 
revenue. They’re going to put walls inside, Mr. Speaker, so they 
can’t compete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say that our Crowns can only operate, Mr. 
Speaker, the Sask Party says that our Crowns can only operate 
in markets where nobody else is competing. Mr. Speaker, that is 
in rural Saskatchewan and the ridings they represent. 
 
You might as well sell the Crowns right now while they’re 
worth something, Mr. Speaker. But we don’t agree with that. 
We will grow our Crowns and we will continue to provide the 
services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, how in the 
world can this minister talk about serving rural Saskatchewan? 
How will he explain to the people of Wood River or Arm River 
that they can’t have basic telephony services in their areas, Mr. 
Speaker, but he’s got $10 million for cable television in 
Honolulu and Palm Springs, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That is absolutely incredible. He doesn’t have the 
money for SaskTel to invest in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister said, the 
minister and the head of SaskTel have said that they won’t get 
into any more service business arrangements in Saskatchewan 
unless there’s a business . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. I’d just ask 
members to lower the level of discussion across the floor so that 
the question can be put and can be clearly heard. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, how in the world can the minister 
and his hand-picked CEO (chief executive officer), Don Ching, 
tell the people of the province that there’ll be no more SaskTel 
service in Saskatchewan unless there’s a business case, but yet 
explain to those same people that they’re prepared to blow $40 
million on an Australian stock market play, Mr. Speaker? That 
doesn’t wash. And what also doesn’t wash is the minister 
refusing to be accountable for his authorization of expenditure 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

 

of the taxpayers’ money. 
 
So once again, to the minister: is Craig Wireless still losing 
money? Are the losses to taxpayers limited to 10 million or 
have more been lost in the ongoing operation of that company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, listen to the ridiculousness 
of this argument, Mr. Speaker. They say, Mr. Speaker, they say 
that they would not allow any of the investments outside of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, none of those investments. And they 
would have so much more money. Yet if you look at the big 
picture, Mr. Speaker, what has SaskTel done? They are $100 
million to the good, Mr. Speaker — $100 million to the good — 
on investments outside of the province, Mr. Speaker. And they 
would cut that off. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, they’d stop our 
Crowns from competing inside of the province. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again, come clean. Don’t hide your agenda. 
Tell the people of Saskatchewan what you want to do is 
privatize, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they want to do — 
privatize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Location of Crown Corporation Investments 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the minister 
lectures us on the need for our Crown corporations to broaden 
their base by investing around the world, it seems that 
invariably he favours tourist sun destinations like Australia, 
Philippines, Palm Springs, and we have yet . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Honolulu. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Honolulu. We have yet to hear of any 
investment in Nuuk, Greenland. 
 
Now is this mere coincidence that the attempt to broaden our 
Crowns always seems to be in prime tourist destinations and 
sun destinations, or are you in fact contemplating investing in 
some of the less attractive places to visit in January? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if I could 
have their attention, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. That member 
from North Battleford is absolutely right, Mr. Speaker. Crowns’ 
investments are in prime tourist spots, Mr. Speaker. And the 
prime tourist spot is right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Ninety-five per cent, 95 per cent of their 
investments are made in North America’s prime tourist spot — 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I assume the minister just confirmed that the 

government will be investing in the North Battleford water 
treatment plant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Registration of Genetically Modified Wheat 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Food 
Agency is contemplating approval of genetically engineered 
Roundup Ready Wheat, and the criteria is to be totally science 
based and they say they will not consider in the criteria the 
issue of marketability or cost-benefit analysis. This position is 
being taken in spite of the fact that 80 per cent of the purchasers 
of Canadian wheat say that they would not accept GE 
(genetically engineered) wheat from Canada. 
 
Now in view of the pressing concern of Saskatchewan farmers, 
APAS (Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan), 
the Canadian Wheat Board, is the Government of Saskatchewan 
going to take a public, firm position on the approval of 
Roundup Ready Wheat? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very good question 
that the member from North Battleford asks and we are on 
record, Mr. Speaker, and have been for some time. I’ve 
corresponded with the federal minister, some months ahead of 
when the member from North Battleford has corresponded with 
the federal minister. And we’ve said that GM wheat should not 
be registered in the international marketplace, Mr. Speaker, 
until two things happen. 
 
One is that, Mr. Speaker, we should ensure that we have the 
marketplace protected across the world so that our Canadian 
wheat continues to be the leader across the world. And 
secondly, Mr. Speaker, that our Canadian wheat doesn’t get, 
doesn’t get . . . that we have assurances that we can protect the 
segregation of the grains, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve articulated that message to the federal government better 
than seven or eight months ago, Mr. Speaker. We’ve said to the 
federal government, you shouldn’t be insuring the wheat so that 
it can be sold across the international marketplace. And I’m 
glad to see that the member from North Battleford has now 
communicated with his federal colleagues and said to them that 
they should be also making sure that we protect the industry in 
Saskatchewan and across North America. We appreciate the 
support of the member from North Battleford on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, apart from the particular issue 
that is before us right now — namely whether or not the 
marketability of our wheat should be left to the protection of 
Monsanto or the Government of Canada — there is a larger 
issue that the Canadian Food Agency says that marketability 
should not be one of the criteria for approving GE strains. 
 
Will the Government of Saskatchewan go on record and press 
the Canadian Food Agency to broaden the criteria so that 
marketability and cost-benefit analysis be part of the criteria for 
the approval of any new varieties of GE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the federal 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

ministry and the federal government has the latitude to proceed 
to make the kinds of adjustments to the Canadian Food Agency 
regulations of which the member opposite speaks about. And 
we’ve encouraged the member . . . We’ve encouraged the 
federal government to proceed down that path, Mr. Speaker, 
and I appreciate the fact that the member from North Battleford 
as well is moving down that path. 
 
And I say until we have in Canada and the federal government 
can identify for Canadian producers and North American 
producers that we can have identity preservation, Mr. Speaker, 
and that we can have in the world marketplace today an 
assurance that we can protect our Canadian wheat product, we 
are not supporting the procedures, Mr. Speaker, with the 
receiving of the registration of GM wheat in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

TABLING OF CERTIFICATES OF ELECTION 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Before orders of the 
day, before orders of the day it is my duty, members, to inform 
the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 
received from the Chief Electoral Officer a certificate of the 
following elections and returns: of Mr. Andy Iwanchuk as 
member of the constituency of Saskatoon Fairview; of Mr. 
Walter Lorenz as member of the constituency of Battleford-Cut 
Knife. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I hereby table this correspondence. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and respond to 
written question no. 147. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 147 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today, 
sitting to my left, is Mr. Doug Moen, who is the deputy minister 
of Justice and Deputy Attorney General. And to my right is Ms. 
Betty Ann Pottruff, who is the director of policy planning and 

evaluation for the Department of Justice. And right behind me 
is Mr. Gord Sisson, who is the director of administrative 
services, and beside him is Ms. Elizabeth Smith, who is the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister. 
 
And also we have Murray Brown, who is the acting executive 
director of public prosecution sitting behind Ms. Pottruff. And 
we have Murray Sawatsky, acting executive director of law 
enforcement services sitting behind Mr. Sisson. 
 
And at the back we also have, in case we need them, Susan 
Amrud, the executive director of public law; Rod Crook, the 
executive director of courts and civil justice division; Keith 
Laxdal, the associate deputy minister, finance and 
administration; Gerald Tegart, the executive director of the civil 
law division; and Lionel McNabb, the director of family justice 
services. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to 
the minister and his officials. It’s always a good time to be able 
to get together with a department and the minister and the 
officials and go through some of the situations that exist in our 
province and get some clarification on directions and 
aspirations and all those sorts of things. 
 
But before I get any further into this, I’d just like to have one of 
the pages take the globals over to the minister to be taken care 
of so that we get the answers to that as soon as possible. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Minister, as . . . Or through the Chair, very recently the 
Justice department that used to cover justice and corrections 
was basically divided up into two or three different 
jurisdictions. And I know last year, when we went through the 
estimate part of the session, there was a lot of confusion as to 
where the areas were. And we talked with one particular 
minister and he’d say well I think that belongs to the other one. 
And they weren’t even sure; they’d say, I think it belongs. 
 
So I would like for the minister to outline at this particular point 
two things: what the purpose was — and probably going to end 
up with more than two — what the purpose was of that division 
and exactly where those divisions are at present, and if the 
minister feels it’s working well or if there will have to be some 
further changes down the road to make it work as smoothly as 
possible for the people of the province. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This actually . . . In 
terms of the organization of government, I should say it actually 
is the prerogative mainly of the Premier. But I’m happy to 
discuss it briefly in our estimates here because, as the member 
says, it does touch upon Justice. 
 
I want to say first of all that the member’s global questions 
which are written questions that we’ve been provided with, as 
per usual we will get these answers as soon as we can and get 
those answers back to the member as soon as we possibly can 
get them together. 
 
I want to say about . . . The decision to have a separate 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety was motivated in 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

 

large measure because there was a desire to integrate correction 
services for both young people and adults. And prior to the 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety being created, 
youth corrections was under the Department of, then, Social 
Services. Adult corrections was in Justice. But there was a 
desire to have a focus on corrections as a whole and therefore to 
amalgamate those two together. And that was done in the 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I would like for the minister to 
clarify a little further. You mentioned that the youth aspect had 
been under Social Services and was now fitting under a 
different department and basically how that has worked. And 
also as far as the personnel that were working with the youth 
under Social Services, did they sort of come along or has that 
department had to train and prepare a whole new set of 
individuals to work with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to clarify for the member, Mr. 
Chair, that this was not an exercise in getting a bunch of new 
people to handle corrections. The same people that have 
handled corrections in the past continue to handle corrections. 
It’s just that the youth and adult corrections are in one place and 
therefore I think it’s more focused on the needs of corrections. 
 
But I also want to say that the departments of Justice and 
Corrections work very closely together. And we have found 
since the Department of Corrections and Public Safety was 
created that not only is it a good thing to have the youth and 
adult corrections services in one place, but also that the 
Department of Corrections and Public Safety works very well 
with the Department of Justice. There’s a high degree of 
co-operation and collaboration between the two. And I’m 
advised that we’ve found that it really has worked quite well 
without, without having to hire new people to do it. It’s simply 
a reorganization and an ability to focus on corrections for both 
adults and youth offenders in one centre. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I think there’s some 
reassurance in the fact that the minister said that no new people 
were hired. I wasn’t really concerned about the new people 
being hired, I was more concerned whether the people that had 
worked with youth in Social Services had sort of come along 
now with that responsibility coming over to your department. 
 
If no new people were hired, does that mean that no one came 
over from Social Services, or that you’re just working with the 
same number of people you had before and Social Services kept 
all those individuals that worked with youth prior to this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I don’t know really what to say 
other than there were people that worked in youth corrections in 
Social Services that I understand were perhaps in several 
locations because Social Services is organized on a regional 
basis. There were people that worked in corrections — adult 
corrections — that worked in Justice. Those people have been 
brought together in the new Department of Corrections and 
Public Safety and they have a common philosophy, a common 
risk-management strategy, and the ability to work together on 
corrections policy. 
 
And I’m very happy to have this dialogue with this member 
although I would say that I actually am not the minister in 

charge of Corrections, that would be the Minister of Corrections 
and Public Safety. And he might want to direct more detailed 
questions about corrections, the way it operates, the philosophy, 
and so on, to the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
when he continues his estimates in the House. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees, and 
thank you to the critic and the minister for allowing just one or 
maybe two questions on another issue entirely. 
 
And it actually relates to a potential private members’ Bill that 
might be coming forward in Ottawa with respect to a new 
section in the Criminal Code. The Swift Current group of the 
Students Against Drunk Driving are, first of all I’d just say by 
way of background, a very, very proactive and energetic group, 
award-winning group within the whole Students Against Drunk 
Driving movement and very committed to the cause. And they 
have undertaken a bit of a lobby of their federal Member of 
Parliament and of all legislators with respect to changes they’d 
like to see to the Criminal Code. 
 
It’s been their findings through discussions with prosecutors 
and with the police, that at the scenes of major collisions where 
there has been a significant injury or death that those are quite 
chaotic even to the most seasoned police officers. And I’m 
going to just quote now from the letter they are sending out. 
They say that: 
 

Circumstances at the scene often prohibit an officer from 
using the usual tactics in determining whether an individual 
is impaired. Currently an officer has to form the opinion 
that the accused is impaired before he or she can demand a 
blood sample.  

 
And you’d see — I’m not quoting any more — but you’d see 
where that poses particular difficulty if there is . . . in the case 
of a victim of an accident, for example. Then they go on to say 
that: 
 

We constantly see that they are not able to form that 
opinion.  
 

And they say that cases are being lost as a result of that. 
 
Now it is a federal matter and I understand that, but I wonder if 
the minister would give an indication to members of the 
committee as to whether he’d be prepared to raise the matter at 
a Justice ministers’ conference. I’m sure the agendas for those 
are predetermined far in advance and I’m sure they’re quite full, 
but if he could give a general commitment to raise this general 
matter with his colleagues and with the federal Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well first of all, Mr. Chair, I’d like to say 
that I congratulate the work of the Students Against Drunk 
Driving and the Mothers Against Drunk Driving. They do a lot 
of good work in our communities and it’s much needed because 
it also plays an educative role. It’s good to see young people in 
communities across the province organizing their chem-free 
graduations and so on. It’s a very responsible group of young 
people. 
 
With respect to the matter the member is raising, I would make 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

this commitment, that certainly we’d be very happy to look into 
it. We haven’t seen the private members’ Bill that is being 
proposed for parliament. I’d be quite happy to read it and look 
at it and see if it’s something that we would lend our support to. 
 
I’m sure that there are complicated issues that would involve a 
balancing act between the desire to have the police able to do 
their job — which we support — and the human rights 
protections that citizens are entitled to. It’s a balancing act 
between giving the police powers to investigate and ensuring 
that citizens are not subjected to overly intrusive tactics by 
police which would be a violation of their human rights. 
 
But having said that, I’m not expressing a conclusion. I’m 
saying that’s the kind of issue that we would need to look at and 
that would involve actually examining the legislation which 
we’d be very happy to do. And we’ll undertake to get a copy of 
that, either from the member or in another way, and I’ll have 
my officials look at it and then give some advice as to whether 
this is something that the province of Saskatchewan would like 
to take a position on. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. 
Point of . . . just so . . . I don’t think I was clear in the first 
question. The private members’ Bill, I think it’s in the draft 
stage yet so it hasn’t been introduced. And no further question, 
just an undertaking on my part that when there is a draft 
available I’ll make sure that the department and the minister 
receive a copy for their review. Thanks for the answer today. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wonder if you could 
explain the difference in special constables under The Police 
Act and peace officers. Could you make a . . . Could you give 
me a distinction between those two classifications of peace 
officers and perhaps in general terms what duties and 
responsibilities would go along with both of those two 
particular designations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, in a general way I would say 
that special constables have the power and authority that they 
are given really in their appointment, which is made by the 
government. And sometimes they work for police forces and 
sometimes they work for other agencies. 
 
They do not have full powers of police officers. They do not . . . 
For example, they do not have the right to carry firearms. They 
usually have limited functions and are appointed for a limited 
purpose such as receiving information that only a police officer 
would normally be entitled to receive, serving documents, and 
so on. 
 
And I’m advised that special constables, in effect, are appointed 
to do a limited number of things in order to assist the police or 
relieve police or co-operate with the police so that the police 
can be out doing the major things they need to do to deal with 
crime or prevent crime. And the special constables can do some 
things of a more administrative nature. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, would I take it from your comments 
then that when you refer to a peace office and a police officer 
that in fact they are both the same individual, there is no 
distinction under law between a peace officer and a police 
officer, however there is certainly a distinction between a peace 

officer and special constable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I should clarify, Mr. Chair, that there 
is a difference between the term, peace officers, and police 
officers. All of the people that the member has referred to and 
that I’ve referred to, they are all peace officers. 
 
The police are peace officers; the special constables are peace 
officers; people that work enforcing The Highway Traffic Act 
are peace officers — but not all of them are police officers. Just 
the police are police officers. And then the special constables 
have their duties which are set out in their appointments. And 
the highway traffic officers would have their duties which also 
would be designated in their appointments. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, just for further clarification on special 
constables. Their duties are . . . I understand from your 
comments then that their duties are defined by their 
appointment. Is that . . . Or is there sort of a blanket set of duties 
and authorities that go along with that designation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that every 
appointment of a special constable contains the list of duties 
that that special constable would have. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you mentioned the highway traffic 
officers. From your perspective as Minister of Justice, what is 
their role as . . . what role do they play as being a peace officer? 
What Acts are they authorized to enforce and what 
responsibilities would they have in enforcing those Acts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that the people that 
enforce the highway traffic . . . Well the highway traffic 
officers, they enforce the highway traffic laws — usually things 
like weights and measures, regulations under The Highway 
Traffic Act, certain trucking statutes that the province has; and 
that they may have power also in certain emergency 
circumstances to operate as peace officers. 
 
But I should point out also that they are under the authority of 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation. The Minister of 
Justice is responsible for policing services. The Minister of 
Highways and Transportation would be responsible for the 
highway traffic officers. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I’m looking at the job description of the 
highway traffic officers and one of the duties — in fact the last 
one listed — is enforce provincial and federal rules of the road. 
I wonder if you could expand on what that means and what 
requirements and what type of duties that those individuals 
would have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think the member has actually 
described it reasonably well. They have the power and authority 
to enforce the federal and provincial rules of the road. 
 
 But I should point out that, you know, the rules that they 
enforce are not all the rules of the road. It’s the primary 
responsibility of the police for example to enforce the, you 
know, the speeding laws. They are more concerned about — I 
think — weights, road restrictions, that kind of thing. And only 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

 

in emergency circumstances would they do the things that 
police would normally do such as enforcing the speeding laws 
for example. 
 
So they do have certain powers. They do not enforce them in 
areas where the police would normally operate, and likewise the 
police will not concern themselves normally with regulations of 
a nature that the highway traffic officers would normally 
enforce. There’s a demarcation between what the police will be 
responsible for and what the highway traffic officers will be 
responsible for, and I would leave it at that basis. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, would it be fair to assume that the 
highway traffic officers would enforce rules of the road in areas 
of the province perhaps where the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) and highway patrol coverage is perhaps not to 
the standard that people would like to see it? And I guess the 
second part of my question is: do the highway traffic officers 
have a responsibility under the laws of our province to in fact 
enforce rules of the road when they see infractions occurring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer, Mr. Chair, is no. They are not 
expected to fill in, as it were, for the police where the police are 
not present. There may be some emergency circumstances 
where someone has to do something, and if they have the 
authority, they will do it. But they are not a police force in the 
sense that the police are, either municipal police force or the 
RCMP. 
 
And what I would be willing to do, if it might be helpful also, is 
to perhaps provide the member with a written description of the 
things that are done by the highway traffic officers, and going 
back to the special constables, on a routine basis and how that 
differs from what the police would normally be expected to do. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. I certainly would look 
forward to that information. I think it would be very helpful in 
understanding the difference and those sorts of things. 
 
I just perhaps . . . one final question in this area. I’m told that a 
number of drug busts, for lack of a better term, that have 
occurred on our highways, a number of them actually have been 
initiated by the highway traffic officers making the initial stop 
of the vehicles and that sort of thing. I’m just wondering if in 
fact there is statistics that actually document that or is that just 
one of these rumours that we hear? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I would put it this way, Mr. Chair. There is 
a responsibility on the part of the traffic officers to notify the 
police in the event that they become aware of some items — 
drugs, illegal drugs, and so on — that are present in a vehicle. 
So that they co-operate with the police in that regard and that’s 
their responsibility. 
 
There have been a few instances where the presence of illicit 
drugs has come to the attention of the police through the efforts 
of the traffic officers who are out doing a very good job. And in 
the main however, the police themselves of course detect where 
illicit drugs are and they’re responsible for doing that. 
 
And I should say while I’m on the topic, that the RCMP in 
Saskatchewan do a very good job of that — of detecting illicit 
drugs and trying to prosecute people who are involved in illicit 

drugs. 
 
So it has happened on occasion. Is it a regular or common 
occurrence? Well commonly it would be the police that would 
themselves be identifying material of that sort. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon to the 
minister and to his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to ask you a couple of questions 
surrounding policing costs for the municipalities. Mr. Minister, 
if RCMP live in a town in Saskatchewan and have their 
barracks in that town, do the citizens of that town have to pay 
more per capita for policing costs than do the surrounding RM 
(rural municipality) areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
In fact, in anticipation of other questions, I could point out that 
if you are a community over 500 people with a detachment, 
then you pay $57 per capita for police services. If you have no 
detachment in the community you pay $42 per capita. If it is a 
community under 500 people with a detachment you pay $40 
per capita. If you are under 500 with no detachment you pay 
$20 per capita. And if you are a rural municipality you also pay 
$20 per capita. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
ask you why that kind of a formula was set out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In general terms, Mr. Chair, the formula is 
arrived at by the Department of Justice in consultation with the 
Urban Municipalities Association and the Rural Municipalities 
Association. So I’ll make that comment first of all. 
 
The second comment I’ll make of course is, as with many 
issues, the problem is what is fair depends upon your vantage 
point and what some of the communities think is fair is not the 
same as what other communities think is fair, so that you never 
get complete consensus on how these costs should be 
distributed. And someone always thinks that somebody should 
pay more and that they should pay less. And sometimes the 
opposite is true of the same people; the people that are supposed 
to pay more actually think they should pay less and somebody 
else should pay more. 
 
So it’s not an easy issue any time you’re talking about things 
like taxes or how you’re going to . . . how the community’s 
share of policing will be paid for. That would be my first 
observation. 
 
My second observation would be that it reflects in part issues of 
tax base. I think it’s fair to say that larger communities will 
have a larger tax base. They will have greater capacity, 
generally speaking, to pay more of their police costs. I think 
that’s just common sense. 
 
My third observation would be that the feeling as part of this 
formula is that if you have a detachment in your community 
that, you know, it’s an economic advantage simply to have a 
detachment in a community — so that’s a good thing. And I 
think it gives the community a feeling of greater security to 
have a detachment in the community. Of course you can’t have 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

one in every community, but where you do have one generally I 
think people see that as a positive, a positive thing. 
 
From the government’s standpoint of course, safety and security 
are very important. We try to work with the police and 
communities to ensure that there is some police presence across 
the province, as well as on strategies to reduce crime, and that’s 
what we’re doing. 
 
We contribute about $88 million to support policing across the 
province and the communities also contribute on a per capita 
basis in the amounts described, ranging from $57 per capita 
where . . . We’re talking about the RCMP here, I should say, 
because of course some of the communities have their own 
police force such as Regina and Saskatoon. But if they don’t, 
the cost of the RCMP service ranges from 57 in the 
communities with a detachment down to 20 to the rural 
municipalities. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, was there an agreement by the Urban 
Municipalities Association, that’s sort of an agreement across 
the board, that towns in Saskatchewan — town or cities that 
have an RCMP detachment — would pay more per capita for 
that service than would the rural municipalities around? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe it is the policy of SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), the urban 
municipalities passed at, not this year’s convention but, I think 
their 2002 convention, that they . . . in answer to the question, 
yes. They believe there should be a difference between if you 
have a detachment you should pay more than if you don’t. 
 
And I believe their resolution and policy was that if you have a 
detachment you should pay $40, $45 per capita instead of the 
57. And if you don’t you should pay $30 per capita. 
 
Now you can see that that would involve a reduction in what 
the urban communities would pay over 500. And they also I 
think would say that a lot of the lost costs should then be 
transferred to the smaller communities and the RMs, and they 
would say that they should all pay more than they do now. And 
as you can imagine, the larger centres are all in favour of that 
because they’d pay less, but the rural municipalities aren’t in 
favour of it because they’d pay more. 
 
And there already has been an adjustment — I believe it was 
about five or six years ago — where some of the costs were 
taken from the larger urbans and transferred to the smaller 
communities, which still pay less. But at one time they were 
paying nothing and it was thought to be fair that they should 
contribute some. And the larger communities got a break. I 
mean, they’d be paying a lot more if it wasn’t for that 
readjustment that occurred a few years ago. 
 
And yes, the larger communities would like to make some more 
changes. They would like to see the cost come down for them 
and they’d like to retain the difference in cost, whether you 
have a detachment or you don’t. But they want some of the cost 
to be transferred onto the communities less than 500, plus the 
RMs. And this is where you’re not going to get consensus 

beyond the larger communities because the smaller ones and the 
RMs don’t want to take on those additional costs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, if there was 
an agreement by SUMA to levy a higher per capita tax, you 
could say, or cost for RCMP policing, if in fact there’s a 
detachment in a community — whether it be a smaller 
community or a city — the community of Vonda is wondering 
what the reason is then that Saskatoon with their new barracks 
are not having any cost increases for their policing. 
 
Citizens there don’t pay to have the barracks in Saskatoon, 
whereas the community of Vonda was told that the reason that 
they had to pay a higher per capita rate for policing, for RCMP 
policing, was because they had a barracks in that community. 
So we need to have some rationale for some of the decisions 
being made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the answer is that the barracks in 
Saskatoon, yes, is located in Saskatoon; actually, it’s on the 
outskirts of Saskatoon, the new one that’s being constructed. 
But that is not for police officers just to work in Saskatoon. 
That is for police officers that will primarily work in rural 
Saskatchewan. They just happen to have their barracks in 
Saskatoon. That’s one major difference. Rural Saskatchewan 
benefits from that RCMP barracks in Saskatoon. They provide 
service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The other major difference is of course, as I indicated earlier, 
the city of Saskatoon is one of the municipalities that has its 
own police force. So in Saskatoon the citizens pay for policing 
by paying their municipal taxes which then the city council uses 
to hire the police and they have a very . . . fairly large police 
department. 
 
In Vonda they don’t have their own police department; they 
rely on the RCMP. And instead of hiring their own police, they 
participate in the cost of that policing. But in both cases the 
communities pay for policing. 
 
I want to point out that in Saskatoon we would estimate that the 
cost on a per capita basis would be $150 — $150. That’s what 
the average citizen would pay for police services in Saskatoon. 
So it compares quite favourably to asking the people in Vonda, 
for example, to pay the . . . I guess it’s the $57 because they 
have a detachment. 
 
There is a cost that Saskatoon must pay per capita as well, and 
it’s actually considerably higher. This is a situation where, like 
taxes, it almost doesn’t matter what the amount is, there will 
always be arguments that my amount should be less and 
somebody else’s should be more. 
 
But I do want to assure the member that even though the 
citizens of Saskatoon may not pay the $57 per capita for RCMP 
costs, they will pay approximately $150 per capita to have their 
own police force, which they do. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate those 
answers. You had made mention a couple of answers ago that 
the communities over 500 have a greater capacity for taxes and 
so they would be expected to pay more for RCMPing costs. 
 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

 

Well again I refer to Vonda, and Vonda has under 500 people. 
They don’t have a great capacity for taxing their people and still 
they are paying quite a large amount as compared to the 
surrounding RM areas. 
 
From my understanding, the surrounding RM areas are paying 
$18 per capita, and the town of Vonda, citizens within that town 
are paying well over 40-some dollars per capita. So there’s 
quite a discrepancy there, and of course their rationale is that 
the RCMP serve the surrounding area as much. 
 
And I know that this argument and discussion has gone on in 
the last few years at SUMA conferences and everywhere, but it 
seems that they . . . when they were asking your government — 
your department — why the discrepancy, the answer they got 
was that it’s because you have a barracks in that community. 
 
So they did not speak of the greater capacity for taxes or not. 
They just said simply because you have a barracks in that 
community, there is an automatic increase — and quite a high 
increase — in their per capita rate for RCMP policing. 
 
So that’s why I asked you, Mr. Minister, whether or not that is 
the rationale because the barracks is located in a community. 
Because if that is the rationale then it seems that in the mind of 
the people in that area that there should have been an increase in 
Saskatoon also for the RCMP policing because the RCMP 
barracks are located within the perimeters of Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to say first of all, Mr. Chair, 
that we are always willing to engage in discussions with SUMA 
and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
to revise the formula for policing costs. 
 
But I want to say to the member that, you know, she’s getting 
into an area which is a very no-win area because essentially 
what she’s saying is, well in Vonda they’re paying 40 or $42 
per capita for their RCMP; the RM people are paying less. And 
she’s saying that the people in Vonda say, well we should pay 
less and the people in the RM should pay more. 
 
Well the people in the RM would say, well you’ve got the 
detachment in Vonda so you’ve got a closer police presence 
plus there are more people there to support a tax base. 
 
And I would invite the member to take up her comments, if 
she’s saying that the RMs should pay more, with the RMs in her 
constituency; because I think what she’s going to find is that the 
RMs do not agree. They think that the present system is fair. 
 
So I say to the member once again, that yes I understand that 
there will always be somebody that says, I don’t like the 
formula; I should pay less; somebody else should pay more. In 
fact the people of Vonda pay less now than they would have if 
we had not made the changes we made five or six years ago, 
where it used to be communities under 500 with no 
detachments and RMs paid nothing for police services even if 
they received them. We have changed that to shift some of the 
cost to the communities under 500 and the RMs. 
 
The member may be suggesting that we should shift some of 
the cost more. And I invite the member to take that up with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities because 

what she will find and she already knows is that they will say, 
well they don’t agree. So having said that, I’ll say we’ll 
continue to talk to SUMA and SARM and make changes that 
are fair. 
 
But I want to say to the member also, that in sort of getting into 
the area that, well somebody is saying that the people of 
Saskatoon aren’t paying more when they have an RCMP 
detachment, I say to her again, the people of Saskatoon, the 
people of Regina, the people of Prince Albert, the people of 
Moose Jaw, the people of Estevan have their own police forces. 
They do not rely upon RCMP to provide municipal policing. 
And of course that has to be paid for by the taxpayers. 
 
And the people of Vonda should not be under the impression 
and nor should the member, that taxpayers in Saskatoon do not 
pay for policing because they do. 
 
And the per capita costs, for example, of policing — I said 
approximately 150 — I’ll tell the member what they are in 
those centres that have their own police forces. In the city of 
Regina where we presently sit, the cost is $201 per capita. In 
the city of Saskatoon, the costs are $167 per capita. In Moose 
Jaw, they are $165 per capita. And in Prince Albert, they are 
$182 per capita. 
 
So there should not be anyone in the province of Saskatchewan 
that says, well we have to pay $42 or $57 per capita and what 
about the people in Saskatoon? That is not a sensible argument 
because the simple fact of the matter is, and I repeat, the people 
in Saskatoon pay about $167 per capita. That’s the cost of their 
police force. They definitely pay for police. And for us to get 
into a discussion about people in rural Saskatchewan are paying 
something and people in big cities aren’t paying something, 
that’s a nonsense argument. And I hope we don’t hear that 
question again. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Minister, it is 
your responsibility to ask . . . to answer questions. I think you 
understand that. And I think you understand clearly that I have 
brought these questions to you from people that are citizens of 
this province and who want some answers. 
 
Now it is you who is putting words into my mouth, Mr. 
Minister, when you talk about starting an argument between 
urban and rural municipalities regarding police costs. That was 
not my intention and I think you know that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to know — and what this discussion was 
intended to be about — was how the formula was derived at. 
Because there is a large discrepancy between the communities 
where there’s a detachment, the per capita costs for those 
citizens, and the costs for citizens in the surrounding area. 
 
Now $30 per head, that’s about . . . a discrepancy of about $30 
per capita difference and that’s quite a large amount. So my 
questions to you were intended to find out just where the 
formula came from — why this is that there’s such a great 
discrepancy, especially in a community under 500 people where 
the RCMP certainly serve that community very well and serve 
the surrounding area well. But the service they provide would 
probably be just as much towards the people in the surrounding 
RMs as to the numbers of people in the community. So I would 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

like to focus, if you would, Mr. Minister, on just answering why 
the discrepancy is so large. 
 
(15:15) 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member from Cumberland on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, leave to introduce visitors? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I’m very, very pleased to 
introduce in the Speaker’s gallery the people who work very 
hard to, in this province through the friendship centre system. 
We have people from all over the province, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’d like to say as well, welcome in Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was mentioning in Cree, you know, the values 
of helping each other, you know the values of friendship are an 
important and integral part of the friendship centre movement. 
 
And with that I will introduce the members. There is Allan 
Dreaver, Gloria Belcourt, Conrad Lavalley, Gaynard Dumont, 
Rose Pfeiffer, Marjorie Hanson, Joey Thompson, Gerid Coates, 
Whitefish, from Battleford Friendship Centre; Fred McCallum, 
Rae Leibel, Ricky Campbell, Warren Isbister, Billy Kennedy, 
Jackie Kennedy, Becky Trotchie, Serge, Paul Daigneault, 
Winston McKay, Maurice Aubichon, Michael Maurice, Earl 
Monkman, Ron Woelk, Ron Gamble, Carol Friedhoff, Corina 
Poochay, Julie Pitzel, Ashley Norton, George Raymond, Janelle 
Roy. 
 
Please welcome them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well the member 
was saying it’s my responsibility to answer questions. I’m more 
than happy to answer the member’s questions, and the record 
will show in fact that I have repeatedly now answered her 
questions, and I’m happy to do so, and I’ll answer them as 
many times as she wants to ask them. 
 
But I do want to repeat to the member that there . . . she’s 
saying that, well some of the municipalities are paying too 
much and there’s a big discrepancy between what others pay, 
and she says the discrepancy is too large. And what I’ve been 
trying to say to the member is that the problem she’s going to 
have is, if she finds that she wants some communities to pay 
less, other communities are going to have to pay more. And 

she’s going to find that it’s quite a complicated system to try to 
get everybody to agree on what everybody should pay. And 
some of the communities think they should pay less and others 
should pay more. 
 
But I want to say to the member once again that the simple fact 
of the matter is that, prior to 1999, some of the communities — 
I believe the communities under 500 and the RMs — paid zero 
per capita. They paid zero per capita. Some of the communities 
paid up to $99 per capita. So the discrepancy at that time was 
zero to 99. It’s a discrepancy of $99. 
 
Now the member is saying, well some of the communities pay 
$20 per day, or per capita now, and some of them pay 57, and 
some of them pay 40-some. So there’s a discrepancy. Yes, there 
is a discrepancy. It’s smaller than it used to be so we’re making 
progress, and in fact if that’s the member’s problem, she should 
be acknowledging that, you know, we’ve made some progress 
and there’s less discrepancy than there used to be. 
 
But I also want to say to the member that we have to be very 
honest and upfront with people. And the reality is, if we say to 
the people in Vonda — who by the way, their rate if we hadn’t 
made the changes that we’ve made, might be closer to 80, 90, 
$100 per capita today instead of 40-some because we 
transferred some of the costs from the larger urbans or the 
urbans with detachments to others who didn’t pay anything 
before. But if she wants to do that, she also has to be prepared 
to go to the other communities and say, and you’re going to pay 
more. 
 
And the member will find — I’m not disagreeing necessarily 
with readjustment but we have to have consultation with the 
small communities and the big communities — and the member 
will find that when she goes to some of those small places and 
the RMs, they will say to her, we don’t agree with you. We 
don’t think we should pay more. We think we’ve taken on more 
of the burden than we used to have. 
 
So I don’t know how to make it more clear, but the discrepancy 
is smaller than it used to be. If the member feels the discrepancy 
should be eliminated and that everybody in the province should 
pay the same, the member should say so. The member should 
say so, if that’s her view. 
 
And if that is her view and the policy of the Saskatchewan 
Party, we will take that out to the communities and we’ll tell 
them that that’s her view. And I’d be interested, Mr. Chair, to 
knowing is that her view — that it should be a flat per capita 
rate across the province? Or alternatively, if she doesn’t like . . . 
the distribution is between the urbans and the rurals now, what 
is her view as to how it should be distributed? Perhaps the 
member could enlighten us. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Chair, the 
minister insists on getting into a political debate. The minister, 
the minister wants to get into a political debate. The minister 
doesn’t seem to have the decency, Mr. Chair, to answer the 
questions just as they are put to him as a question and, two, to 
come up with a clear answer about why the discrepancy is there. 
 
Now he has certainly talked about, well you can’t please 
everybody, you have to put the money . . . the money has to 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

 

come from somewhere. Before 1999, it was worse. I mean, it 
was not as . . . There wasn’t as great a level playing field. Well 
there’s no level playing field now anyway. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if I could just ask you one more 
question and hopefully get just one answer, a straight answer 
without a political debate. Did the province, Mr. Minister, did 
the province create the formula for RCMP policing or is it 
negotiable based on whenever there is a discussion that may 
come up as to what the cost will be for a community as opposed 
to RMs in a certain area? 
 
I just want to know if the province has created a formula that is 
used across board or whether it’s negotiated with communities 
as the question comes up yearly or whatever the case may be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want . . . Yes. I want to say, Mr. 
Chair, that I am trying to answer the questions of the member in 
as helpful a manner as I can. 
 
And I would just point out to the member that she has the right 
to write the questions, but she does not have the right to write 
the answers. And we’re entitled to give the member factual 
answers. If the member doesn’t like the answers, well that’s the 
member’s prerogative. I can’t make her like the answers, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
I do want to say in answer to the question — and I’m answering 
her question that she asks: is this something that is negotiated 
directly with each community or is it an across-the-board kind 
of system — it is something, as I’ve pointed out I think several 
times in my answers, that we discuss the matter with SUMA 
and SARM. We try to come up with as best a consensus as we 
can. 
 
And then, once that consensus is arrived at as to how much each 
person in each community should pay per capita, that is an 
across—the—board system that will be applied across the 
province. And the amounts per capita are, as I described in the 
answer I think to the member’s first question, it varies from $57 
per capita down to 20. And the reality is that there has been 
some readjustment so that some communities pay more, some 
pay less. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I should say I’m not sure that what I said 
about the community of Vonda is accurate in the sense that I’ve 
been advised that Vonda is fewer than 500 people and they have 
a detachment. I think there may have been a time when Vonda 
actually paid zero for policing — zero per capita. And they 
were caught by the readjustment that occurred several years ago 
where they have to pay something because they have a 
detachment and formerly they might have paid nothing. And so 
I want to put that on the record and if I was in error about 
Vonda, then correct that. 
 
But what I said generally is true, that communities over 500 
would have been paying much, much more today than they 
would have if we had not made the change a number of years 
ago. 
 
And I just say to the member, it is not a matter of trying to 
politicize anything. The fact of the matter is that this is like 
taxation or anything else. There will be people in Saskatoon that 

say, well we’re paying too much. There will be people in Vonda 
that will say, we’re paying too much and somebody else should 
pay more. And no matter what system you have, that’s going to 
be the case. 
 
I also repeat to the member, that if there are people that are 
interested in changing to a more fair system, I repeat again that 
we will continue to discuss the matter with SUMA and SARM 
and we are totally open to ideas as to how you shift these costs 
around. But there has to be some respectful consultation with 
the rural municipalities, with the very small communities, and 
with the larger ones too, and to try to come up with a consensus. 
 
And I certainly agree with the member that it is not a political 
football. It is not something to be kicked around like a political 
football. It is a very serious matter of how we should pay for 
policing. And I just say to the member that it’s very, very 
difficult to get everybody to agree that I should pay this much 
because in reality, everybody wants to minimize their own 
costs. 
 
But having said that, we’re fully engaged all the time in trying 
to talk to SUMA and SARM about improving this system, as 
we’ve been doing. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just a 
few moments to ask the Assembly to welcome my young 
cousin from Buffalo Narrows, Ricky Campbell. Ricky’s here as 
a youth representative with the friendship centres and it’s a long 
travel from Buffalo Narrows. 
 
I’d like to ask the Assembly members to join me . . . And Ricky 
fancies himself as a hockey player because he’s kind of related 
to me. And his father was a better hockey player than both of us 
combined and also works for SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) so I hope Ricky 
follows in his father’s footsteps. 
 
And ask the Assembly to join me in welcoming Ricky to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d just like to 
comment on the minister’s remarks. 
 
Mr. Chair, there is no doubt, absolutely no doubt that every 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

segment, every sector of this population in Saskatchewan are 
paying taxes that are much too high. They have been paying 
dearly for the last 10 years. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, we know very well that the education portion 
of property tax that the farmers throughout this province are 
paying is really doing them in. It’s a burden that’s very heavy to 
carry. And we recognize too that towns and both urban 
municipalities as well as rural municipalities have been 
subjected to having much fewer transfers from provincial 
coffers to those municipalities to use for the services they need. 
There’s no doubt about that. 
 
This is not intended, as I mentioned before, to be a dispute 
about who maybe should pay a little more and less because of 
course when people are all suffering under the burden of heavy 
taxation, they’re going to be ending up of course, you know, 
fighting for their life. 
 
What we need to do, what these people want an answer to, Mr. 
Minister, is simply they want the answer to who created the 
formula, how the formula was derived at, and . . . so they can 
make sure there is a fairness across the board, I guess. Now 
many of these people don’t necessarily have the kind of 
information that you as a minister would have and so they ask 
the question through me. And I thank you for your answers, Mr. 
Minister. They are recorded and I will certainly take them to the 
affected parties. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I thank the member for her questions, 
Mr. Chair. And I just do want to take the opportunity to point 
out for the member’s information that in fact the member refers 
to the high burden of taxation in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want the member to know that in the last four years 
income taxes in Saskatchewan have come down for most people 
by about 35 per cent. I want the member to know that we have 
the lowest sales tax of the nine provinces in Canada that have a 
sales tax and it’s on a fewer . . . smaller range of goods. I want 
the member also to know, because she and her party do not tell 
the people this, that the small-business income tax rate, which 
was 10 per cent when our government assumed office in 1991, 
is now 6 per cent — which as the member can calculate is 40 
per cent lower. 
 
(15:30) 
 
I want the member to know also that people in Saskatchewan 
pay the fourth lowest bundle of personal taxes in the country, 
Mr. Chair — the fourth lowest. And I want the member to know 
that at one time they paid the second highest because we’ve 
been doing a lot of work to come up with a more competitive 
tax system. 
 
And it’s fine for the member to get up and continually say, as 
she and her party will say, that somehow people do not have to 
pay taxes for health and education and roads and that we can 
have all of these things without taxation. But I want the member 
to know, that taxes are necessary in a civilized society so that 
we can have a health care system and education system and a 
road system. 
 
And she and her party will go around trying to pretend, in their 

effort to gain power, that somehow you can have a situation 
where nobody is going to pay any taxes. And you know, Mr. 
Chair, most people in Saskatchewan are a little bit smarter than 
that. 
 
But my purpose, my purpose, is simply to say when that 
member gets up and talks about the high burden of taxation, I 
agree with her that we will all think that the taxes that we pay 
are too high. But I’m not going to let the public record and the 
people watching this on television not be informed about what 
this government has done to improve the taxation situation in 
Saskatchewan, which we largely inherited from the previous 
Devine administration which was supported by the members 
over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, while 
we’re discussing Justice, I think I just have to make a few 
comments before I get into a few questions regarding Justice, 
and talking about taxes in this province. 
 
It’s interesting to hear the minister, former minister of Finance, 
now the Minister of Justice give us a little lesson on taxes in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The Minister of Justice is telling us 
the fact that we now have one of the lowest sales taxes in this 
province but he fails to tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
when he was elected the tax was at seven, he increased it to 
nine, now he’s lowered it to six, and he’s taking a lot of credit. 
 
Well it’s always easy to take credit for something after you’ve 
increased the taxes and taken more out of people’s pockets, and 
you can brag about the fact of the dollars that you have 
available, and be very selective in what you want to share with 
the people of Saskatchewan regarding the taxes in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, what have we really seen as a result of 
these decreased taxes? This minister talks about personal 
income tax and, Mr. Chairman, I think you will find that even 
on this side of the House we have given the minister, the former 
minister of Finance, some bouquets for the reduction in the 
provincial sales tax. 
 
However, Mr. Chairman, if I recall, in the 1999 election 
campaign the Saskatchewan Party, when . . . and the election 
campaign was calling for a reduction of 20 per cent of personal 
income tax. And at that time, the then minister of Finance said 
it couldn’t be done, that there was no way we could achieve that 
type of a reduction. 
 
And very interestingly enough, lo and behold, the results of the 
1999 election when the NDP government was elected with a 
reduced plurality — in fact they had fewer votes than the 
opposition of the day — and well, they said at one moment that 
it . . . well they said at one moment that you couldn’t reduce 
personal income tax; now they’re taking all the credit for 
reducing the personal income tax. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Chairman, that we have . . . we 
certainly went to the people. We went to the people in 1999 
with the idea of reducing the personal income tax. 
 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

 

The minister said it couldn’t be done and he gave us all the 
reasons why he couldn’t. And then when the people said, well 
we believe it can be done, then the minister was re-elected, and 
with a slim . . . in fact they didn’t have a majority. They had to 
talk to the Liberal members and they had to coerce them into 
joining with them in order to guarantee that they’d be able to 
form a government of the province of Saskatchewan. And then 
all of a sudden they said, well the personal income taxes — yes, 
I think we can reduce those taxes. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, for the people of Saskatchewan it was the 
right thing to do, even though the government didn’t believe it 
was the right thing to do in 1999. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, when we’re talking of politics, well this 
place is politics. We look at an election coming up, and there’s 
a number of members sitting . . . a number of members sitting 
on that side of the House who weren’t privy to be here in 1986 
and 1991. 
 
And I saw what their members — some of the members that sit 
on that side of the House today — I saw how they performed in 
this Assembly, and the way they would . . . could discredit a 
government of the day as they were looking forward to an 
election in the year of 1991. 
 
Now it’s easy to say, oh, you can’t be political. Well this is . . . 
and the member from Saskatoon knows that this is a political 
arena. And, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, this is a political 
arena. 
 
And while the government is . . . while the opposition is asked 
to hold the government accountable on a number of issues, we 
can’t help it if there are so many people these days, as they were 
in the late ’80s, who are more than willing to hand over brown 
envelopes. We can’t help it if there are people coming forward 
everyday with brown envelopes and just letting us know where 
the government is slipping up and failing the people and the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, we’re getting back to the debate on Justice. 
Well we’ll get there but I think it was important that we at least 
brought a few facts forward as well in regards to some of the 
comments the minister has. And I would almost be surprised 
that the minister doesn’t give me a little more food for fodder 
when we . . . after we give the minister a chance to respond. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important that people get the 
facts on both sides. And the minister can take credit for his 
reduction of the personal tax. That was something that was 
important, that was needed to be done, but there’s certainly a 
ways to go as yet. And yet at the same time when we talk about 
reducing personal income tax, the government and this minister, 
currently Justice minister, formerly the Finance minister, 
continues to brag about how he’s brought down the debt. 
 
And yet what have we seen over the last year or last year and a 
half? We’ve seen actually an overall increase in the debt in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and yet on one hand we’re told that 
we’ve got a balanced budget. Well I have, for one, Mr. 
Chairman, wonder how in the world we can have a balanced 
budget when the debt continues to increase in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 

In fact, Mr. Chairman, the debt today is higher, the net debt is 
higher today than it was in 1991 when this government came to 
office. And the member from Saskatoon knows that. 
 
We can go through to the, just to the records that were just laid 
on the table about a month, month and a half ago. But, Mr. 
Chairman, for the minister to stand up and tell us, well we’ve 
got a balanced budget because we can take from the rainy day 
fund, well he admitted about a year and a half ago that the rainy 
day fund actually didn’t have any actual resources in it to draw 
from anyway. 
 
So let’s . . . we can allow . . . we can continue on with this 
debate and I think we’re more than willing to pursue to this 
debate if the minister is willing to get into the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . or Chairman, however, coming back to the area 
of Justice, I would like to ask of the minister, how many people 
are currently incarcerated in provincial correctional facilities in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the member’s question, I 
believe that approximately 800 people are probably sentenced 
to correctional centres as adults, probably about 300 people on 
remand — those are people who are incarcerated but they’re not 
yet through the trial process — and approximately 300 youth. 
So in terms of how many people might be incarcerated today: 
approximately 1,400 people. So that’s the answer to the 
question. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I share with the member his interest 
in all of the facts being presented to the Saskatchewan people 
and not just selected information. And so I must as a former 
Finance minister respond to some of the assertions that have 
been made by the member about taxation and otherwise. 
 
The member says somehow that we came up with these tax cuts 
but in the 1999 election said we couldn’t afford tax cuts. Well if 
the member would read, if the member would read the platform 
of the New Democratic Party in 1999, Mr. Chair, it says that we 
will decrease taxes for the average family in Saskatchewan by 
about $1,000 per year, reduce the income taxes. And as 
everyone knows, Mr. Speaker . . . or, Mr. Chair, we did that. 
 
The member says — this is how unreliable sometimes 
information from over there is — the member says we said 
there shouldn’t be tax cuts in the election. One of our prime 
policies was to cut income taxes and we did that, Mr. Chair. So 
obviously he’s wrong about that. 
 
I also want to say that we did — we did — reject the tax plan 
offered by the Saskatchewan Party in the last election. Why, 
Mr. Chair? Because it was a tax plan for the rich. That’s what it 
was. And we said, we’re going to have a tax plan that will assist 
low-income people, middle-income people, as well as the rich. 
Everybody got a tax break, but not just the rich as the 
Saskatchewan Party always wants to do. 
 
Every time they talk about tax cuts they don’t talk about 
ordinary people; it’s always big business and people who are 
very wealthy. They always want to cut their taxes, Mr. Chair, 
but not the ordinary people. And that’s a point of difference 
between that party and the New Democratic Party and our 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

Liberal colleagues in our coalition government. 
 
I also want to point out that . . . This is very interesting. First of 
all the members opposite, the member said that they have 
acknowledged many times the fact that we have cut the income 
taxes. 
 
And you know I’ve sat in this legislature so many times, Mr. 
Chair, after the budget in 2000 and said . . . and listened to the 
opposition say that the tax cuts were not meaningful. They said 
that many times. They said, oh it’s . . . the first year they said 
it’s just a cup of coffee a day. They said it was a tax grab; that 
we were really increasing taxes. They said all kinds of things 
that weren’t quite right. 
 
And you know, Mr. Chair, it is good, it is gratifying to sit in the 
legislature today and hear even that Saskatchewan Party say 
that we have cut the income taxes. It is gratifying to see that 
they have finally acknowledged that, Mr. Chair, because they 
have not been acknowledging that before. 
 
I also want to point out while I’m on my feet, the member from 
Moosomin talked about . . . and the member from Moosomin is 
really on shaky ground here. He’s in a dangerous area. He’s on 
thin ice and I’ll tell you why, Mr. Chair. 
 
He says that when we came to office the PST (provincial sales 
tax) was 7 per cent and now it’s, you know, it’s 6 per cent. At 
one time it went up to 9 per cent. But what he didn’t say is the 
government of Grant Devine, which that member was a part of, 
did this — it harmonized the PST with the GST (goods and 
services tax). And the PST and GST were harmonized by Grant 
Devine and that was supposed to come into effect on January 1, 
1992 — January 1, 1992. That was Devine’s plan. 
 
He had put the sales tax on restaurant meals, which we repealed 
as one of the first steps of our government; he had put it on 
children’s clothing; he had put it on a variety of other items. But 
more significantly than that, he . . . the government that he was 
a part of harmonized the PST with the GST, and that’s the 
important point because you had a 7 per cent tax, PST, but it 
was on everything. It was on everything that the GST is also on. 
 
And I’ll tell the member, if he doesn’t know, what the effect of 
that is. And all he has to do is look at the public accounts of the 
three provinces in Atlantic Canada that harmonized their 
provincial and federal sales tax. The tax bill of somebody, the 
average family living in New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and the 
other province that harmonized — I think there’s three of them 
— the average tax bill is $1,700 a year in sales tax. The average 
tax bill for a Saskatchewan family of four — 50,000 family 
income, two incomes, two children — is $850. That’s the 
average tax bill. 
 
If you do what he did, Mr. Chair, when he was in office with 
Grant Devine — and he can’t deny it because he was there with 
Grant Devine and voted for it — if you do what the member 
from Weyburn advocated in the Weyburn Review last spring, 
you will increase the sales tax on the average Saskatchewan 
family by $850 a year just like that. That’s what they want to 
do. 
 
And what did we do, Mr. Chair? We got in, we said we’re 

cancelling that harmonization, we’re cancelling that tax grab. 
That’s the record. The member says he wants the record set 
straight. We’ll set the record straight, Mr. Chair. 
 
And it’s been a long time but we should never let people forget 
that Brian Mulroney and Grant Devine passed legislation 
federally and provincially for the GST and, in this House, for 
the PST to be harmonized with the GST. That’s what they did. 
That’s the public record. And we’re not going to have the 
member forgetting, when he says he wants all the facts to come 
out, what they did to the people of Saskatchewan when they 
were in office, Mr. Chair. 
 
I want to now just say a word before I sit down. Then the 
member gets up and he says he wants to set the record straight 
about debt. Well I wish he would. I wish he would. Because I’ll 
tell the member something. The province of Saskatchewan, 
since 1995, has received 10 consecutive credit rating upgrades 
— 10 consecutive credit rating upgrades. When we came to 
office we had a very low credit rating, one of the lowest in 
Canada. Now we have straight A credit ratings, Mr. Chair. 
 
And I want the member to know if he doesn’t know — and I 
think he does know — that what do credit rating reporting 
agencies look at? These are Moody’s of New York, Standard 
and Poor’s, Dominion Bond Rating Service. What do they look 
at? They look at the level of debt that a company or a 
government has. That’s how they determine credit rating 
upgrades. 
 
Now if what the member said was true, if it was true that our 
debt was out of control, why would it be that Moody’s of New 
York and Standard and Poor’s and Dominion Bond Rating 
Service would give the province of Saskatchewan a credit rating 
upgrade? Why would that be? 
 
And the reality is, Mr. Chair, that the reason that we have 
straight A credit ratings is that our debt, our debt as a 
percentage of our economy, is half as big as what it used to be. 
Our debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio used to be 
about 70 per cent in the government and Crowns together. 
Today it’s about 35 per cent. In other words, as compared to the 
size of our economy, we have half as much debt as we used to 
have and as that member and the former government left when 
they left office. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Chair, that, you know, you can do a lot, 
you can do a lot with figures. The member can manipulate 
figures and say this and that. And the member says I can too. 
And I can too. There’s no question about it. Anyone in this 
House can. 
 
But what you cannot do, and what the member cannot do, he 
cannot explain why it is — and they like to go out and say the 
debt’s out of control — he cannot explain why it is that 
Moody’s of New York does not think the debt’s out of control, 
Standard and Poor’s don’t and the Dominion Bond Rating 
Service doesn’t. He can’t explain why this government and this 
province is back to straight A credit ratings. 
 
That he can’t explain because he can talk all he wants about me 
manipulating numbers. He can manipulate numbers. I hope he’s 
not saying that the credit rating agencies manipulate numbers 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

 

because they don’t, Mr. Chair. And the record speaks for itself. 
 
And on that point also I want to say, as I’ve said in this House 
before, the member says the debt went up this year. Yes, the 
debt did go up this year. We didn’t need the member to tell 
anybody. We had reported it ourselves because our public 
reports every three months — unlike a government he was part 
of that never even produced a budget in some years — itself, 
Mr. Chair, reveals to the people that the debt is going up. 
 
And I have said many times, publicly and in this House and I’ll 
say it again today, that the debt of Saskatchewan is going up 
this year because crop insurance claims are going to be about a 
billion dollars but the premiums are going to be about 500 
million. Crop insurance claims have to be paid. Forest fires 
occurred. Those forest fires had to be put out. And livestock 
producers were given support. 
 
And what you’ll never hear that member say is that . . . You 
know, when he says he doesn’t want any debt, is he going to get 
up and say that the crop insurance claims of the farmers should 
not have been paid? He’s not going to say that. No. Is he going 
to say that the livestock producers, when they had no water and 
no feed, should not have been given assistance? No. He’s not 
going to say that. Is he going to say that the forest fires 
shouldn’t have been put out? No, he’s not going to say that. 
 
He’s going to somehow pretend that we can live in a world with 
no taxes and no debt, and somehow you’re going to pay the 
crop insurance claims and provide health care and education. 
And it’s that kind of unrealistic thinking, Mr. Chair, that got us 
into a situation in the 1980s that we’ve taken about 10 years to 
fix, no thanks to anybody sitting over there because all they’ve 
been doing for the last 10 years is complaining. They’ve never 
done anything positive to contribute to an actual solution. 
 
And the member will complain about taxes and the member 
will complain about debt, but on this side of the House, Mr. 
Chair, we’ll stand on the public record of this government. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee report 
progress — in fact, extremely significant progress — in Justice 
and move to estimates for the Department of Government 
Relations. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Chair: — And I would recognize the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And 
thank you for the opportunity to introduce officials that are here 
with Municipal Government . . . Government Relations. 
 
First of all on my immediate left is Mr. Brent Cotter, the deputy 
minister. Wanda Lamberti, who is seated behind the deputy, 

executive director of finance and management services. Larry 
Steeves, on my right, is the associate deputy minister of 
municipal relations. John Edwards, who is seated in the back, 
and John is our executive director, policy development. 
 
Russ Krywulak, who is immediately behind myself, he’s the 
executive director of grants administration and 
provincial-municipal relations. And Trent Good is a manager of 
community planning from Saskatoon. And Doug Morcom, 
who’s the director of grants administration, seated here as well. 
 
And I’m very happy to have the opportunity to introduce these 
hard-working folks who work on behalf of Government 
Relations and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I just wondered if I might, Mr. Chairman, having done 
that, just outline perhaps some of the responsibilities within the 
department that directly relate to the responsibilities of this 
segment of our municipal relations, Government Relations 
department. 
 
And what we do here is develop . . . municipal relations 
develops the legislative and policy framework for the operation 
of the provincial system of municipal government. It provides 
advisory and other services to municipal organizations and 
administers financial assistance programs in support of 
municipalities. 
 
As an example, the urban revenue sharing which provides 
unconditional operating assistance to each urban municipality. 
 
We have the rural revenue sharing — and I’m sure that the 
member opposite, the member from Saltcoats, will be aware of 
this but I just want to make sure that those departments are 
identified — rural revenue sharing, which provides 
unconditional operating assistance to each rural municipality. 
As well, it also provides conditional assistance for heavy haul, 
high volume, and road construction, bridges, and traffic 
counting. 
 
Northern Revenue Sharing, which provides unconditional 
operating assistance to each northern municipality. 
 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, which I believe 
may be of interest during the course of this afternoon and which 
provides assistance to urban, rural, and northern municipalities 
for construction of high-priority — high-priority — 
infrastructure projects such as water and sewer systems, 
transportation projects, and energy efficiency of municipal 
facilities. As well, transit assistance for the disabled where it 
provides operating and capital assistance to cities and towns 
that provide special needs transportation services. 
 
Grants in lieu of property taxes provides grants in lieu of taxes 
on eligible properties owned and managed by the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. 
 
And finally under the heading of Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency, which is a statutory agency — provides 
funding. So our department provides funding for the province’s 
statutory responsibility for the Saskatchewan property 
assessment system including core services, assessment research 
and policy development, a central database, provision of 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

assessment information to the province, and quality control. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I want to say that I’m looking forward to 
the questions from the members opposite and hopefully we’ll 
have a meaningful dialogue to ensure that people of the 
province are aware of the services that we provide and the 
efforts on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for that update, and welcome to your officials here 
today. To start with, Mr. Minister, I thought maybe we’d go 
into some of the budget numbers and just get you to give an 
explanation of why the changes from last year. 
 
The first one being, I believe, is administration is up $375,000 
if my numbers are right here. Could you maybe give us an 
explanation of what that additional money is being used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, there’s 
$375,000, I believe the increase that the member is referring to, 
Mr. Chairman. Just as an explanation, now there are some 
salary increases involved here: salaries for the additional 
minister’s office; a First Nations gaming agreement position to 
improve accountability is included in that increase; impact of 
the government’s new financial reporting system, the acronym 
for that being MIDAS (Multi-Informational Database 
Application System); the mandated salary increases which were 
$20,000. 
 
The others, starting at the top for the minister’s office, 150,000; 
First Nations gaming, 50,000; impact of the government’s new 
financial reporting system is 25,000; and mandated salary 
increases, 20,000. So that comes to 245. The operational 
increase includes increase in operating for the additional 
minister’s office, which is $50,000 and then the miscellaneous 
operating expenses, including $15,000 for department training 
and development initiative. 
 
And once again I expect that we have . . . With combining some 
of the responsibilities between offices as the departments were 
downsized, there now are three different departments that 
include three ministers that are responsible for a myriad of 
responsibilities that previously were under one global, or most 
of them were under one minister’s responsibility. This is all 
split out now. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And we well 
know that there’s three ministers responsible and a myriad of 
ways on that side of the House, because quite often we’ll ask a 
question and, come back later because I’m not the right 
minister. Not pointing the fingers, of course, at the present 
minister of Municipal Government because he never does that 
of course. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if you answered this maybe — and I 
maybe missed it — but is there additional staff hired this year 
over and above what the Municipal Government had last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. There’s for 
municipal, zero increases, but for the department as a whole — 
and maybe I can just point out that again going back to the 

increases we talked about to the member — the department that 
. . . Municipal Government has a greater, the larger share of the 
three departments that were combined. So that’s the reason for 
the increases in operating expenses and the 4.5, four-and-a-half 
FTEs (full-time equivalents) increase in staffing. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
next line on the estimates is $681,000 less for accommodation 
and central services. Can you tell . . . explain why that is such a 
large drop from last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, bear 
with me and I’ll go through the explanation for that $806,000 
increase. In 2002-2003, the department was amalgamated and 
reorganized. And perhaps I shouldn’t use that word 
amalgamated in our discussion here. 
 
Okay, as part of this initiative a series of efficiencies were 
pursued, and that was the intent of reorganization. These 
efficiencies were in fact achieved during 2002-2003 and it was 
partly through self . . . staff reductions, pardon me, as well as 
through savings realized in our accommodation budget. 
 
The majority of this adjustment thus reflects the actual 
distribution of expenditures and actual expenditure reductions 
that were achieved in 2002-2003. I’m sorry, this may sound a 
little complicated but it’s . . . The 2003-2004 budget, which 
we’re dealing with, has been realigned to reflect what was 
actually achieved during 2002-2003. So in effect a large 
majority of the increase is actually a reallocation from our 
accommodation budget to municipal relations, so that’s where 
the shift took place as well. 
 
And they were rather modest increases which included $85,000 
for mandated salary increases, $65,000 for enhanced planning 
services — and that particularly to respond to needs expressed 
by local communities, particularly in northern Saskatchewan 
administration district to build a leadership among northern 
municipal officials. And the other $40,000 was to enhance the 
municipal capacity in the North by funding developments and 
implementation of these learning modules. So it was to benefit 
people to better carry out their responsibilities in those 
particular areas. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So if I’m 
understanding you right, Mr. Minister, under the line of 
accommodation and central services, some of the dollars that 
we’re spending less under that heading this year are actually 
moving over to municipal relations, under that heading. One has 
gone down — if my numbers are right — 681,000 but the other 
one has gone up 806,000. Was that part of your explanation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is 
absolutely correct in that respect. But I just point out that what 
was required to meet the budget was by holding together the 
municipal services and moving to cheaper accommodation. So 
it was an offset in that respect. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just 
a little bit different subject here. And you touched on 
amalgamation here and I want to go there for a minute.  
 
I had — I knew you wanted to do that, Mr. Minister; actually 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

 

this is friendly territory right now but I have some questions on 
this — had the good fortune of being at a ratepayers’ function 
out in the RM of Benson the other night. And you may know 
about this and you may not. It’s just in the works right now. 
 
But the town of Benson or village of Benson, I guess it is, is in 
the process of trying to amalgamate with the RM of Benson and 
it’s just in the preliminary stages right now. In fact the night we 
were there that the mayor of Benson, who by the way happens 
to be the administrator for the RM of Estevan — so he knows 
full well how RMs work — but as mayor of the village of 
Benson did a presentation that night. And I thought he did a 
fantastic job. He wasn’t pushing the village of Benson onto the 
RM but was trying to open doors to have it happen down the 
road. 
 
And the RM of Benson sat and I thought listened very carefully 
but, as we all know when a number of these amalgamations 
take place or are going to take place — and I think it’s 
inevitable, many of them are going to happen in the future 
because of our population drop — there are some problems that 
rise that seem to stop these amalgamations. I don’t know in this 
situation if it’s going to be a go or not. I would probably hope it 
would be because I think it would in this situation, and in many 
others, Mr. Minister, would be very beneficial to both. 
 
I guess the question I’m asking, Mr. Minister, has any work 
been done . . . In this situation I think there was examples of 
where possibly, and I can’t remember for sure if it was water or 
sewer or what the problems were that were going to be 
somewhat of an added cost to the RM of Benson if they 
amalgamated. And they were trying to come up with scenarios 
of how they could get away from that so that the ratepayers in 
the RM would be more receptive. 
 
And naturally as a rural ratepayer myself, I would be very 
hesitant to jump into something if I thought as a taxpayer in the 
rural municipality, I was going to have to pick up a share of 
what it would cost for . . . such as the RM — or the village of 
Benson — and we have many instances all over the province, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
I guess my question, Mr. Minister, has anything . . . any work 
been done on how as a government we could assist this? And I 
know we’ve had our differences over amalgamation. I think at 
one point we agreed on some of the things that forcing 
amalgamation wasn’t going to work. I think we set the cause 
back probably 10 years by what happened. 
 
But has any preliminary work been done to how we can assist 
villages, even may end up being towns and RMs at some point, 
if it was a dollar figure that was the stumbling block to this 
happening? Are we looking down the road at maybe how we 
can assist these amalgamations and make them happen, maybe 
possibly for the convenience of both, a little bit faster? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I want to very much thank 
the member from Saltcoats for that question and it is important 
to — I know it is — to a lot of people. And on that issue, there 
are occasions where communities such as we’re discussing here 
can be used as models for others. 
 
And in effect I understand what some of the difficulties may be 

with liabilities and costs. And so we would be prepared through 
the RMs to supply, you know, some modest, some modest seed 
money — and seed money is a good term to use in a variety of 
areas — which would assist, by all means. 
 
And in the case that the member’s referring to, Assistant 
Deputy Minister Larry Steeves would be more than happy to 
visit with both the village and the RM to talk about how that 
transition might go smoothly. Absolutely we would try 
whatever possible. 
 
I’m glad to hear you raise that because more and more there’s 
more and more discussion about the . . . that kind of a voluntary 
exercise which I think would be beneficial in the long term. The 
financial benefits would accrue. It takes a little bit of time so 
you have to get over the transition period. So I very much 
appreciate that. We would do whatever we can to assist. 
 
There may not be a lot of money available but I’d certainly be 
encouraged by folks that want to talk about moving into a 
situation where they would benefit financially and we would be 
happy to assist as I mentioned. Larry Steeves would be pleased 
to go out and meet with anybody who’s considering moving in 
that direction. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
this situation the RM of Benson and the village of Benson 
weren’t asking for help, so don’t get me wrong on this. They 
were doing the preliminary work. 
 
But it just seemed to me that night that the presentation that was 
made by the mayor of Benson did a tremendous job that night. I 
think we could all learn from what he’d spoke about that night. 
And how he spoke I think was the . . . was probably the most 
impressive part of it. He wasn’t pushing the village of Benson 
onto the RM. In fact he was very honest about it. He told them 
that it was not going to be all rosy. There was situations where 
it was definitely to the advantage of the village and not to the 
RM. 
 
And I think by doing it the way he did it, you could almost see 
it was far more receptive or accepted by the ratepayers of the 
. . . or the RM. They were listening, where I think if he’d have 
come in and was a little rammy and said, well, you know, this 
should be done, maybe somewhat similar to what was tried to 
do here with the service district Act and things like that years 
ago, Mr. Minister. So I think we can all learn from Greg Hoffort 
and what he had done that night out there. 
 
I’m wondering though, Mr. Minister, you’ve said that your 
department and your, like, your officials would certainly meet 
with people and try and help them. But there’s nothing ironclad 
there right now. If they come it’s on a case-by-case basis if I 
understand right. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if it’s something we 
shouldn’t be looking at in the future, that if municipalities of all 
kinds are starting to look at amalgamation — and I think we’re 
going to see much, much more of this — if maybe it’s time we 
had something ironclad, whether it was a per capita dollar value 
that could be assistance to them or . . . I think we both know 
that in many situations villages don’t get serious about having 
to amalgamate until they get to the point where they cannot 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

afford to go on, on their own. And that may be a sewer system 
that’s been 40 years in existence and is going to cost a lot of 
money to upgrade. 
 
And I guess where I’m coming from is, possibly if we had 
something ironclad that when municipalities of all sizes that 
were thinking or talking about doing this, could say well this is 
available, we know that. We don’t have to wait on a 
case-by-case basis. Maybe the amalgamation would happen 
before we let ourselves get into a situation where we’ve got a 
$200,000 sewer upgrade. Water as we all know is becoming a 
big problem, and I know in some cases right now the RM 
themselves have wells out there where the ratepayers can use 
them. 
 
Maybe things like this could be sped up where there could be 
the advantage of the villages or hamlets, whatever it is at that 
stage. But I just wonder what your response would be to that, 
Mr. Minister. Could we look at something like that where it was 
ironclad? There’s a program sitting there should you want to 
look at it. I’m not saying the rules can’t be, you know, changed 
at that point to assist because every situation’s probably going 
to be somewhat different. 
 
Right now I think they think out there they’re on their own — 
there is no assistance — and for them to have to come and ask 
in some situations, I’m sure they will. But I think, Mr. Minister, 
if there was something there, I think we might assist these 
people before they get into the situation where they have to do 
something and we’re at that point where it’s a lot harder to help 
them. 
 
Is anything like that being looked at, or would you look at that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I can’t say enough, Mr. Chairman, how 
much I appreciate this opportunity to discuss this very future 
and forward looking idea that we’re talking about. 
 
There is a Web site, as a matter of fact, that can be accessed and 
I’m pretty certain that all the municipal offices, villages, and 
towns would have access. I know they would. And the purpose 
of that Web site is for sharing good ideas with others. And in 
the case that you’re talking about perhaps and as I mentioned 
earlier, people that move in that direction in joint efforts can be 
used as a model for others. 
 
And going back to our discussion about offering whatever 
assistance or guidance would certainly be available so then we 
could show people, hey look what’s happened in this particular 
area . . . the sharing of equipment, the sharing of facilities. It’s a 
marvellous idea and I think in the long term saves, will save 
people a lot of money. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And it’s somewhat not unlike the direction that our view of 
perhaps supplying good water throughout the province and it’s 
on a regional system where communities, rather than individual 
communities becoming involved and needing to upgrade the 
kind of infrastructure that the member has mentioned after a 
long period of time of deterioration, that communities in a 
regional area could get together and pool their resources and 
perhaps, by doing that as well, access some funding that may be 

available and would benefit more than just one community 
that’s in need of whatever infrastructure upgrading throughout 
the province. 
 
So I feel good about what we’re discussing because I can . . . 
And I’ve heard from people as well in the rural areas, that this 
is coming eventually. And what I’ve suggested is that we would 
do whatever we can to try and help in whatever way we can and 
we will all reap the benefits of that in the long term. So 
hopefully that’s future thinking. I say that with all due respect. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we’re 
coming from the same end on this and I think we hope for the 
same resolve. 
 
I know some of the comments I’ve had, some of the small 
villages are having a hard time being able to afford qualified 
administration, as an example. And I think we all know if we 
end up with unqualified people handling the finances, it only 
leads to a bigger problem down the road. 
 
I have the example, and I think we’ve talked about it before, of 
Wroxton, the village of Wroxton in the RM of Calder. And the 
people out there right now I think are finding that, much to their 
surprise in some cases, that it’s working exceptionally well. 
And I think the real plus to this is out in rural Saskatchewan, as 
you know, it’s many of the same people. Farmers living in town 
but are ratepayers at both ends. So I think they’re even 
surprised at how well it worked but I think, because they did it 
on their own, it’s gone over much better. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ll have more questions later. But at this 
point, Mr. Chair, I would like to move to the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I just have a 
couple of questions on two different topics, I guess. 
 
I want to discuss a little bit of the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program. I’ve got one town that was denied 
access for funding. For two years now they’ve applied. Their 
question they’d sent me today, I guess, is that they are asking 
why they were turned down twice. 
 
But also in that letter that said they were turned down, it states 
that: 
 

Less than 20% of the CSIP applications . . . (will) be 
approved this year. 
 

The minister also states and I quote: 
 

Safe drinking water for all residents of the province is, and 
will continue to be the highest priority. 

 
Their question to me is — and they wanted me to pass it on to 
you — is how does the minister expect our drinking water 
safety to be insured with less than 20 per cent of the CSIP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) funding 
applications being approved this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, again I want to thank the 
member from Arm River for a question on a very important 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

 

issue and topic. I know that there is interest and concern both in 
how this program works and what criteria are used to determine 
the application, the approval of applications. 
 
So if I may, in the 2003-2004 budget, 323 applications were 
received, 52 communities were approved for funding, 39 
communities will receive a total of $6.2 million in federal and 
provincial funding for water supply and waste water projects 
including three northern communities. 
 
Now the total cost for these three projects is $12.6 million. 
There are three solid waste projects. And I’m just explaining 
this for the member just to let you know what some of the high 
. . . what the management committee considered high-priority 
projects for this coming year, and remembering that there are 
two more years left in this particular program. 
 
But there are three solid waste projects which would receive 
$503,400 of federal and provincial funding including one 
northern project. Seven communities will receive 1.4 million 
federal and provincial funding to upgrade and repair streets and 
roads. Energy efficiency will receive $43,330 of federal and 
provincial money. And one heritage project will receive 
$100,000 federal-provincial. 
 
So in addition to the above, there are projects pending approval 
that will be announced later on this spring. However, let me just 
point out that 75 per cent of federal and provincial funding in 
2003-2004 is allocated to water supply and waste water 
projects. The unfortunate thing is that there just is not enough 
money in that program to respond to all the 323 applications 
positively — unfortunately. I say that sincerely because I know 
that people are wanting to do, to upgrade their water systems 
and so on. 
 
But I do want to underline, there are still two years left, and I 
hope people will not get discouraged by being denied in the first 
year they applied, in the second year they applied. Apply, I 
would encourage them to apply again. That’s the only response 
I can give you at this point in time. 
 
And I have to say that, and perhaps the member’s aware, that 
the people that review the applications involve SARM and 
SUMA and representatives from the federal and provincial 
governments because it is a unique partnership, really, for a 
funding project. 
 
And they look very closely to determine which projects will go 
to the management review committee, okay — either 
recommended or denied. And the management review 
committee can overrule. They can overrule an approval or they 
can overrule a denial. But they work very hard to ensure that 
those that have the highest priorities, in their determination — 
and please understand that these folks have been looking at 
these applications, have been working with them since the 
program began — so they do their very best to identify those 
areas that are of an urgent, of an urgent need. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’ll 
pass this on to the village of Kenaston. And I know, I think 
they’re going to reapply but they are getting a little 
disappointed. I think they were hoping that the funding will be 
increased in the following years and the next two years in the 

program because there is a lot of infrastructure of different 
towns throughout my constituency I know of, made different 
applications. 
 
Just wanted to ask one other question and this also came from 
the village of Kenaston but applies to my whole constituency. 
The funding for the control of West Nile Virus, I believe that 
falls under . . . will that be under municipal? Because if it will, 
I’ll carry on with the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Actually, Mr. Chairman, to the member, 
the funding would be determined by the Department of Health. 
And that’s . . . so it would not be handled by ourselves. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — But the control, the application where it set out 
. . . What I’ll say is I think there was communities with 
population of less than 2,000 will be getting no funding at all 
for control of mosquitoes with the West Nile disease. Basically 
that takes my whole constituency. I don’t have a town over 
2,000 population and I . . . 
 
My constituency’s a fair chunk of real estate. It stretches from 
the edge of Regina up to the edge of Saskatoon, to the edge of 
Moose Jaw, between Lake Diefenbaker to Long Lake. That’s a 
huge, huge area that there will be no control. So I have quite a 
few towns who are quite concerned that they would fall . . . that 
they would be getting no funding or no money at all under the 
mosquito control, under the West Nile virus. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, here’s a situation where in 
your case . . . And I appreciate what you’re saying. Although 
I’ll answer the question, but again it’s administered by Health. 
But, and I know that the criteria says that communities of less 
than 2,000. 
 
Here’s a good example of what we spoke about just a little 
earlier with the hon. member from Saltcoats about communities 
getting together in those areas and making application, and a 
joint application to say that we in this area, identifying the 
communities, are getting together and saying that we need help 
with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, yes. That’s okay. 
That would be my suggestion. And once again, to submit it for 
review, it doesn’t hurt. 
 
But there’s a good example of saying, well there’s only 1,500 
here and there’s, you know, 1,000 there, by golly we have 
enough between two communities, or between three or four. 
And that’s the approach that may attract the attention of . . . and 
meet the criteria that’s established and would qualify. Here’s 
again a co-operative effort on a regional or area basis. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
had responded to the member from Saltcoats in the sense of 
amalgamation and some of the efforts that were happening with 
amalgamation in the parts of the area that he was speaking to. 
 
There is that whole, I guess, exercise and involvement that the 
towns and villages through a Legislative Review Committee is 
going through now to revamp the urban Act, something similar 
that the cities were doing to create the city portion of the Act or 
the city Act as well. 
 
There’s been some comment coming back from your 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

department as such that there is a little bit of, I guess maybe 
hesitancy to see where the towns and villages are wanting to go 
with that, the particular changes that they’re looking for in 
legislation within that urban Act. And they’re also starting to 
look now to go into that whole regionalization concept as well 
which relates to this amalgamation issue and that type of thing 
as well. 
 
If you can give us some thoughts, I guess, where yourself and 
your department’s coming from in the sense of the direction 
that the towns and villages are taking to make some of those 
changes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the 
member for the question. It’s not something that will be 
imposed on any communities. And the hon. member will know, 
and I’m sure is aware, because I know in his part of the 
province there . . . that regional concept is already in existence. 
 
And we’re very interested. The department is very interested in 
that type of a concept, that the communities, the towns and 
villages and RMs, would come together to determine as to 
where they might . . . what direction they might go in for future 
administration. 
 
It’s not a bad idea. I think that concept has been not only in that 
part of the province but in others where it’s recognized that, 
rather than continue to operate on an individual basis, perhaps 
we can look at benefiting a larger part of our area by getting 
together with other communities — and whether it’s for trying 
to attract businesses, or whether it’s trying to improve 
infrastructure, application for perhaps monies that may be 
available on a regional basis. 
 
And again I keep going back to some of the benefits. Perhaps 
down the road when we’re looking at small communities that 
can’t afford to fix their infrastructure and need water, that we 
can work on a regional basis to have a hub and then supply the 
type of services that people may need in those small 
communities that don’t have the monies for it. 
 
So I’m not sure if I’ve answered your question. I’m enthused, as 
I mentioned earlier, about that concept, those ideas. And I’ve 
heard from community leaders throughout the province that feel 
it’s a very positive thing to be doing in a co-operative manner. 
And that’s a positive way of getting together and sharing 
resources, sharing finances, equipment, and so on. So I think 
that’s a great idea. 
 
We’ve not, and I want to make it clear that we have not, come 
up with any idea of imposing regionalization on anyone. And 
I’m a little hesitant to use that word amalgamation — it’s 
restructuring, it’s reorganization of communities — but as long 
it’s done with the leaders of the communities. 
 
Some of the changes we’ve made to legislation is to allow 
communities to have their own autonomy or the kind of 
autonomy to move in that direction. And if there’s any help that 
our department can offer to help with that kind of an exercise, 
by all means — through our Web sites, through just phone calls 
and having people come out and sit down and meet with 
community leaders. 
 

(16:30) 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s encouraging to 
hear that. I guess there’s some real interest and I guess going 
down that road and taking that opportunity to allow those 
municipalities to take that direction. We know the Meotas and 
that whole area of Jackfish Lake, there’s a huge interest in there 
of going into some kind of a regional concept and that type of 
thing as well. 
 
So I think when the Town and Village Legislative Review 
Committee comes forward, that some enabling legislation can 
be put into place to allow them to structure themselves in a 
form that they can work together — that it isn’t something that 
you need to dissolve municipalities to create larger 
municipalities or larger regions but there is legislation that is 
provided that gives them the opportunity to work together and 
work together in different ways. It’s not that it needs to be in 
the total municipal capacity but it may be in the way that they 
provide a service or they share services in that respect as well. 
So I think that’s very important that when they come with that 
direction, that that’s accepted and that’s worked with in the 
future as well and in that regards. 
 
Just wanting to move on to revenue sharing and I think it’s a bit 
of an issue that we’ve worked on for some time. And it’s one 
that I think SUMA in particular had spent a lot of time with 
your department and yourself determining where they were 
going to go with revenue sharing and how they were really 
going to be able to obtain those dollars as well. 
 
And when revenue sharing was first put into place, there was a 
mechanism of calculating the way those revenue dollars were 
put out. And that whole pool had gotten to someplace into the 
order of about $67 million. And at that time . . . That was kind 
of in the mid-’90s where there were some good revenues 
coming in. As the revenues stopped coming in, we’ve seen that 
pool starting to shrink down. And at that time the municipalities 
were told once their revenues started coming back again, that 
we would see that revenue-sharing pool go back up again. 
We’re sitting somewhere in the neighbourhood of $36 
million-plus in that pool — still about $30 million short where 
that pool was originally at one time. So we’re still making up 
ground from the time that we were partners in the fullest extent, 
I guess, with the municipalities. 
 
What is the direction . . . I know there’s some dollars being put 
back in this year again but there’s a long ways to go here with 
revenue sharing. We’ve seen no changes in the SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) contribution 
that’s going in from the government. Grants in lieu of taxes, 
there’s no change in those revenues going in to that pool of 
costs as well. So it’s a bit of a downloading that’s gone back 
down into the municipalities that they’re needing to pick up 
some of those costs as well. 
 
What is the direction of revenue sharing, and where are we 
going on the long-term basis in the sense of getting back to 
even the $67 million that we were at, at one time, as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, just to 
clarify some of the figures with respect of revenue sharing and 
how it’s going in the right direction. And there are some things 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

 

as far as revenue sharing that are sometimes overlooked and not 
taken into account as far as grants in lieu and some of the other, 
some of the other targeted programs, CSIP and so on, that do 
involve some provincial money as well as federal money and 
local money. 
 
However, in 2001-2002 the . . . it was $55 million; and 
2002-2003, 65; and for 2003-2004, it’ll be 75. This has been 
recognized, that municipalities need funding for infrastructure 
and for a variety of needs to provide services to their residents. 
 
So the revenue in 2002-2003 was increased by $10 million, and 
this is over and above some of the other programs as well. In 
2003-2004, the budget provides another 10 million of new 
money in a revenue-sharing increase for municipalities. The 
further increase of $10 million will be provided for in the 
2004-2005 budget, so it’s a total increase over the three years 
— new money of $30 million or 54 per cent since 2001. So 
that’s a significant amount of monies that have now been 
targeted for revenue sharing. And I don’t think we can argue the 
fact that it is going in the right direction. 
 
The 2003-2004, there’s also been $104 million to the municipal 
sector, to the municipal sector, through a number of programs. 
And that’s the one . . . some of them I was referring to which 
includes revenue sharing, but also the municipal portion of 
grants in lieu of taxes — Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
as I mentioned, the Centenary Fund, and SAMA as well which 
we have supported. So once again this is represented. Again 
another increase of more than $10 million over 2002-2003. 
 
So as well, included with that budget, we’ll provide $172,000 
increase to urban parks. So once again that’s a total of $3.74 
million and $6.78 million to school boards for grants in lieu of 
taxes. So that’s something in the vicinity of $115 million to 
communities. 
 
And really where you consider in a budget where 
health/education increases are greater than the rest of 
government, and they’re essentially zero in other parts of 
government, 15.4 per cent increase in revenue sharing alone to 
municipalities has been recognized as being pretty good. And 
again it’s going in the right direction. 
 
No other sector, not even health, received that significant 
amount of a percentage of increase out of the budget. So I, you 
know, I think we’re . . . I don’t think, I know we’re going in the 
right direction. And I was quite pleased that we were able to 
offer up more monies from the budget for municipalities. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess I can 
appreciate that there’s been more dollars put into the overall 
process of funding municipalities. But the sense that some of 
the program money that’s gone into funding the municipalities, 
through CSIP in particular, it’s not all municipalities that are 
gaining that opportunity of gathering in those dollars. Those 
dollars are only program dollars that we heard that only hit 
about 20 per cent of the needy communities that are out there, 
that are actually even putting in their applications. So there’s 
probably even a larger percentage of municipalities that aren’t 
gaining the opportunity of those new dollars in that sense as 
well. 
 

And I guess as far as grants in lieu of taxes, we’ve seen no 
increase this year at all in the funding and grants in lieu of taxes 
coming into this year’s budget. So that’s a definite . . . I guess a 
concern that the municipalities have, the way the assessments 
and the reassessments have gone, those values have gone up in 
that respect. So somebody within that municipality is picking 
up those extra costs because that portion hasn’t been funded to 
pick up those extra costs and valuations through the 
reassessments that have gone on as well. 
 
And we’re also starting to see the pressure with the satellite 
communities. The satellite communities around the cities, the 
major cities — the Saskatoons and Reginas — are having their 
own concerns and their own problems because of just the nature 
of the way they do business. They’re basically a residential 
community. They don’t have a whole lot of commercial 
assessment property in there, so they don’t have those dollars 
that come into those communities on a tax basis as well. And 
the pressure of providing services is as great or greater because 
of having to compete with the type of service that are needed 
for the . . . for those communities that are equal to the cities. 
There’s a whole new area of pressure that’s coming on for the 
need of providing that infrastructure and providing that service 
for those communities as well. 
 
So we need to identify that if there are some dollars coming in, 
those dollars still . . . are not seeming to be able to keep up with 
the demand of what’s out there for the services within these 
communities and the way that some of these communities are 
growing as well. 
 
There’s been some talk about wanting to have to change the 
formula of the revenue sharing as well. And that one is a very 
difficult one and the minister’s kind of shaking his head. 
Because it’s one that until there’s enough money put into the 
pot for us to really start talking about addressing these concerns 
and these different needs that are out there, we have to realize 
that we have to bring that level of dollars in that pool of 
revenue-sharing need to the extent that we can actually start 
talking about changing that formula. Because there are some 
real problems out there. Those satellite communities and those 
growing communities, they’re needing some infrastructure 
dollars. And it’s just not coming in the way the system is 
designed right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well I just — in response to that — I just 
want to clarify and point out that sometimes we overlook the 
fact. And again, I believe we’re going in the right direction. 
 
In 1998 there was zero dollars for grants in lieu of; we’re up to 
$13 million. That’s a significant increase. And that’s part and 
parcel. Three years ago there was zero money for the kind of 
infrastructure help through Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program, and that was zero. Now we have 21 million . . . over 
$21 million. So there is access to monies that weren’t there 
before. And that’s on the plus side. 
 
As far as the formula you mentioned, yes, we desperately need 
to work with SARM and SUMA, okay, to make sure that . . . 
And the hon. member will know, as being a mayor of a 
community as well, that you cannot . . . it’s difficult sometimes 
to come to an agreement or a consensus on the direction you 
should go, and I understand that. 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2003 

 

But it’s important as well, and I recognize that if there is 
adequate enough monies, that we need to look at . . . we need to 
sit down and be serious, and there may need to be some 
give-and-take when we sit down to determine how that formula 
should work. And I agree, before we get the next $10 million 
next year, we should sit down — we should seriously, and be 
serious about it. 
 
And perhaps not everybody at the end of the day is going to be 
happy, and unfortunately in the past that’s what’s happened. We 
haven’t been able to get different associations to agree on a 
direction to take that might . . . Because it’s human nature — 
well if we use this one, you know, it’s going to benefit them and 
we’re going to lose out or that sort of thing. 
 
But I do believe . . . I have a great deal of respect for the 
association leaders, for community leaders, and a great deal of 
confidence in them that we will be able to sit down and, given 
the direction that we all want to go, that we will come up with a 
formula that will offset some of the angst or the concerns that 
some communities have because they feel they’re short 
changed, and make it fairer for everybody. 
 
And there has to be an answer out there someplace, and I’m 
looking forward to ideas and suggestions and associations 
working with our department to make sure we do come up with 
the formula that’s adequate and fair and equitable to everybody. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to ask the 
minister a couple of questions. Given in recent days that the 
water problem that happened in Walkerton, Ontario took place 
and now there’s charges being laid against a couple of the city 
employees concerning that whole issue, I would just like to ask 
the minister: we’re fortunate in North Battleford that no one 
died from that water problem; a lot of people were ill. 
 
I’m just wondering if the minister could shed any light on the 
future application of North Battleford to get their water and 
their sewer systems looked after through the 
Saskatchewan-Canada Infrastructure Program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I want to thank the member from Redberry 
Lake for that question and point out at the outset, before I 
respond with respect to the North Battleford issue, there have 
been other communities faced with the need for upgrading 
treatment plants, water wells, sewage facilities, and so on over 
the years. And those communities that have recognized a need 
to do so have gone ahead and done it, even prior to programs 
such as the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And I’m sure the member from Redberry Lake knows that and 
appreciates that. And I’m sure there are people in those 
communities that . . . community leaders once again that I have 
a great deal of respect for who take their responsibilities 
seriously and attend to the needs of their citizens. 
 
With North Battleford, $1.7 million in federal and provincial 
CSIP funding will be provided to the city of North Battleford to 
support their water and sewer needs. Now North Battleford has 
in fact been supported in a significant way by the province in 
their efforts to upgrade their sewer and water system. 

The city does have access to $1.2 million over the five years of 
the program — 254,000, just over . . . well almost $255,000 has 
been allocated, already allocated, to construct two new water 
supply wells; $949,000 has been approved to support the design 
of a new sewage plant. Now that funding will be used over the 
next two years. 
 
The city has been aware, the city has been aware that it will 
receive this funding. They’ve been aware of that for some time, 
that they will receive some funding and that will be part of 
some of the upcoming Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program announcements about projects approved for the next 
several years. So North Battleford has already been aware that 
this funding was coming, would be available. 
 
In addition, in 2001-2002 North Battleford was provided — has 
been provided — with half a million dollars, $500,000 from the 
strategic initiatives portion of that Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program to install an ultraviolet system for its 
water treatment plant. 
 
Including this strategic funding, North Battleford will get about 
$121 per capita from this program, from the CSIP program, for 
its water and sewer infrastructure. This is about 40 per cent 
more than any other city will receive on a per capita basis. 
 
So it is . . . there has been support for the community of North 
Battleford. And I know that the leaders of those communities 
will do whatever is necessary to ensure safe drinking water for 
their citizens. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, in 
North Battleford situation we’re just very lucky that we didn’t 
have people die in that situation. The reality of it is that the 
water intake is downstream from the sewer outlet. It’s a bizarre 
situation. 
 
And I think the people in North Battleford expect more than just 
the standard answer and . . . that they do not basically fit within 
the requirements of the infrastructure program. They need to 
have the situation looked after right away because of the 
different circumstances. And because communities all over 
Saskatchewan don’t have the money to invest, you know, 
they’re looking to the other levels of government to help. 
 
And I think North Battleford is a situation that the government 
should look at a little differently because of the . . . number one, 
the health reasons concerning the issue — the potential loss of 
life and wellness of the individuals — but also the huge 
economic loss that took place during the period where they 
were on a boil-water advisory. And I think the people of North 
Battleford need more . . . a better answer than what you have 
been giving. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 
member from Redberry Lake, his comment about having built 
the plant downstream or upstream, whichever . . . I guess it 
doesn’t matter where you build it, you’re either upstream or 
downstream from the next community anyway. Some 
community is upstream or downstream. 
 
So in that case, yes, there . . . We recognize that there’s a need, 
that there’s a need for the city of North Battleford to do 



April 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

 

something immediately, preferably. And we have worked with 
them. We have Sask Water that’s become involved with and 
offered an opportunity to immediately proceed with . . . And 
I’m not disagreeing with the hon. member that there is some 
urgency. 
 
Now the . . . Over the years, I mean the . . . I guess 
municipalities have the responsibility to ensure that their 
citizens have safe drinking water. And part and parcel of the 
monies that are received through taxation . . . and I know that 
our frugal leaders of the communities or councils do in fact put 
money away for a rainy day for those unexpected events that 
they may need to have immediate cash for. 
 
And under the circumstances, we have talked to the city of 
North Battleford about the possibility of their financial situation 
allowing them to go through the municipal financing board or, 
in fact, utilize reserves that perhaps over the years were not 
expended to certain infrastructure or certain needs. 
 
And I’m not saying that’s wrong, that you put money away for 
a rainy day. But by golly, you know, when you can perhaps see 
the rainy day coming and unfortunately when the floodgates 
break, then you start thinking, gosh, I should have, you know, 
put a little tighter gate on that. 
 
So I guess what I’m saying, we want to work with them. And I 
feel this is an urgent situation. I’m not denying that. But so are 
other communities in an urgent situation and so have other 
communities been in similar situations — not to the extent that 
it got to the point that we saw in North Battleford, happily. But 
those communities, even prior to an infrastructure program or 
any federal-provincial monies being available, went ahead and 
said, our priority’s here; our responsibility as leaders in this 
community is to ensure the safety of our residents; and went 
ahead and however they did it — through municipal financing, 
through reserves, through long-term amortization on loans, 
borrowing money, mortgage, whatever — they went ahead and 
they did it. And then the primary reason be to ensure that their 
citizens could enjoy good quality, safe drinking water. 
 
So I guess . . . And we’ve been trying to work with North 
Battleford to ensure that we . . . This needs to be desperately 
attended to and I appreciate the member from Redberry Lake 
recognizing the urgency that does exist. But I also would 
appreciate very much . . . And I’m sure a lot of people 
recognize the responsibilities that community leaders have to 
their citizens when they are in charge of the community, 
whether . . . when they’re the elected officials of a community 
— to work in the best interest of the people that elected them 
and the people that they serve and to whatever means is 
necessary. 
 
And I’m not trying to lessen the seriousness of the matter. I’m 
just saying that we have to take into consideration a whole host 
of communities that need the kind of help that North 
Battleford’s looking for, but may be in a healthier position, 
financially or otherwise, to either gain some financing or 
proceed on their own to make sure that they get this thing fixed. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. One last question, Mr. Chair. I 
accept what you’re saying. North Battleford may have, to a 
certain extent, more of a larger tax base where they can handle a 

larger construction project. My next question really speaks to 
the smaller communities like Perdue and Vonda and Maryfield, 
who have water and sewer problems as well, and they don’t 
have the tax base. 
 
You know, both sides — the government and the official 
opposition — we talk about rural revitalization. In those smaller 
communities, if we don’t as a province and as a government, if 
you do not look after those smaller communities through the 
infrastructure program or other means, these communities are 
going to die. There’s no way that they’re going to be saved. 
And I think the government needs to address their needs maybe 
in a little different fashion than the federal-provincial 
infrastructure program is willing to assist them. That may be 
through the federal-provincial infrastructure program — maybe 
it should be revamped and more likely just more money put in 
to the plan to cover these smaller communities. 
 
But I think the Perdues of Saskatchewan and the Vondas are in 
a different category than North Battleford, and I think 
something should have been done with North Battleford quite 
some time ago. But also the smaller communities are on a 
different level of commitment that they can make because of 
their tax base. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I appreciate that question very much, and I 
agree. But there’s only so much money in the pool and the 
people that represent the review committee are two from 
SARM, two federal, two provincial, and two SUMA 
representatives to determine where the priorities lie. 
 
In the case of Vonda and Perdue, as the member has mentioned, 
perhaps that in these kind of situations working with other 
communities to make applications, to work with, to share some 
of the potential for accessing grants money may be a way to go. 
 
But we’re doing the best we can. And I agree. I believe that the 
federal government as well has recognized that perhaps 
hopefully over the years the infrastructure funding will continue 
to support the kind of needs that we have in this province and 
beyond. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................684 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................684 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................684 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................684 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................685 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................685 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................685 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................685 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................698 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................699 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Snowbirds’ Air Show 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................685 
 Major Saskatchewan Projects 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................686 
 Saskatchewan Party Candidate — Athabasca Constituency 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................686 
 Female Board Members in Saskatchewan  
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................686 
 Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Awards 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................686 
 Rural High-Speed Internet 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................687 
 Moosomin Moose Raise Funds for Health Care Facility 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................687 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskTel Investment in Craig Wireless International Inc. 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................687 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................687 
 Location of Crown Corporation Investments 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................691 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................691 
 Registration of Genetically Modified Wheat 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................691 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................691 
TABLING OF CERTIFICATES OF ELECTION 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................692 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................692 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................692 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund—Justice—Vote 3 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................692 



 

 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................692 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................693 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................694 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................695 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................700 
 General Revenue Fund—Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs—Vote 30 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................704 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................706 
  Lorenz ........................................................................................................................................................................................708 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................710 
 


	Location of Crown Corporation Investments
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Location of Crown Corporation Investments
	ORDERS OF THE DAY

