















































Hansard: June 12, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1615 
 June 12, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the deplorable condition of Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in Kelvington and the 
surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington 
and Lintlaw. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition referring once again to the Crown grazing lease issue 
that is prevalent in the southwest part of the province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure that 
current Crown land lessees maintain their first option to 
renew those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the 
community of Maple Creek and Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about Highway 
No. 20. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Strasbourg and Duval. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who are very concerned over the condition of 
Highway 47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 

47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, Lampman, 
and Midale. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again I rise with a petition from citizens from southwest 
Saskatchewan that are extremely concerned about the condition 
of Highway 43. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is in total signed by the good citizens of 
Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to Saskatchewan crop insurance 2003 
premium increases to farmers. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, and Girvin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise on behalf 
of folks from my hometown who are proposing a constructive 
alternative to the government’s plan to put a permanent CT 
(computerized tomography) scanner into the southwest regional 
hospital. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today, again all from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of citizens from west central Saskatchewan to present a 
petition concerning the state of health care in the area. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the current 
level of services available at the Kindersley Hospital and to 
ensure that current specialty services are sustained to better 
serve the people of west central Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from the 
town of Kindersley and also the town of Eatonia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
presenting a petition in regards to Highway 14. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
recondition and repair the highway in order to address 
safety concerns and facilitating economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by people from the community of 
Battleford, Wilkie, North Battleford, Unity, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present on behalf of constituents who are very 
concerned with the section of Highway 22. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 

 
A petition concerning the dispute over water levels in the 
Qu’Appelle River system; and 
 

Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 12, 13, 18, 36, 41, 100, 114, 119, 120, 124, and 
140. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 27 grade 4 students from Balgonie Elementary 
School. They’re seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re accompanied today by their teacher, Ms. Audrey 
Schultz. Now looking up there I see some very tall students so I 
know there are at least four chaperones accompanying the 
students today as well. 
 
Whenever I’ve attended Balgonie Elementary School, I’ve had 
a warm welcome and I feel part of that community, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’m looking forward to meeting with the students 
on the staircase for pictures and a bit of a discussion following 
question period. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in giving a warm welcome 
to the students from Balgonie Elementary School, their 
chaperones, and teacher. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’m very 
pleased to introduce 24 grade 6 students from St. Dominic 
School in Humboldt. With them are their teachers, Malcolm 
Eaton, Cathy Korte-Monz, Colleen Bowman, Linda Salikin, 
Bev Schmidt, and Debbie Bells. 
 
Humboldt, as we all know, is Saskatchewan’s newest city. It’s a 
great place, and I’d like to welcome all the students here today 
and I hope you enjoy your time in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Pull of the Land Musical Drama 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
weekend I was privileged to attend a sold-out performance of 
the musical drama, Pull of the Land, at the Rosetown Central 
High School, put on by Sky High Productions.  
 
This drama tells the story of a farm family coping with the 
issues such as generational transfer of a farm, rural lifestyle 
versus urban lifestyle, and both the pleasures and pressures that 
accompany that pull of the land. 
 
First presented in Harris a few weeks ago, the production 
moved to Rosetown last weekend for three performances and is 
scheduled for future showing in Kindersley. 
 
Taking the format of a dessert theatre in Rosetown, proceeds 
from the events were directed to the Harris Community 
Development and to the Rosetown and District Health Centre 
Foundation. 
 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

 

The musical drama was written and produced by Harris 
residents, Elaine Kowpak and Beth Robertson, and was 
performed by a cast of 24 from the Harris-Tessier area and from 
the Rosetown area. The pianist was Ruth Wilson from Harris. 
Several patrons also assisted in making this effort a success. 
 
Congratulations to Sky High Productions for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

La Ronge Mushroom Business 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, Kitsaki Meats, La Ronge, is 
owned by Lac La Ronge Indian Band and has been in the beef 
jerky and wild rice business for many years. But recently the 
firm has expanded into the wild mushroom wholesaling 
business, and business has been pretty good. 
 
At the end of May, in the first five days of the season, pickers 
delivered over 5,000 pounds of morel mushrooms to the plant in 
La Ronge where they are packed fresh and dried before 
shipping. The majority of the mushrooms are currently destined 
for the United States, but Kitsaki has a distribution deal with a 
Swiss co-operative that will send mushrooms being sent 
directly overseas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this kind of entrepreneurial spirit is one of the 
reasons why the future of this province is wide open. I want to 
congratulate all those involved with this new initiative, in 
particular the Lac La Ronge Indian Band and Kitsaki 
management, and wish them continued success in this and all 
future ventures. Thank you. 
 

Rodeo Superstar 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the world of rodeo, 
superstar status is not necessarily restricted to cowboys. 
 
In 1978 Bob and Dixie Black ran a band of bucking horse 
mares on their ranch in the Cypress Hills near Maple Creek and 
a foal was born that year that would eventually go on to fame. 
 
Coyote, as he was soon known, was sold three years later to the 
Bar T Rodeo Company and thus began his illustrious rodeo 
career as a bucking horse. 
 
Coyote was chosen several times to buck at the Canadian Finals 
Rodeo in Edmonton and at the National Finals Rodeo in Las 
Vegas. He excelled at the Calgary Stampede where he was part 
of a 1985 Canadian record bareback ride and was the 1985 
Canadian Bareback Horse of the Year. 
 
However in 1995 Coyote was sold to a stock farm in Colorado. 
 
Now a couple of years ago Dan Black, son of Bob and Dixie, 
was bronc riding in some southern U.S. (United States) rodeos 
and happened to see Coyote. He mentioned to the horse’s owner 
that he would like to bring that horse back to the Cypress Hills 
ranch to retire when the time was right. 
 
Well late last year Dan finally got the phone call and Coyote 
was ready to retire. Now Dan made the arrangements to bring 
the horse home from Colorado without his parent’s knowledge 

and on the evening of December 24, the horse arrived at a 
neighbouring ranch. On Christmas Day, Dan delivered Coyote 
to his parent’s ranch making this one of the best Christmas gifts 
they had ever received. 
 
Late last month, in the spirit of respect and appreciation, the 
Maple Creek Cow Town Pro Rodeo honoured this bucking 
horse. Announcer Joe Braniff detailed Coyote’s 
accomplishments and Coyote made a final run around the High 
Chaparral Arena in front of an appreciative audience. 
 
In addition to Coyote’s many trophies and awards, Mr. Jay 
Lundy has recently nominated this amazing horse to the Rodeo 
Hall of Fame. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join 
with me in recognizing that good rodeo requires outstanding 
performances from both two-legged and four-legged critters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Rivers Day 
 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My city is 
Saskatoon and as the movie title goes, A River Runs Through It. 
The same goes for your city of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact in his book entitled The Rivers of Canada, Canadian author 
Hugh MacLennan called our two-branched Saskatchewan River 
one of the great historical rivers of our nation. 
 
I mention this because this past Sunday I took part in a very 
pleasant and informative event to celebrate the first annual 
National Rivers Day, a day proclaimed to commemorate and 
preserve Canada’s spectacular rivers. The Canadian Heritage 
Rivers Board was jointly established by the federal, provincial, 
and territorial governments for this purpose. 
 
The Meewasin Valley Authority, the living water project, and 
Partners FOR the Saskatchewan River Basin co-hosted a scenic 
cruise and barbecue aboard the Saskatoon Princess, a cruise 
which took us along the South Saskatchewan River for two 
hours. As well, Mr. Speaker, other events were held throughout 
the day to honour our rivers and to make us aware of the 
heritage, vastness, and diversity of Canada’s rivers from sea to 
sea to sea. One day of celebration for what we know is 
year-round attention. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wilkie Students Win Youth Business Institute 
Interprovincial Competition 

 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Youth 
Business competition prepares future entrepreneurs. Wilkie’s 
the home to about 1,400 people. It also has the world’s largest 
grasshopper. And now it has the first Saskatchewan high school 
to produce a champion in the Youth Business Institute 
interprovincial competition. Wilkie can claim the bragging 
rights over communities such as Regina, Saskatoon, Nokomis, 
Turtleford, Prince Albert, and La Ronge, where students have 
keenly been obtaining . . . trying to obtain this title for 
themselves. 
 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Faculty of Administration at the University of 
Regina and the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce have 
co-sponsored the YBI (Youth Business Institute) since its 
inception 18 years ago. 
 
Every year high school teams from all over Saskatchewan are 
invited to form teams up to six players to operate a simulated 
business on computer. Competitions are held in the fall and 
winter seminars with the top 16 teams from each moving on to 
the grand challenge. Prior to the grand challenge the winners of 
the fall and winter competitions take on the top two teams from 
the similar program managed by the Manitoba Chamber of 
Commerce. Last month the first team, a Saskatchewan team, 
won the interprovincial competition. The Wilkie high school 
has broken the Manitoba dominance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, students are given a generic industry and 
companies. They have to think through business strategies, and 
make business decisions, short-term and long-term planning, 
and budget quality and quantitative analysis strategies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, join me in congratulating Ryan Kolenosky, Tarilie 
Pernitsky, Chantz Jaindl, and teacher adviser, Alex Majewski, 
on winning this competition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Saskatchewan Express Launches Summer Tour 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening the 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
minister and I, along with a host of other Saskatchewan Express 
fans, were at the Centre of the Arts for this year’s first 
performance of our celebrated song and dance group to launch 
their summer tour through parks and communities across our 
wonderful province. The minister was there for the 
entertainment and also to present a cheque from SaskPower for 
$30,000 to help fund the activities of Saskatchewan Express. 
 
This first performance of the season, hosted by Jean Freeman 
and Doug Alexander, was even more special because it included 
a tribute to the group’s founder, Carol Gay Bell. Some 23 years 
ago Carol Gay Bell set out to create a show that would feature 
Saskatchewan young people and would entertain the young and 
old in communities across our province and beyond. A 
Saskatchewan talent hunt to rival that of Canadian Idol was 
launched, and a celebration of our province’s 75th anniversary 
was planned. 
 
Over these last 10 years more than a quarter of a million people 
have seen the Saskatchewan Express perform in the province. I 
know we all commend Carol Gay Bell’s commitment to 
nurturing our province’s young people. Congratulations also to 
Irene Deck, Chair of the board, and her directors. 
 
Thanks to so much hard work, people across the province will 
once again enjoy their music, their dance, and their energy this 
summer. I am pleased that SaskPower continues its 
contributions to the quality of life in Saskatchewan. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Naicam Recycling Programs 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, as we become more aware of the 
vulnerability of our environment, recycling has become a 
household word in many communities. The community of 
Naicam is no exception. 
 
Paper recycling began when the local cadets decided to provide 
a valuable service as a means of raising money. Recycling 
bottles through SARCAN became another activity. Next, this 
community became part of the first trial regional recycling 
facility, REACT (Regional Authority of Carlton Trail) and 
recycling became more extensive with glass, boxes, plastics, 
and garbage. 
 
The next phase in this community’s recycling endeavour was 
the founding of the Naicam community thrift store a year ago, 
which offered an opportunity for the community and 
surrounding area to recycle and reuse items — a year-round 
garage sale. This volunteer effort has met with great success, 
and in a few short months the loan for the renovation was paid 
off, and profit after a year was given to a community 
organization. 
 
The board of directors are a visionary group and have now 
expanded their mandate to include the collection of reusable 
clothing and household items for the Canadian Diabetes 
Association collection program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a prime example of volunteers with a vision 
providing a service to the community and to the province. And 
in the process they’ve made a profit which benefits not only 
local people, but people throughout the province. 
 
I ask you to join with me in congratulating these very 
resourceful people. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Beef Industry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Canadian Press 
is reporting that the federal government has already decided on 
a compensation package for the beef industry, and that it 
contains nothing but interest-free loans. Mr. Speaker, if that’s 
their position, it’s another slap in the face of the beef industry 
and of Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more loans and more debt is not going to help 
feedlot producers and cattle producers; it’s the last thing they 
need, Mr. Speaker. At a time when they still have no idea when 
the US border is going to open, further debt will just help bury 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is, are these reports 
correct? Does the federal aid package amount to nothing more 
than interest-free loans and more debt for cattle producers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have just come from a 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

 

variety of national interviews that some of these similar 
questions were being put. What we have received this morning 
are reports from sources. We cannot, from the federal 
government, attain any clear answer on whether this in fact is 
the case or is not the case. 
 
But let me say this. If it is the case that all that Ottawa is 
proposing to meet the needs of the livestock industry in Canada 
and in Saskatchewan are loan guarantees, then they have totally 
missed the mark. They have totally missed the mark. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Minster of Agriculture 
is able to be here. He will soon be leaving this province to 
travel to Vancouver to meet with all of the Canadian ministers 
of Agriculture, including Mr. Vanclief, the federal minister, 
tomorrow. I will ask him to respond to further questions today. 
 
But let me assure this House and assure the people of 
Saskatchewan that our Minister of Agriculture attending to that 
meeting in Vancouver will be taking a very, very clear message. 
We need substantive support for the livestock industry in our 
province and it needs to be a whole lot more than loan 
guarantees. Asking people to take debt when they’re suffering 
is simply inappropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the 
Premier was doing these interviews, I happened to be watching 
Mr. Vanclief do an interview, a scrum on Newsworld. And Mr. 
Vanclief more or less indicated that all he was prepared to put 
on the table were loan guarantees. And he said he would also 
use statutory programs, which I would take to mean the existing 
farm safety net programs, the new super NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account), and perhaps the compensation for 
slaughtered animals. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not the solution 
to the issue at hand. Mr. Speaker, this is an insult to Western 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a slap in the face of 
the beef industry, the men and the women whose livelihood 
depends on the beef industry. Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier, 
what is he going to do about it? What is he going to tell the 
federal Liberals? Is he going to tell them and insist that this plan 
is absolutely unacceptable, and bring home a better plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, all of the 
Western premiers gathered this week in Kelowna and laid on 
the table what we think is not a rich package but an important 
package that can support the industry through this period of 
difficulty until we can get the American border open. 
 
I had the opportunity yesterday to speak with other premiers 
from across Canada. This morning all premiers in Canada were 
on a conference call. I raised the issue with all premiers. And I 
think it’s fair to report that there is general, if not unanimous, 
support across the country among premiers for this kind of 

response to the BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) and 
the livestock industry. 
 
You can rest assured, Mr. Speaker, and the Leader of the 
Opposition can rest assured, that I will continue pushing the 
national government, as the Minister of Agriculture will 
tomorrow with his colleagues. We will continue pushing this 
federal Liberal government until they wake up and find out 
what’s happening in Western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
mentions that the proposal of a $400 million package is a 
modest one. Well modest it is indeed, because a recent report 
indicated that the cost to the industry and the cost to the country 
could be as much as $550 million a month, Mr. Speaker. More 
in a month — and a month has already passed — than the total 
package being asked for. This same group says that a 
four-month ban would cost the beef industry two and a half 
billion dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberals have not received that picture 
yet. They’re still in the Dark Ages. Mr. Speaker, what’s even 
more appalling is that the federal Liberals seem to have already 
dismissed the Western premiers’ proposals. That’s a real 
concern and our Premier has to deal with that. Mr. Speaker, this 
federal proposal of loan guarantees is a problem, not a solution. 
 
How does the Premier propose to get it through the heads of the 
federal Liberals in Ottawa that they have to come up with a 
different plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think through the same 
kind of consolidated voice, the consolidated efforts that we’ve 
had coming out of this legislature, and coming out of the 
Western premiers, coming across Western Canada, now coming 
from all parts of Canada. 
 
I too heard the reports of the Canadian animal coalition this 
morning and their estimates that this industry could be losing 
between 5 and $600 million a month — 2.5 billion in a very 
short period of time. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think we all recognize the potential, the 
potential damage here is even much greater than that. If we are 
not able to resolve the border issue with the Americans, this 
industry’s very existence in Canada is threatened. Now we will 
know that . . . We will know the harsh reality of that in 
Saskatchewan but so will every Canadian in every provincial 
jurisdiction. 
 
We know that we are on the verge of seeing expansion of the 
livestock industry in this province. We know that we’re on the 
verge of seeing expansion in ethanol where the distillers’ grain 
can build that livestock industry. We know that we produce the 
best beef on the face of the earth. We know that there’s a great 
and hungry market for good quality food and good quality 
Western Canadian and Saskatchewan beef. That is why we take 
this issue so seriously. 
 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

We have ensured through the science that the food supply is 
safe; that this is one isolated incident. We’ve taken the science. 
We’ve proven the science. We need to go to our American 
counterparts now and convince them to reopen the border. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly we all have to speak loudly and clearly on this issue 
because the federal Liberals aren’t helping us very much. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, neither is the federal NDP (New 
Democratic Party). 
 
There was a very troubling letter today in the Leader-Post from 
none other than NDP MP (Member of Parliament) — senior 
MP — Lorne Nystrom. Now Mr. Nystrom took it upon himself 
to criticize Canada’s food inspection system. He said, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . this whole situation could have been avoided if 
Canada’s food inspection and regulatory system had been 
stronger to begin with. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this opinion is grossly misinformed. It’s a 
comment that is damaging to the cause that we are trying to 
correct, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask the Premier, does he support his NDP federal cousin for 
criticizing Canada’s food inspection system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I would concur that I’m a bit 
troubled by the notion of the article that indicates that a 
strengthened CFIA (Canada Food Inspection Agency) would 
have served us in a more appropriate fashion. The reality is is 
that I think through the investigation process in Canada, it’s 
been demonstrated fully that we have a very good food 
inspection agency in Canada and it will only get stronger, Mr. 
Speaker, through the course of the recommendations that will 
be made over the next couple of days. It will only strengthen. 
 
I think what was also important in that article, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Leader of the Opposition of the Saskatchewan Party has yet 
not alluded to, is that the . . . is that Mr. Nystrom also said that 
this is an issue that requires federal compensation. He said that 
this is a trade issue. The reason why today beef isn’t moving in 
Canada into the US, Mr. Speaker, now that the science is 
completed, is about the decisions that are being made on trade. 
 
If the science finds itself to be in the pure state that it will, it 
will then be the question about why isn’t our beef moving into 
the US. Mr. Nystrom states it’s then going to be about trade. 
And if it is about trade, then in Canada producers and feedlots 
should be compensated for trade injury which is what we’ve 
been on for some time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, we all 
agree that we need a trade compensation package, an injury 
damage payment because of what’s happened. But because of 
Mr. Nystrom’s statements that package will have to be larger 

because it will be longer before the US border is open. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we had a Prime Minister who said some 
things that he shouldn’t have said and some people called on 
him to have his mouth duct-taped shut. Mr. Speaker, we had a 
Minister of Agriculture in Ontario that said some wrong things 
and the Premier of Alberta demanded an apology and got a 
public national apology on television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe now it’s up to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan to demand a retraction and an apology from Mr. 
Nystrom so that we can set this behind us. Will the Premier 
show that leadership? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
from the Saskatchewan Party is quite capable of calling Mr. 
Nystrom and making the kinds of requests that he’s making of 
this Assembly on his own, through his own party. He’s able to 
do that, Mr. Speaker, in his own capacity as the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I and 
this government will be concentrating on two or three things. 
We’ll be concentrating, Mr. Speaker, in enhancing the kinds of 
food safety issues that Canada will be required to make, I 
expect, on the report that will be made by the scientific 
community in the next couple of days. 
 
We as the provincial government, along with the federal 
government, will work at enhancing those standards so that we 
have a better place in Canada and can provide to the 
international marketplace and domestically, Mr. Speaker, a 
level of foods, food safety that we think will be important and 
imperative. 
 
And secondly, we’ll press hard, Mr. Speaker, over the next few 
days and into the future to make sure that we get a reasonable 
compensation package to start with for our industry and into the 
future to build a stronger safety net, Mr. Speaker, that will 
incorporate trade injury on a variety of different fronts that 
we’ve argued are necessary to make the industry stronger. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Revenue-Sharing Grants 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Government Relations. How 
much is the urban revenue-sharing grant for the city of Regina 
in 2003-2004? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
answer that question. The figure I referred to yesterday in the 
13.2 million of revenue sharing provided by the Regina caucus 
were the estimated totals amounts of direct provincial grants, 
Mr. Speaker. The 13.2 million figure included revenue sharing, 
7.89 million; grants in lieu, transfer for the disabled, operating 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

 

capital expenses, Mr. Speaker. It goes on and on. 
 
I spoke with the, I spoke with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, there are a variety of funds 
that are transferred from the province to urban municipalities. I 
spoke with the mayor of this great city of Regina this morning, 
Mr. Speaker; we have an excellent working relationship. And 
the province and the cities, and all the cities and municipalities 
in this province are working together to try and build 
communities, Mr. Speaker, and I very much appreciate and 
respect all the efforts of all the municipalities — the cities, the 
urbans, the rurals — who through the ’90s supported this 
government in balancing the books, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
surprised the minister didn’t include the $30,000 SaskPower 
donated to Saskatchewan Express in Regina’s revenue sharing. 
He’s got everything else in the books in revenue sharing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, once more I ask the minister, 
I’m asking the question, how much revenue-sharing money 
went to the city of Regina . . . or is going to the city of Regina 
this year? The exact amount of revenue sharing, not grants in 
lieu, not money for libraries, nothing else, just revenue-sharing 
dollars. How many dollars in 2003-2004? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve already answered 
that question. Perhaps the member wasn’t listening. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I also have some figures here from 
the city of Regina who are very, very appreciative of the 
support that this government has given the city of Regina. And 
the figures that I received from the mayor’s office — that total 
grants and transfers amount to $47 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why the opposition is 
attempting, is attempting to create, to create this diverse 
concern. I mean I don’t know why they’re trying to be so . . . 
create some animosity between the city of Regina and this 
government. 
 
We have developed strong relationships, Mr. Speaker. We work 
very closely. I am proud of my association with the city mayors 
with whom I meet, with the rural municipalities with whom I 
meet. They know that, working together, we’ll create bigger 
and better communities and that’s what we’re working for — 
not to try and play politics to divide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the NDP member for Regina Qu’Appelle . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order. Order. And would the member start over, please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
NDP member for Regina Qu’Appelle distributed an NDP 
election brochure chock full of misleading and inaccurate 
information about provincial funding for the city of Regina. In 
fact the NDP distributed some of the same false information to 
many other homes in Regina. 
 
The NDP’s election campaign brochures make phoney 
statements about funding to the city of Regina based on the 
claim that Regina’s 2003 urban revenue-sharing grant is $13.3 
million. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
And I’d ask the members to allow the question to be put and 
then to allow the response to be given. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP member for Qu’Appelle said the government has given 
the city of Regina $13.3 million revenue sharing. But Mayor 
Pat Fiacco told reporters at a news conference today it’s only 
7.9 million. Who do you believe, Mr. Speaker? I’ll go with Pat 
Fiacco. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that Mayor Pat Fiacco is 
right and that the NDP’s campaign propaganda distributed to 
pretty near every household in Regina last month inflated the 
value of Regina’s urban sharing revenue grant by a whopping 
70 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there appears to be 
more distortion coming from the opposition. I had the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. You just have to 
contain the exuberance a bit. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the 
pamphlet, “Provincial Dollars to the City of Regina 1999-2000 
to 2003-2004 Budget Years.” And the funding is indicated. Plus 
let me read this: 
 

Includes funds from the following sources: Urban Revenue 
Sharing Grants; Provincial Grants-in-Lieu of Taxes; Crown 
. . . (corporation) Grants-in-Lieu of Taxes; Transportation 
For The Disabled . . . Centenary Fund; Provincial Share of 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program; Municipal 
Police Grants; Grants-in-Lieu of Taxes from Casino 
Regina. Does not include Social Services direct funding 
(Mr. Speaker). 

 
So it’s quite clear, the revenue sharing. 
 
And this is the document that I received from our good mayor, 
Mr. Speaker. It says here revenue-sharing grant, at the very top, 
seven million, eight hundred and eighty-nine point one million 
dollars. Added together, paratransit operating, 
Canada-Saskatchewan . . . and on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

And the mayor says that the province transfers $47 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know if the minister, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the 
minister does not understand, but grants in lieu of taxes are not 
revenue sharing. Grants in lieu of taxes are like every other 
business. Every homeowner pays taxes on their home, their 
business, and that’s all grants in lieu are. 
 
So the minister needs to get his facts straight, find out what 
revenue sharing is, pass it on to the member for Qu’Appelle, so 
he doesn’t put out this phony-baloney propaganda at election 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and his NDP 
colleague, the member from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, now. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Government Relations and the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle owe the people of Regina an apology. 
 
It may be election time but it’s time to tell the truth and be 
honest with the people of Regina. Mr. Speaker, the mayor of 
Regina and the council of Regina have tried to hold the line on 
taxes, but it doesn’t help when members — city members in 
Regina — fabricate the numbers and distort the facts about how 
much money the government actually pays. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of 
Government Relations, on behalf of the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle, apologize to the people of Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member from 
Saltcoats continues to operate the way he has, there will be a 
Grant in lieu of that member . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, this government has treated 
all municipal sectors fairly by providing an increase of 15.4 per 
cent in revenue sharing for each this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve been working co-operatively with all the communities. 
 
Over the past two years there have been increases in revenue 
sharing and there will continue to be into the following year, 
Mr. Speaker, each year. And I, as I said before, I very much 
appreciate meeting with the city mayors and meeting with 
communities of our municipalities and recognizing all their 
efforts through the ’90s to help the government balance a 
budget that was so desperately needed to be balanced, Mr. 
Speaker. We have good co-operative work and we are working 

and going in the right direction. 
 
I still want . . . What the member is saying, I don’t . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North Battleford Sewage Treatment Plant 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. On April 14 after the uproar 
of the CSIP (Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) 
grants, the infrastructure grants, and my intervention, the 
Premier was good enough to agree to meet with the mayor of 
North Battleford to see what could be done to ensure that the 
construction of the waste water treatment plant recommended 
by the judge on the inquiry could proceed this year. 
 
Now at the time the Premier said to the mayor he’d need a little 
bit of time to get back to him; he couldn’t give an answer right 
then. It’s now two months. Does the Premier now have an 
answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where 
that member has been. I don’t even know where he was when 
the problems in North Battleford were created. I’m sure he was 
somewhere in the vicinity. 
 
But anyway, I want to tell you this, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government officials from our department and Sask Water have 
been working with the city of North Battleford to determine 
options for the city to be able to start building their new sewage 
treatment plant, Mr. Speaker. Now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, working collectively, you 
can always come up with options and solutions. But when you 
try to create divisiveness, as the Saskatchewan Party does, you 
resolve nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have, working together, we have identified three options to 
pay for a new sewage treatment plant, Mr. Speaker. The 
opposition doesn’t want to hear it because it is good news and 
this government is working in co-operation with the city of 
North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I directed my 
question at the Premier, to the Premier, for two reasons. 
 
First of all, it was the Premier who gave his sacred commitment 
that he would be there for North Battleford at the time of the 
water crisis. And second, the minister’s opposition to any 
assistance to North Battleford for the waste water treatment 
plant is well known. 
 
So I again ask the Premier. He is the one who said he would be 
there for North Battleford. He is the one who decided to spend 
$2 million on an inquiry and nothing to fix the problem. 
 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

 

Now he said he needed a bit of time on April 14 to come up 
with a solution. It’s been two months. How much money are 
they prepared to come up with to assist in the construction of 
the $15 million waste water treatment plant? Will he at least 
match the amount of money that he spent on the inquiry? 
 
And I direct that at the Premier, not at the minister whose 
opposition to this is well known. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That member is accusing me, Mr. Speaker, 
of being opposed to assisting my home city of North 
Battleford? What has he done for that city? He sat on city 
council while all that was happening. What did he do for that 
city? He didn’t even raise that issue in this House when it all 
began, Mr. Speaker. Where was he? Vying for the leadership of 
the great Liberal Party in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, North Battleford and our department discussed 
option one. They could self-finance the 16.25 million sewage 
plant by providing $2.5 million from their reserves and 
financing a loan for 13.75. This option then, Mr. Speaker, 
would help increase North Battleford’s residents’ monthly 
sewer and water rates by a minimal amount. 
 
Option two was North Battleford can negotiate a partnership 
agreement with Sask Water to own and/or operate all or any 
portion of that facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have done more for that city in negotiating agreements and 
discussing options than that member ever did when he sat on 
that city council. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial Statements. Introduction of Bills. 
Orders of the . . . Why is the member from Regina Lakeview on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I have a ministerial statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview would 
request leave to revert back to ministerial statements after I 
called orders. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New Health Care Facility in Outlook 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize. I couldn’t quite 
hear that word through all of the din that was here, but thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m very pleased to rise today, Mr. Speaker, to tell the members 
of this Legislative Assembly that yesterday I had the great 
pleasure of announcing that a new integrated health care facility 
will be built in Outlook. In this budget year, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan Health is investing $400,000 for the planning 
stages of a new integrated health care facility in Outlook. The 
new facility will be attached to the existing Pioneer Home 

long-term care facility and will replace the existing Outlook 
Union Hospital. The result, Mr. Speaker, will be to provide 
better coordination of acute care, long-term care, home care, 
and a wide range of community services in one integrated 
health care facility. 
 
This project represents this government’s ongoing commitment 
to improving the quality and accessibility of health care in 
Saskatchewan. Our blueprint for change in the health care 
system was outlined in the Action Plan for Saskatchewan 
Health Care which the Premier and I were pleased to announce 
in December 2001. 
 
Since that time, Mr. Speaker, this government and 
Saskatchewan Health have made significant strides in achieving 
the goals outlined in the action plan. On March 28 of this year, 
Mr. Speaker, we announced our provincial budget for the 
coming year which included a $61 million investment over the 
next two years for new and upgraded health care facilities. This 
important commitment allows us to approve and support a 
number of new projects that are necessary to sustain our 
province’s health care system. 
 
The $400,000 investment by Saskatchewan Health that I 
announced yesterday builds on the work we have done with the 
Heartland Regional Health Authority to ensure that the new 
health care facility in Outlook was a capital priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project in Outlook represents an effective 
partnership among many groups in Outlook and the surrounding 
communities. The result, Mr. Speaker, will be improved access 
to high-quality health care for people in Outlook and the 
surrounding area. The new facility will also enhance the 
Heartland Regional Health Authority move toward a primary 
health care focus system. These are all important goals of our 
action plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new health care facility in Outlook will deliver 
a wide range of health care services all under one roof. It will 
not only benefit the residents in these facilities, but it will also 
provide an improved workplace for our valued health care 
providers that work in this region. 
 
The project is estimated to cost $4.6 million when completed, 
Mr. Speaker. The Government of Saskatchewan will continue 
to fund the next phases of this project until the new facility is 
completed and operational. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to our funding, the significant sum of 
$1.7 million has already been raised by the residents of Outlook 
and surrounding areas towards the community’s share of the 
project. This is a great gift by the people of the Outlook area 
and truly reflective of a strong community spirit that exists 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is due to the hard work of many community 
leaders and volunteers that made this announcement possible. 
Their dedication and persistence to see their vision become a 
reality is indeed a reflection of the true pioneering spirit of 
Saskatchewan people.  
 
That spirit exists in Outlook and area, and in all of our 
Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker. That spirit is about 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

people working together and finding innovative ways of 
overcoming obstacles. We see a need and find a solution by 
working together with our community partners. And this 
announcement is evidence of that. 
 
This community spirit is also about a set of values we all share, 
Mr. Speaker. They are the values of caring for others in our 
community and working together to make sure that such 
important services as health care are accessible to everyone, not 
just a privileged few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recognition also needs to be given to the board 
members and staff, past and present, of the Heartland Regional 
Health Authority and the former Midwest Health District, as 
well as the staff at Saskatchewan Health who supported this 
project from the beginning. 
 
We look forward to continuing to work with the Heartland 
Regional Health Authority and its community partners to 
develop the scope, cost, and design of the project as well as 
complete a functional program for the integrated health care 
facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the end result of this process will be a modern, 
attractive facility providing high-quality health care services to 
the residents of Outlook and surrounding area. This new 
integrated health care centre has been a priority for the people 
of Outlook for a long time, Mr. Speaker, and it’s finally become 
a reality. 
 
I am very pleased to be able to make this statement today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to reply 
to the minister’s statement. I happened to be with a councillor 
and the administrator yesterday when the news came to them 
that the project would be a go and to . . . Needless to say they 
were quite happy, as I can remember the last four years working 
to get this with the board and with the people in that area, the 
government funding at the end. 
 
Like the minister had stated, the people had raised a million 
seven and they had it raised for quite a few years. And that 
shows you the work and dedication over the number of years 
that the people in that area, the Outlook surrounding area, have 
done to raise that, to make that commitment for that hospital in 
that area. And the only thing really holding them back over a 
number of years was the government share, and I’m glad that 
they finally came through with that now in the area. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Outlook and the 
residents, they were very pleased with the announcement. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader on a point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise on a point of order to request that you review the Hansard 
record of today and make a ruling regarding remarks made by 
the hon. member for Saltcoats in the questions, when he was 
putting questions to the House in question period. 
 
I’m not absolutely certain, Mr. Speaker, of the precise words 
that he used, but the Hansard record will provide a very 
accurate and precise record of what the words he . . . were used. 
 
I apologize that in the noise in the House it was not possible for 
me to hear completely, precisely. But it is my belief, Mr. 
Speaker, that I heard the hon. member for Saltcoats make 
reference to the government member’s failure to tell the truth. 
And in the same question, Mr. Speaker, or just a moment later, 
a fabrication of the truth or of the facts, something of that 
nature. But clearly and deliberately the word fabrication was 
used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a long-standing practice of this House 
and all Houses in our practice of parliamentary democracy that 
it is most appropriate that we engage in passionate debate in this 
House — assuredly that is acceptable — but that what we do 
not do is engage in personal attacks and attacks in character. 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, it’s a long-standing tradition 
that reference to members’ honesty is not acceptable. There are 
ways of dealing with that if the hon. member bona fide holds 
that to be his belief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also point out that it is no more acceptable 
to do indirectly what one is not permitted to do directly by rules 
of the House. And I would argue that when one is not able to, 
by the rules of the House, to simply stand up and make an 
accusation of the honesty or integrity of a single member, no 
more are you permitted to do that of a collective number of 
members as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you would take these into 
consideration, review the Hansard record, and bring a ruling to 
the House. And I would humbly request that after having done 
so that you would request the hon. member for Saltcoats to 
withdraw his remarks and apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Speaking to the point of order, I recognize the 
member for Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, with permission to respond to 
that point of order. Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that what we 
have here is not a point of order. It’s a situation where no one 
seemed to hear anything. There was nothing definitive heard; 
they don’t know what they heard, and yet there’s a complaint 
put forward. It seems to me a whole lot more that this is trying 
to defend a situation where they found themselves in trouble in 
question period rather than anything specific. 
 
The reference was made to a personal attack. There were no 
personal attacks made there, Mr. Speaker. On this side of the 
House, we heard those statements. We were not engaged in a lot 
of noise making over here. We knew exactly what the 
statements were. The member’s criticism and his point of order 
are, I believe, not well taken at all, Mr. Speaker. 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

 

The Speaker: — I thank both members for their comments. I 
will take a look at the record and bring back a ruling on that 
issue in . . . at an appropriate time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
to stand today on behalf of the government and respond to 
written questions nos. 718 through 720 inclusive, being an open 
and honest government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 718, 719, and 720 
have been submitted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand and convert 721 for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 721 converted to orders for 
returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — And I would recognize the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m pleased today to be joined by Bob Kary, who is our director 
of young offenders, community programs, in the Department of 
Corrections and Public Safety. Seated behind Mr. Kary is Betty 
Ann Pottruff, the executive director of policy planning and 
evaluation with the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
And welcome, ministers and staff. 
 
To the minister through the Chair, we have a number of 
questions on this Bill. There seems to be an awful lot of 
vagaries within this Bill. So if you would indulge me, we do 
have quite a series of questions that we would like to ask. 
 
But before we get into the specifics, could the minister provide 
us with the basis and the background for this particular Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the federal government 
has responsibility overall for youth justice. What they have 
done is undertaken to replace the Young Offenders Act with the 
Youth Criminal Justice Act federally. This particular piece of 
provincial legislation enables us to carry out the administration 
of that Act within the province. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This Act is a 
very broad and sweeping piece of federal legislation that will 
have quite an impact on jurisdictions across the country. Yet it’s 

our understanding that the federal government purposely left 
the details and implementation of the federal Act up to 
individual provinces. 
 
Could the minister please clarify for us how the proposed 
legislation in front of us today will facilitate that legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the Act in front of us 
largely is enabling from the federal legislation. The member is 
correct, there are a number of areas that have had options built 
into them provincially that we have exercised our discretion on. 
 
If I might say overall, though, this Act really allows us to 
continue on with running the youth facilities. It allows us the 
authority to put into place determinations around open and 
secure custody, to deal with alternative measures programming. 
 
One of the key issues that we have had some debate about in 
this province is around the presumptive age issue. This has been 
in the news to some extent. This is the point at which we 
determine whether a youth would be eligible for adult 
sentences. The federal legislation was not prescriptive in this. 
Obviously when a person turns 18 they’re automatically 
considered for that. Under the Young Offenders Act the age had 
been set at 16 and there was an ability under this legislation to 
move that down to 14. 
 
The Saskatchewan cabinet had decided to reduce that age to 14. 
We thought that was in better keeping with the provincial 
communities’ response and request for us to deal with young 
offenders in a serious way. 
 
I want to say to this Assembly that I am deeply disappointed 
with the approach taken by my federal colleague not to appeal 
the Quebec court’s opinion that these presumptive age issues 
should be reset at 16 and not at 14. This is not a position the 
Saskatchewan government agrees with. I would argue it is not a 
position that Saskatchewan people agree with. And I have 
written to the federal minister to outline our serious concern 
with this, and we will take this up with him and our federal 
counterparts at the ministers’ meeting this fall. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Prior to this 
Bill being brought forward, what kind of discussion or 
consultation or review took place, and with whom? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the consultation around 
the Youth Criminal Justice Act occurred at the federal level and 
so there were, as I understand, federal-provincial discussions 
about this. There were discussions that the federal government 
undertook with various stakeholders throughout the province. 
 
Obviously we have had a number of discussions over the past 
years we’ve been preparing for this, with different groups, 
various community-based organizations, service providers, 
Aboriginal groups, law enforcement officials, these different 
organizations. We’ve talked within the routine course of 
preparing for the transition from Young Offenders Act to the 
YCJA (Youth Criminal Justice Act). 
 
But the key decisions around what went into the Act were 
determined by the federal government and so they were largely 
— well entirely — undertaken by the federal administration. 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

This is one of the complicated pieces as we deal with criminal 
justice, is that of course the legislation and the codes are set out 
federally but administration of these Acts falls to us 
provincially. 
 
So this Act before us today really enables us to carry out the 
programming and services, but doesn’t make the determination 
as to what are criminal offences, or in a large part why there 
would be different provisions for youth as opposed to older 
offenders. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I take 
from that that the consultation that has been done was 
predominantly at the federal level with various jurisdictions. 
But did I gather from your comments that after the federal 
legislation was passed that there was no consultation in this 
province with stakeholders; that the Bill was produced without 
any further consultation? It was just totally based on the federal 
government’s Bill? Or my question goes back to was — after 
the federal government established and passed this Bill — was 
there consultation within the province with reference to the Bill 
before we come up with this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, in fact there was 
consultation after the federal Bill was introduced and passed 
that we undertook, largely around the operational issues and 
some of the options that we had to exercise here. Certainly one 
of the most significant sets of discussion was this question of 
presumptive age, the lowering from 16 to 14. 
 
I anticipate the member’s next question will be to understand 
better what the result of that was. I can say that in general there 
was support for reducing the age from the 16 to 14, with this 
one important segment opposed; the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and the First Nations and 
Aboriginal Justice Reform Commission do not support the 
reduction of the presumptive age. They have made that very 
clear to me as Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
I have had this discussion with them on a number of occasions 
and while I appreciate their view, it is the view of the cabinet 
and of myself that the lowering of the age from 16 to 14 was 
within the keeping of what the provincial interest was. There 
were a number of other discussions that we had around how to 
deal with more of the alternative measures programs that were 
dealt with. It allowed us another opportunity to talk to 
stakeholder groups about how youth justice was dealt with. 
 
While I am certainly critical of the approach the federal 
government has taken on the presumptive age and the decision 
not to appeal the Quebec Court of Appeal’s decision, I am 
nevertheless pleased that the federal parliament has replaced the 
Young Offenders Act. And I think, as members in this 
Assembly have said during second reading debates and the 
discussion that we’ve had on this side, we’re very pleased that 
the Young Offenders Act has been replaced. It was an 
ineffective Act. 
 
The Youth Criminal Justice Act that was passed federally is, I 
believe, a step forward. But there are a number of things that we 
are going to have to work with Ottawa on to make sure that this 
Bill does not fall off the rails like YOA (Young Offenders Act) 
did, not the least of which is the question around how we deal 

with the fact that we are seeing increased prevalence of criminal 
behaviour in younger people who may be outside of this age 
ring. I’m talking in this particular case about the 12 and unders. 
 
We need to be very clear as to how we are going to deal with 
serious, chronic repeat offenders within the youth population to 
make sure that they are dealt with appropriately. But at the 
other hand, that we not overreact and that we make sure that 
there’s a sufficient amount of resources put in to deal with 
alternative measures. 
 
In this regard the federal government has done, I believe, a poor 
job of meeting their responsibility to make sure that the funding 
is available to deal with the alternative measures programming. 
The ability for us to fund alternative measures to keep young 
people who first come into contact with the law enforcement 
agencies, move them out of the system to a more corrected 
behaviour, is a positive thing within the Act. But that will only 
be achieved if we see the resources put into it. And this is an 
ongoing piece of discussion that we’re having with the federal 
ministers that if they anticipate . . . if they really want this Act 
to work, they’re going to have to commit the resources to doing 
it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think I have a 
couple of questions later on in my questioning with regard to 
funding. But more immediately my question was, originally 
here, what kind of discussion or consultation and with whom 
did the department speak to before bringing this Bill forward? 
 
And initially I understood you to say that it was under the 
federal level. And then when I questioned again, you said, yes 
you have, since the federal government passed the Bill, that in 
fact you have had consultations here within the province. And I 
believe you mentioned FSIN. And I believe that was the only 
one you mentioned. 
 
So I’ll just want to refer back to my question and ask what 
groups that you consulted with in this province prior to putting 
this Bill forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, we’re running into a bit 
of a . . . tripping over the word of, consultation. The federal 
consultations that were undertaken were largely imported into 
the discussions that we had in this Bill, in that the consultations 
that happened around the federal Bill, obviously we participated 
in and were aware of the responses to. Those were largely 
incorporated into how we dealt with this Bill. 
 
But there were, as the member had previously pointed out, a 
number of discretionary issues that we did additional 
consultation on. The groups that we would have consulted in 
that case were in fact the FSIN. I think I met personally with at 
least two other tribal councils; the First Nations and Aboriginal 
Justice Reform Commission; the Children’s Advocate was 
involved. We have done, as we were preparing for the 
changeover, met with the existing set of stakeholders that we 
have throughout the department offering programming. 
 
I would not characterize those necessarily as thorough 
consultations. They were largely focused on operationalizing 
the federal Act. 
 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

 

And so I hope that that better clarifies the approach, that the 
federal government largely did the consultation on the big 
changes. We then talked more with groups about the 
discretionary issues that we had to deal with and the operational 
issues. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Where I was 
kind of going with this and I’m coming to it later and I just 
can’t find it right now in my questions, but there’s a huge issue 
on FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) and FAE (fetal alcohol 
effects). And I’ll come back to that, but that’s why I’m asking 
the questions if you met with stakeholders such as people and 
discussed those two issues. But I want to come back to that with 
a little bit more thorough question later. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s our understanding that some of the changes 
are more significant changes when comparing the old Act to the 
new federal Act. There’s significantly less incarceration time 
for seemingly less serious offences, while the more serious ones 
will be looked at with a combination of incarceration and 
intensive rehabilitation and reintegration programs. 
 
How specifically will this differ with what’s being done before? 
And how will this legislation provide for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member is largely correct that the 
Bill does seem to refocus in two directions. One is it provides 
the enforcement agencies and the province with more tools to 
deal with young offenders who are new to the system, in a large 
part, or committing what are considered less serious offences. 
 
On the other hand, it provides us with a new set of tools to also 
what I would call, in a targeted way, get tough with chronic, 
repeat offenders. 
 
If we take a look at the example here in the city of Regina 
where we have a strong commitment to community policing by 
the local police force, we have seen that by using those kind of 
resources more effectively, where the community policing 
works on the ground, we have more discretion available to the 
police and to prosecutors, to youth services, to make sure that 
first-time offenders, people that are young offenders that are 
involved in less serious crime, are dealt with in a way that 
reintegrates them back into the community by correcting or 
adjusting the unhealthy behaviour that they have. 
 
(14:45) 
 
That’s one group. On the other hand what we have also found 
— and this was not well addressed by Young Offenders Act but 
is better addressed under this model — is our ability to get 
tough with the chronic repeat offenders. This was certainly the 
approach that we took with the auto theft strategy here in 
Regina, both phases one and two 
 
Interestingly, the study that was done on this showed that where 
we were dealing with alternative measures for first-time 
offenders or relatively low-risk offenders through a 
community-based model, that we in fact had a very low rate of 
recidivism. The study in fact showed that of the 70 young 
people involved in auto theft that were referred to alternative 
measures, that only 8 of them reoffended — which is a 
tremendous success when you think that recidivism rates are 

usually in the 50 to 60 per cent range. 
 
On the other hand what we were able to do with the chronic 
offenders is make better use of tools to make sure that they had 
intensive supervision, that custody was employed in a secure 
way, secure custody was utilized where appropriate. And in 
fact, of the numbers, 30, 35 chronic repeat offenders that were 
involved in auto theft, I think today — I haven’t seen the note 
for this week — but there would still be 18 to 20 of them who 
are in secure custody. 
 
I use that as an illustration of the two different ways that this set 
of changes enables us to deal with youth — on the one hand 
with a more active way to reintegrate into the community; on 
the other hand a targeted get-tough approach with chronic 
repeat offenders. 
 
That’s the premise behind this Bill. The trick to making it work 
is to make sure the resources are employed appropriately and to 
make sure that we understand which category youth fall in. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I totally 
agree. The resources being in place is a very key element of 
arresting crime in our province. But, Mr. Minister, from what 
you just explained, we could do all of that prior to this 
legislation; is that not correct? 
 
And what I am failing to see is what this legislation is going to 
do different because all of that stuff that you referred to was in 
the past. We’ve done that, and I applaud the work that’s been 
done in the car theft dealings here in the city of Regina. But 
we’ve been able to do that. And this legislation, I don’t see how 
and where this legislation actually enhances that because we’ve 
been able to do all of those things that you just mentioned. And 
I’m wondering if there’s . . . if I’m missing something in this 
Bill that says now we can go forward and do more, and I don’t 
see that in the Bill. And I wonder if you’d explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There are in fact two significant 
differences in this Bill as opposed to young offenders that the 
member has alluded to. First of all is it puts a greater, much 
greater, emphasis on using alternative measures which Young 
Offenders Act did not deal as much with. 
 
The second piece is this does provide us with a new set of tools 
to deal with these chronic repeat offenders by allowing us to 
bring them back into custody, into secure custody in the case 
that they have not kept the terms of their release or have not 
been dealt with appropriately. 
 
It is, it provides the province with more tools to get tough on 
these chronic repeat offenders of which, of course there’s a very 
small number of, but they’re certainly the ones who I think 
capture the public attention and cause a great deal of concern 
about rising crime among young people. 
 
If I might say Saskatchewan has of course a fairly tough 
approach to dealing with youth crime; we take it very seriously. 
This is a concern throughout communities. And what we need 
to make sure is, is we work with communities under this new 
Bill, that we are able to build in place, community by 
community, the type of programming and supports that the 
police in that area need or the local community groups, or the 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

city councils, seek. So this gives us some flexibility and 
alternative measures to do that, but it still provides us with a 
good provincial regime on the chronic repeat offenders. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just for 
clarification purposes, could you explain what defines open 
custody, secure custody, and I think temporary detention is 
self-explanatory, but the three of those phrases that are used in 
the Bill, just to try and explain the differences between those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To answer the question, there are three types of custody that are 
used, the first being temporary which is, as the member alludes 
to, like remand. This is largely what the facility in Saskatoon 
deals with at Kilburn Hall where they are kept until their court 
dates. 
 
The second option is where we would have open custody. This 
tends to be, in the vernacular, like a halfway house. The 
program is carried on outside of the,. outside of the facility. The 
youth would participate in normal schools in the community. 
They may participate in programming outside of, outside of the 
facility, but they would still be resident at that facility. 
 
The final type is secure custody which is like Dojack here in 
Regina, where the programming is inside. The youth are held in 
a secure environment and not . . . except in special 
programming situations, don’t have direct contact outside of 
that facility. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there any 
basic difference between using these three terms under the 
YOA and under the new Youth Criminal Justice Act or are they 
basically the same under both Acts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — They’re basically the same. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, one of the concerns that 
has been brought repeatedly to our attention is that the new 
federal legislation’s focus on intensive rehab and reintegration 
programs, as we talked about and you mentioned, is funding. 
Yet this proposed legislation that deals directly with 
administration of the federal Act, there’s no mention of 
increasing resources or funding. Could you comment on this? 
 
Again, I know you started to talk about funding earlier. Is the 
federal government putting funding in, or where is the funding 
going to come from for these programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There is in fact a federal-provincial 
sharing cost funding agreement that we deal with. The federal 
government provides about 17 cents on the dollar, one seven 
cents on the dollar in terms of support up to a cap. 
 
As we were dealing with this, anticipating the increased 
demand on community-based organizations and the funding 
arrangements that are going to have to be put in place, we did 
this year redirect from other departments funding into these 
services. 
 
The member will recall in our discussion on estimates that it 
ends up being about 3.4 million that we used a special warrant 
for recently and of course have redirected in this existing 

expenditure year. 
 
So that’s the cost in terms of what we’re dealing with for some 
of this. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. During the 
transition period between the two systems, what kind of 
problems or issues so far have been identified and how will this 
particular legislation impact on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We’re fortunate to be able to have time 
to deal with the officials that we work with throughout the 
province, through different organizations, to do a lot of training 
to get ready for the new Act, the new provisions, and as such 
has been quite seamless. There has not been a great number of 
concerns out of this and it’s really worked quite smoothly. So 
there’s nothing I could report to the member or to the Assembly 
that sticks out as being a particular problem. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Section 4 of 
the Bill concerns facilities and that it says: 
 

The minister may (and I quote) establish, maintain and 
operate any facilities that . . . (are considered) advisable to 
provide for necessary custody, detention, support and 
education of persons to whom youth justice services are 
provided. 

 
How many facilities for youth justice services are there in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, there are about 12 
locations that we have for facilities and they’re split evenly 
between open and secure custody. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, with the new legislation 
aiming for less incarceration and more rehab and reintegration 
within the community, is there . . . do you foresee a need that 
some of these facilities may have to be adapted, changed to 
accommodate the new legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think in some ways, Mr. Chairman, 
it’s a little too early to tell. There does seem to be a slight 
decrease in terms of the number of youth involved who are 
incarcerated. Whether that is a direct result of this Bill or other 
actions that have been taken, it’s too early to tell; and whether 
that’s sustainable or not, again it’s a bit early. 
 
It does appear though that there seems to be a bit of a 
downward trend over the past year for that. It’s something we’ll 
have to take a look at as we move forward. But at this point I 
don’t anticipate it’ll have a significant impact on the array of 
facilities that we have throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I take from that, Mr. Minister, that 
there’s no plans to establish any new facilities to accommodate 
the changes required? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We’re not anticipating that there would 
be a need for new facilities to be built. There is an ongoing 
question in the northern part of the province as to how we deal 
with youth who become involved with the system there and 
whether in fact we should consider some kind of a youth secure 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

 

or open youth facility in the near north area. This is not on the 
planning agenda for the next I’d say 24-36 months, although I 
have had discussions with northern mayors about this at the 
round table. Our view is that the facilities that are in place now 
are generally well suited for the size of the youth population 
that we’re dealing with. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Section 5 
refers to youth justice services, specifically the establishment 
and providing of such services and the entering into of 
arrangements with various people or agencies to provide such 
services. 
 
Again since the new federal legislation aims for less 
incarceration and less . . . for less serious offences, is it the 
government’s belief that current youth justice services as they 
exist in Saskatchewan are sufficient to meet the increased 
demands of the new federal Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this provision in section 
5 . . . clause 5 of the Act deals with our ability to provide 
funding to community-based organizations as the member has 
indicated. These deliver a lot of the programming that young 
people will be involved in. 
 
There’s always been pressure on us for additional funding in 
these areas. And what we will need to continue to monitor is 
how closely the . . . or how much funding we can dedicate into 
these community-based organizations as we look at the impact 
of the Act. 
 
Part of this will deal with policing. Part of this will deal with 
the response of the courts. There’s certainly pressure on us in 
some parts of Saskatoon to look at other alternative measures 
programs. But that’s largely what this section deals with. 
 
If the member’s asking, is there sufficient funds there now, I 
would say, yes, that we are able to carry forward with most of 
the programming. Is there demand for more funds? Yes, there’s 
significant . . . there are significant new programs we could 
introduce if we had more money available to us. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you 
explain or advise how many justice service programs are 
available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that the answer 
is lots. And we can endeavour to get a . . . endeavour to get a 
list. We have 18 different communities with offices that are 
represented. Each of those would have a number of different 
community-based organizations they would deal with. I can 
endeavour to get a list although I don’t have it with me here 
today. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Battleford-Cut 
Knife. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
minister and his officials for giving us the opportunity to 
introduce the school that’s attending here today. 
 
Mr. Chair, through you and to the members of the Assembly I 
would like to introduce 12 grade 7 students from the school of 
Chief Mistawasis from Leask that are in your east gallery. They 
are here with teachers and chaperones, Janelle Badger, Deanne 
Johnstone, Nick Postnikoff, Linda Johnstone. They are here to 
view proceedings this afternoon and have also taken a bit of a 
tour of the Legislative Building, and I’ll be meeting with them 
later. 
 
So if you join me in welcoming them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I’d like to introduce guests, with leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members of the 
legislature, I’d like as well to join the member in regards to 
introducing here the students from — and the teachers and 
chaperones — from Mistawasis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, and members, I would like to say 
a few words in Cree. And of course in Cree we say Ta wow, 
you know, for you’re welcome to the legislature. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
It is always a tremendous pleasure to have members, you know, 
of First Nations, you know, come over to the House and see the 
proceedings of the House. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
We thank you for coming over. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Chair 
of Committees. I also would like to welcome the group to the 
legislature this afternoon. What we’re doing right now is called 
Committee of the Whole. And this is where we debate a Bill 
prior to its final reading and we have the opportunity to 
question the minister and his officials about the contents of the 
Bill. And that’s the process we’re going through right at the 
moment. 
 
Mr. Minister, a number of well-known and highly regarded 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

public figures have expressed their concerns that the current 
programs and services available for young offenders have fallen 
far short of meeting the needs of this group. And they say the 
young people suffering from the effects of FAS and FAE are 
simply not receiving the levels of programs and services within 
the justice system they require. 
 
And we talked about . . . I mentioned a little earlier about FAS 
and FAE, but with respect to this section — section 5 — there 
is no mention of this and I’m wondering why. It seems like a 
little bit vague and open-ended but I’m really wondering why 
there’s no mention of programming for FAS and FAE in this 
section. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, one of the reasons we 
have not specifically articulated FAS/FAE/FASD (fetal alcohol 
syndrome/fetal alcohol effects/fetal alcohol spectrum disorder) 
as within this particular Bill is largely because we don’t 
articulate our programming in the legislation for any one 
particular illness. We also would not deal with a particular 
treatment for schizophrenia or other addictions or these kind of 
issues. 
 
We have in fact over the last number of years been working 
with our officials within the youth system to be able to better 
identify and deal with children with FAS/FAE/FASD problems. 
 
Identification of this is often a difficult thing and there tends to 
have been — as I understand — within the system debate over 
the past several years as to what might have been previously 
diagnosed as attention deficit disorder may now in fact be better 
described as FASD condition. So part of what we’ve been doing 
is working on a professional basis with people, with youth 
workers to better identify the needs. 
 
The programming laid out within the system is one that doesn’t 
deal with youth in a categorical way but rather deals with the 
treatment plans on a one-to-one basis. For instance, where there 
is not an FASD situation, it may be needing to have a tailored 
education program, tailored employment program, behaviour 
management issues, anger management, addictions issues. 
These are largely dealt with in a very sophisticated way and an 
individual way within the system. 
 
So that is why we have not articulated specifically treatment or 
resources to this although it is very much an issue that we are 
aware of. 
 
Part of what is happening now within the youth justice 
community is trying to get a better understanding on the 
numbers and the treatment options for this. We could get into 
quite a long discussion in here, I think, about what is 
appropriate, but it’s generally accepted that a highly regimented 
and a standardized routine is helpful in terms of dealing with 
this particular . . . or managing the behaviour of children with 
FAS- or FAE-type conditions. 
 
So we haven’t articulated here. We are nevertheless certainly 
aware of it and we’re working with the health services 
community on ways to deal with it within the correctional 
system and then also on a community-based approach. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, because this is 

a problem — FAS/FAE — as we know about. A lot of these 
young people really don’t realize that they’re doing anything 
wrong. And there’s definitely treatment that’s required. 
 
I’ve had some dealings with FAS/FAE and if we just simply 
lock them up and follow the rules that are laid down — as I see 
in the new justice Act they’re treated just like the other inmates 
— and they’re not receiving maybe the corrective services or 
the services that they might need. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, this also goes along with other aspects of our 
youth society also, like there’s an overrepresentation of 
Aboriginal youth within our justice system and how are we 
going to specifically deal with that? And I don’t think this Bill 
covers that. 
 
And also with our addictions. And we know that the youth 
addictions centres are totally inadequate. I know we’ve 
addressed this in the House the last couple of years. And I think 
the Health minister had suggested there was 12 beds available, 
and we’ve received something in the neighbourhood of 4,000 
calls per year. So it’s something that really needs to be 
addressed. 
 
And as we know, how it relates to this Bill is that individuals 
that are involved in addictions, a lot of time they receive their 
money or get their money through acts of crime. 
 
And so it’s an overriding problem here that could be dealt with, 
in some respects, within this Bill but I don’t see anything in this 
Bill that addresses any of these particular issues. And I’m 
wondering if the minister would comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member raises three very 
important issues. And perhaps I’ll just deal with them in, well 
as it turns out, alphabetical order, so starting with Aboriginal 
youth which he raises. 
 
We are very committed to using extrajudicial measures to make 
sure that as we establish safe communities throughout the 
province, the young people, particularly as they start to come in 
to dealing with criminal behaviour, as they start to show that 
criminal behaviour, that we can deal with them upfront in a 
proactive manner at a community-based level to try and keep 
them out of the correctional system. 
 
This is in fact one of the benefits of this legislation is it allows 
us to use more of those extrajudicial sanctions — sanctions 
outside of the normal custodial facilities. This will be a very 
important piece as we work with police and prosecutors to 
figure out how to deal with this. And it is going to be one that 
has to be community tailor-made. 
 
For example, here in Regina we’ve used the auto theft strategy. 
We’ve talked about that. That’s been very successful in dealing 
with inner-city youth who have problems or, in the case of 
Regina’s specific situation, First Nation youth who may come 
into the city and become involved in these kind of behaviours. 
 
In a community like North Battleford that I’ve had the 
opportunity to work with over the past year as they try to deal 
with issues there, we have taken a very proactive approach to 
dealing with the council, the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

 

Police), the Battlefords Tribal Council, in finding solutions that 
work with them. 
 
The Battlefords have an excellent facility there at Drumming 
Hill youth camp, youth facility, that is very helpful in terms of 
finding both cultural programming, recreational programming, 
educational programming to deal with Aboriginal youth. 
 
We’ve been working with the community of North Battleford 
. . . or sorry, of Meadow Lake. We’re looking at working with 
Yorkton. Saskatoon is another community. Each of these 
though we need to take a look at the resources available within 
the community to find an approach that works with the elders, 
with the cultural community there, with the policing 
environment, and to deal with it. 
 
This Act, I would disagree with the member in . . . I may agree 
with him that it is mute on it, but it nevertheless facilitates that 
approach we’ve been taking. And I think that if we see this 
trend line continuing to go down in terms of number of youth 
involved with the . . . incarcerated, that we’ll find that that is in 
fact one of the reasons why this is successful. 
 
(15:15) 
 
On the question of addiction, the member is correct that we 
have a difference of opinion in the Assembly as to how to deal 
with youth addictions. It is not our view that a significant 
increase in the number of in-patient spots should be available 
for youth. We prefer to deal with that through the health 
districts in an outpatient community-based approach. 
 
I appreciate there’s a philosophical difference between 
members on how we should deal with it. It’s our belief that this 
is one . . . our approach on this side, the NDP approach, is better 
supported by the community-based organizations and in fact is 
in better keeping with treatment plans for individual youth. I 
appreciate the members opposite have a different view and I’m 
sure we can debate that. 
 
On the issue of FASD and youth who are incarcerated, in fact 
we have a very . . . I would disagree with the member if his 
assertion was that we do not have special programming in place 
to deal with them. We do in fact deal with FAE, FAS, these 
FASD conditions on a case-by-case basis within the facilities. 
 
These are very . . . They require very intensive and tailored 
programs for the individual. But one of the difficulties is that it 
is very hard for us to, in many cases, identify who the youth are. 
 
FASD disorders, as the member will know, there’s a spectrum 
within them. And so there are varying degrees of 
dysfunctionality associated with the youth and we need to make 
sure the programs are there. 
 
I would argue that one of the biggest difficulties we are going to 
have as we see more FASD children go through the system is, 
first of all, making sure that we can identify them before 
criminal behaviour becomes an issue. I think too much of the 
fact is that it’s being caught by the judicial system, and not first 
of all in the health and community systems themselves. So 
we’re going to need to work on that to make sure upfront, 
before criminal behaviour is displayed, that we can deal with it. 

Secondly, the youth justice system is not designed for long-term 
care. We just do not have a . . . That’s not the purpose of this 
Act. It’s not the philosophy behind the Bill. And so we are 
going to have to, as a community, as a . . . beyond just the 
justice system, think about how we deal with young offenders 
or young people who have this condition so that they can be 
dealt with in the community. 
 
I’m not a believer that simply as they grow older that they’ll 
age into the adult correction system and that we’ll be able to 
house them in the jails and the penitentiaries. I think that that 
would be a wrong-headed way of dealing with it. This is a 
challenge that we have and we’re going to have to work with 
community-based organizations to identify that more 
accurately. 
 
Those are the comments I would offer. I appreciate the 
member’s note that it is not specifically addressed in here but in 
fact the Act overall sets the groundwork for us to deal with each 
of these problems. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I agree, 
in, especially in the FAS, FAE cases, and all of the cases that 
you have described, if we can get treatment prior to the justice 
system getting a hold of these young individuals we’d be far 
better off as a society as far as I’m concerned. Again because I 
believe an awful lot of these young people with FAS or FAE 
probably don’t understand even why they’re incarcerated, what 
they have done wrong. And so if we can keep them out of the 
judicial system we’d be far better off. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, I’m glad that you said we agree to 
disagree on the addictions. 
 
And you may be aware that over the last couple of years I’ve 
been spending a fair bit of time working with youth addictions 
and looking at programs and where they’ve worked in other 
jurisdictions. And I would like to see us switch our focus a little 
bit more in this province on youth addictions and how to treat 
them. But as you said we will agree to disagree on how to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Minister, section 8 deals with youth workers and yet there 
is little definition of what a youth worker actually is. Could you 
clarify what specifically youth workers will be required to do 
and what kind of background or credentials they will need? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — With permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to, 
on behalf of the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
from Kelvington-Wadena who is at another meeting right now, 
to introduce a number of students in the east gallery — from 
Naicam, 20 students, grade 11s and 12s. 
 
They’re here with their teacher Ed de Gooijerand they’re 
visiting Regina and the Legislative buildings. And they’re going 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

to spend some time just watching what happens here and do a 
tour of the building and get their photo taken. And I’m going to 
have the privilege of meeting with them for a short period of 
time at about 3:45. 
 
So would all members join me in welcoming these grade 11 and 
12 students from Naicam to our Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I of 
course want to join with the members opposite in welcoming 
the students here today, as they have an opportunity to watch us 
discuss in detail the youth justice services Act which is before 
the legislature right now, where we’re going through on a 
clause by clause basis the discussions. 
 
The member opposite has asked me about provisions under 
section 8 regarding youth workers and what these youth in fact 
do . . . or youth workers do. These workers really do a number 
of different things. 
 
This is a broad category that we would use. They may be 
involved in everything from assessment to case planning, 
supervision, after-custody work with youth; they are often 
involved with interagency work. It’s a bit of a catch-all category 
that we use, but it allows us to certify who they are. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And what kind 
of a background or credentials are required by these youth 
workers? It might be a question you may not be able to answer 
but wondering how many youth workers there are in the 
province? If that’s a fair question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised that there are 104 youth 
workers in the . . . 104 youth workers in the province. The 
minimum requirement is that they have a degree in social work 
and they do, as well as obviously having experience in dealing 
with young people. And we would deal with additional 
requirements depending on what the type of program they’d be 
involved with. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When we look 
at the new federal legislation and the legislation that’s before us 
now, and looking at less incarceration time, is there an 
anticipated increase in the numbers of youth workers or will we 
be just maintaining the 104? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, of the 104 youth 
workers, 15 of those have been added as we prepared for this 
new legislation. So in fact there was some ramp-up on that. 
 
I should also note that this does not include the youth workers 
within facilities, the folks that are involved in the custody 
facilities. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is it the 
department’s practice to conduct criminal record checks on 
those who will be working with those individuals who are at an 
impressionable age and who are already at risk? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, yes we do. Both with 
workers, these youth workers that would be noted in the Act, 
but we also undertake record checks with employees of 
community-based organizations that would be dealing with 
youth that we would have under our care. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Going on to 
section 12, it deals with separate detention in that when a young 
person is taken into custody he or she is to be held separate and 
apart from adults who are also in custody. Given the facilities 
that currently exist in the province, what specific provisions are 
in place at each of these facilities that will allow this to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Throughout the province, Mr. 
Chairman, we actually have separate facilities for youth with 
the one exception being in Prince Albert where we have the 
facility divided so that youth are not, not kept together. P.A. 
(Prince Albert) is the one exception where we have a joint use 
facility but in fact it is separated so the youth do not come in 
contact with adult offenders. 
 
Otherwise in Regina and the Battlefords, Saskatoon, Yorkton, 
other locations throughout the province, the youth are housed in 
separate facilities completely where there is no joint use. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Section 13 
refers to trust funds for young offenders. Under what 
circumstances might one, one of these occur? How will they be 
administered and who will be taking care of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that this is a 
new provision under this Act that wasn’t previously in place 
under Young Offenders Act. The trust funds would normally be 
in a couple of different categories: one where there’s been an 
estate left for youth; the other being a case where a youth may 
have some funds of their own that need to be administered 
while they are in custody. 
 
The administration is carried out by CPS (Corrections and 
Public Safety) staff and within a set of rules are established and 
available to the Provincial Auditor. They are, as I’m told, 
relatively standard in their provisions. And although there are 
some of these funds, it’s not . . . it would be an abnormal 
circumstance for us to see youth with these trust funds. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have no more 
questions for this Bill but I would like to thank you and your 
staff for the answers provided today. And with that I have no 
more questions, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I want to thank the member opposite for his questions and the 
officials for their help today, and I would move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Hon. members, please come to order in 
the Committee of Whole. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
assembled officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you. I hope we’re all well 
assembled today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
With me, sitting immediately to my left is Ms. Mary Ellen 
Wellsch, who’s the general counsel for the Information Services 
Corporation. And to her left is Mr. Allan Jensen, who’s the 
deputy controller of surveys for the Information Services 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
officials today. The first question that I would have has to do 
with . . . in terms of section 2, in the area of legal land 
description. 
 
What is being changed here and why? As I look on the Act to 
amend The Land Surveys Act, 2000, we get a number of 
descriptions within the amendment under section 2, but 
township, range, and section don’t seem to be included here. 
 
So that question then is in two parts. What is being changed 
here, and why? And if the old . . . Is the old system at all being 
excluded, and if so, why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, no, the way of describing land is not being changed. 
And if land is described on a title using the quarter section, and 
the section, and the township, and the reference to the range, 
and so on, that still would be the case. 
 
But a definition is added to the legislation defining the words 
legal description simply because those words have never been 
defined in legislation, although there are several pieces of 
legislation that use those words legal description. And this 
simply provides a definition of what legal description means. 
 
And in terms of this Bill, the Bill says that section 2 is amended 
to add a definition of legal description with respect to a parcel 
and says it means: 
 

the land description that is designated for the parcel on a 
plan and that includes: 
 

And so on. And presently if you have land that is described by a 
quarter section number in the usual way, that would be the land 
description designated for that parcel on a plan. And that’s 
simply . . . The definition of legal description simply says that is 
the legal description and it includes: 
 

in the case of a parcel on an approved plan, the number that 

the Controller assigned to the plan on approving the plan 
 
So it includes the number, but the number doesn’t replace the 
existing description of the land; and in the case of a parcel of 
land of survey that was filed or registered in the land titles 
office and so on, the registration number of the plan of survey, 
so that the registration number is also a part of the description. 
 
So in other words if you had a land, the northwest quarter of 
section 3 in township 5, west of the third meridian — that 
would be part of the legal description; the number that the 
controller has assigned to the plan would be part of the legal 
description; and the registration number would be part of the 
legal description. So all of those things would form part of the 
legal description and so on. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — To the minister. Possibly you could explain 
to the Assembly the need for the addition of this further 
descriptive term in a numerical value and what was the 
rationality on including this. Was it linked to the . . . for the 
computer system that was going to be handling this 
information? 
 
It seems that we had a system that worked well here for a good 
number of decades. What is the reason to have an addition of a 
legal description — in this case, this numerical formation — 
and could you possibly provide parallel jurisdictions that have 
also added this legal description if it has been void in other 
areas. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The reason, Mr. Chair, for the 
numerical description to be added is partly to accommodate the 
computerization of the system. But it’s more than that in the 
sense that if you’re dealing with a parcel of land that is farm 
land, let’s say, and you’re dealing with the northwest quarter 
and so on, that description will never be repeated so you don’t 
have a problem. You only have one northwest quarter of section 
5 in township 31, west of the third meridian. 
 
But that is not true with respect to some urban properties. You 
may have in Saskatoon, let’s say, lot 1 on block 2, plan GU501, 
and there may be a repetition of that in another municipality, in 
an urban municipality. So that for the urbans especially, you 
want to have the numerical number which will be unique to 
each piece of property to differentiate between lot 1 on block 2 
in Saskatoon and lot 1 on block 2 somewhere else. 
 
And it ensures that there is a unique number with respect to 
each piece of land in Saskatchewan, but that would not be as 
important for farm land, like I say, as land in urban centres. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The next question 
I would have is with regards to this new numerical number 
being designated in the description of a property. Is the 
description of a property now legally void without that new 
designation? As well, having also you’ve said, the old ones 
were complete prior — this is an addition. Is it still legally 
binding if you had the prior ones only and the new one has been 
excluded, for whatever reason, on whatever kind of transaction 
may transpire? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. If it was not included, Mr. Chair, it 
would not affect the legality of a transaction or a title or 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

anything like that. The way this clause is worded: 
 

‘legal description’, with respect to a parcel, means: 
 

(and then) the land description that is designated for the 
parcel on a plan and . . . includes (these numbers or) . . . 
the registration number of the plan of survey; 

 
And I think every plan of survey has a registration number now. 
So it could be one or the other. So if you didn’t have the one — 
the numerical number, the nine-digit number, I think it is — 
you would certainly have the other in any event. You’d have the 
registration number that now exists on every title in the land 
titles system. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The nine-digit 
registration number, does this digit, does the numerical value of 
this correlate with the global positioning system to be able to 
take that number and just derive from that exactly which piece 
of . . . which parcel is representative on the map? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No it does not relate to that; it’s a 
completely random number. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well that leads to the next question. Who 
did the department consult with in making these proposed 
changes with regards to having this numerical allocation or 
demarcation as being a new part of the legality of property and 
having this number being absolutely random? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To ask for 
leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(15:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Today we have very special guests in the west gallery. We have 
the mayor of Pinehouse, Cecile Caisse, who’s visiting the city 
today. And with Cecile is her daughter Corrine. And of course, 
with both these fine ladies is my brand new assistant, Tyrone. 
 
I’d like to ask all the members of the Assembly to make 
welcome a very strong developer and fighter of northern 
Saskatchewan, the mayor of Pinehouse, Ms. Cecile Caisse, and 
her daughter Corrine. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With leave to say a few words of welcome 
to the guests also before I answer the question. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I just want to say that I met with them 
and I enjoyed meeting with them and I wanted to welcome them 

as well. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 17 – The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I wanted to say to the member, there was 
consultation with the Land Surveyors’ Association with respect 
to the definition of land, legal description that is before the 
House today. I can’t say that there was consultation with them 
with respect to the nine-digit number system. That is something 
that was developed internally for the reasons indicated for the 
land titles system. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When meetings 
occurred with the Land Surveyors’ Association, I take it that 
they made a presentation on behalf of their organization. 
 
Would the minister be able to table that or, in failure in being 
able to do that, be able to point out to the Assembly how many 
of those recommendations that they put forward were taken 
under consideration and put into this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I don’t know right at the moment and 
neither do the officials whether there was a written presentation 
by the Land Surveyors’ Association, but I’ll undertake to look 
into that and then to respond to the member as appropriate, 
whether there is a written response. 
 
And if there’s no . . . If the land surveyors have no objection to 
sharing it and if the ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) has no legal reason why they can’t share it, I’d 
be happy to share it with the member. 
 
But at the present time, I don’t know whether there is a 
presentation in writing. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, on the verbal side 
of it, would your officials be able to point out from those 
consultations which recommendations came out of the survey 
association, which ones they directly felt they were very in 
favour of? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I am advised by the officials, Mr. Chair, 
that they took a draft of this legislation to the Land Surveyors’ 
Association. They asked them if they felt the legislation was 
appropriate, and the land titles or the surveyors’ association said 
they thought the legislation was appropriate and really didn’t 
have any objections to it that we’re aware of. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The next question 
I would have would be with regards to the changes in the 
definition of property, again under section 2 to be amended. 
Will there be any costs involved to make these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer to that is no. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Regarding . . . 
What about fees to customers with this proposed change? Will 
there be any increases in dealing with the system, having this 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

 

third designation under section 2 to be amended? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, in section 29 there 
are some changes regarding monuments. Could you just 
enlighten the Assembly of exactly what this means and possibly 
outline an example for our Assembly today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I am advised that land surveyors, as a 
matter of professional responsibility, feel that as they are doing 
their jobs if they go out to do a survey and the monument that 
marks the spot at a section corner or a quarter section corner is 
lost, they have a professional responsibility to replace that at 
their own expense. And that’s what they normally do. 
 
But sometimes the odd land surveyor, not as a normal practice, 
but the odd one may not put them on . . . re-establish the 
monument. And this says that if you go out and do the survey 
and the monument isn’t there, you should put a monument there 
obviously to assist in keeping property lines well established. 
And so we’re adding as a rule in this legislation that the land 
surveyor should re-establish the lost monument. 
 
And I should add that this provision is not new. It actually was 
contained in the repealed Land Surveys Act. There was a Land 
Surveys Act that contained this rule but that was repealed and 
what this does is to simply re-establish the legislation that says 
land surveys should do this. 
 
And I’m advised that some surveyors have neglected to 
establish monuments even though the lines and points are all 
run and established, and this provision will require that the 
monuments be re-established and that will assist in the 
maintenance of the provincial survey system. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you be 
able to outline just the cost to a surveying company of 
establishing a monument in, we’ll just say rural Saskatchewan 
farm land or ranch land as opposed to being in the city? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well it’s a very low cost. You know, you 
have to bear in mind that this provision applies to a situation 
where the surveyor is already there, so there’s no cost to getting 
the surveyor there. They are there anyway and being paid for 
that. 
 
I’m told that it only takes a matter of minutes to actually 
re-establish a monument and I’m also advised that they actually 
only cost a few dollars. So there’s very little cost associated 
with it. It’s just the matter of, they’re there, it’s low cost; if the 
monument’s not there, put it back or put a new one there. 
 
And this is a matter of professional responsibility for land 
surveyors in any event. Most of them would do it without any 
legislative rule, but the rule should be there to say that is indeed 
what one should do. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, in section 34 there 
are some changes regarding the powers of the controller. Could 
you just outline what’s being done here please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. This provision stipulates that if a plan 

is submitted for approval more than two years following the 
survey, a field inspection must be conducted before the 
controller will consider approving it. 
 
But that’s the present rule, that if you’re more than two years 
from the survey and submit a plan, then a field inspection must 
be conducted. 
 
But the controller and the surveyors feel that the two-year 
period is not long enough, and this provision will permit the 
time to be established in regulations. So that it says, any person 
submitting a plan, if more than two years has gone by, the 
thinking is that there could be a regulatory change to allow the 
controller to exercise some discretion in the matter. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. I have one final question, Mr. 
Minister, regarding section 85. A clause is added dealing with 
frames and plan proposals. What’s your department planning 
here? Just an outline of the amendment regarding section 85. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chair, could I ask the 
member to repeat the question? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Minister, finally my last question deals 
with section 85. A clause is added dealing with time frames and 
plan proposals. What’s your department planning here? Just an 
outline of what is meant by this change. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’m advised that the 
thinking of the officials is that the time within which a plan 
must be submitted to the controller after the making of a survey 
should be three to five years. That’s what they’re contemplating 
for the regulations. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We have no more 
questions and can advise that it return for third reading. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
thank the member from the opposition for his very helpful 
questions and also I’d like to thank the officials from the 
Information Services Corporation for their assistance here 
today. 
 
And with that I move that this Bill be reported without 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(16:00) 
 

Bill No. 30 – The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the 
opposition for their co-operation, and also I would like to move 
that we report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Chair, what I’d like, to 
ask leave of the House to revert back to discussion on Bill 30. 
The members of the opposition have some questions that they 
haven’t asked before the Bill was passed, and we would like for 
leave to go back so that the critic can ask his questions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 30 – The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask that the 
minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. With me is Mr. 
Darcy McGovern, who is a Crown counsel with the legislative 
services of the Saskatchewan Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. Appreciate the opportunity to ask a few questions 
related to Bill 30, the pawned property Bill. 
 
What I’d ask the minister first off is if the minister could please 
explain how this Bill will operate once it becomes law. 
Specifically, what changes can pawnshop operators expect to 
see in their industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I would be happy to do so. Presently 
if a person takes a piece of property into a pawnshop and pawns 
it in most Saskatchewan cities — I think with the exception of 
Regina and Moose Jaw where a pilot project has been going on 
for three years where the system contemplated by this 
legislation is already in place and working — the information 
about the piece of property is recorded on a piece of paper and 
every so often these papers are given to the police in the local 
municipality. 
 
We’ll use Saskatoon as an example. And then, once received, 
the police have a huge pile, as you can appreciate, of pieces of 
paper, Mr. Chair, and they have to then have someone enter that 
into their system. And as a result the information is frequently 
out of date and inaccurate. 
 
And what this system will do is it will address concerns that 
have been raised by the Saskatchewan police community, and 
they are saying that they want information in real time. 
 
In other words, if I go into a pawnshop with a piece of property, 
the pawnshop will be required to record information about that 
item. If it has a serial number and a description they will record 
that and that information will be provided to the police right 
away, at the same time that that information comes in . . . or 
item comes into the pawnshop or shortly thereafter. 
 
And one can see that this will assist the police with respect to 
stolen property that they may be looking at or looking for. 

Where there’s been a theft in a residence for example of a 
particular item, if the item with the serial number or a 
description matching the item comes up, the police will be able 
to have that information that this has just gone into a pawnshop 
yesterday; maybe this has something to do with that break and 
enter. And they will be able to retrieve that property, either use 
it as evidence if required, or if appropriate, return it to the 
lawful owner. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could I ask 
what groups that the department contacted when drafting this 
legislation — what groups were consulted with and if it was 
debated with some of the stakeholders. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. First of all I’d like to point out again 
that this system is already operating in Regina and Moose Jaw 
on a volunteer basis and with all pawnbrokers in those 
communities for the last three years. And it has been the 
positive results of it working in those communities that has led 
to the police community asking us to extend this type of system 
throughout the province. 
 
In answer to the question, a working group was established in 
late spring of last year at the request of the Regina Police 
Service, and in response to a resolution from the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association. The working group consisted 
of officials from the Department of Justice; the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police), so as a third party the RCMP was 
consulted; the Regina and Saskatoon Police Services. So the 
Regina police department was consulted; the Saskatoon police 
department was consulted. Of course the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association was consulted and Business Watch 
International as well. The Saskatchewan pawnbrokers 
association was consulted. The Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities and the cities of Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 
Regina, Prince Albert, Yorkton, and North Battleford have all 
been consulted. 
 
I think it’s fair to say, as far as I know, that all of those parties 
support the legislation with the exception of the Saskatchewan 
pawnbrokers association which does not, but everybody else 
does. And the police do, and the municipalities do, and we 
believe that it is in the public interest that the police be provided 
with 21st century tools to deal with 21st century criminals. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, it is my understanding — 
and correct me if I’m wrong on my figures — but out of the 
pawn transactions in this province, there’s less than one-half of 
one per cent that have been identified with stolen goods. That 
figure was given to me and I wonder if your figures are the 
same. 
 
And I understand where the policing services are coming from. 
Naturally the policing services want all the tools available to 
them that they can get, but it would appear by this legislation 
that more onus is going to be placed upon the pawnbrokers than 
on the policing services. It’s driving the pawnbrokers into doing 
some of the stuff that they already do, but forcing into 
computerizing it. 
 
And when we look at the small percentage and I’d ask you to 
comment on this. If that figure is compatible with what your 
figures are, the less than one-half of one per cent, and the fact 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

 

that we’re placing more onus on pawnshop owners and 
operators in fact than we are on police when it comes to the 
goods that are in a pawnshop or the goods that are transacted in 
a pawnshop. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d like 
to introduce to the House, and through you and to you to the 
House, two special guests up in your gallery, Jake and Betty 
Banman. 
 
They’re from Saskatoon and how I know them is through their 
great volunteer work at our school, at Caswell School. Jake is 
known for making great pancakes and helping out with the 
breakfast program. When I saw them up there I thought oh, I’ve 
got to introduce those people, great people, and make our 
schools really special. 
 
So I’d ask everyone to welcome them to our House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I believe that the 
figure that the member quoted is the figure that is being used by 
the pawnbrokers association. I don’t believe it’s a figure that 
comes from the police. 
 
I will tell the member this, the Regina Police Service has been 
using this system for three years and they have given examples 
of cases that they say were solved directly as a result of the 
ability of the system to convey information on a real-time basis, 
and to track goods between communities that are on the system. 
 
And I also want the member to know that a pilot project started 
in Saskatoon, January 1, 2003, January 1 of this year. And in its 
February 10 interim report, the pawn project sub-committee 
noted the following. Now I want to point out this is 
approximately 40 days, 40 days after the pilot project started in 
Saskatoon. 
 
The police reported 132 stolen articles were identified in 40 
days using this system. And 39 bicycles that were stolen were 
identified in the first 40 days. Hits for property stolen outside of 
Saskatoon — hits meaning that, you know, they get the 
information about the item and it’s already registered on their 
computer as being stolen — hits for property stolen outside of 
Saskatoon, brought into Saskatoon, matching entries from 
reporting pawnshops in Saskatoon, 79 articles and 9 bicycles in 
the first 40 days. 

Four hundred and twenty-two customers pawning in Saskatoon 
have an address and a location other than Saskatoon in the first 
40 days; 95 customers pawning in a city other than Saskatoon 
have a Saskatoon address. 
 
In other words, I may . . . Someone may steal a piece of 
property in Saskatoon and take it to Regina and if it’s entered 
into the system, the police in Saskatoon can be told that that 
item has shown up in a pawnshop in Regina. 
 
And I might add that the most popular pawned items are the 
television and video recorder. So there is great progress made 
when you have this system. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Chair, to anyone who is listening, that 
one of the problems we have in our communities — I’m very 
sorry to say — is a high rate of break and enter. And most 
people, most reasonable people living in Saskatchewan know 
that that is a problem. 
 
And what this Bill does is it says if I go into a pawnshop and 
pawn something, the pawnshop has to tell the police what item 
has been pawned and they have to do that in real-time using a 
computer. And I want everyone watching this to know that what 
this Bill will do is give the police the tools that they need to 
identify stolen property that is coming into pawnshops. And we 
have experience in Regina and Moose Jaw that shows that is the 
case. We have experience in Saskatoon after a short time that 
says that’s the case. 
 
And if we have this kind of legislation, we can feel more safe 
and secure because it’s much less likely that we’re going to 
have break and enters and stolen property when we make it 
more difficult to dispose of that property through pawnshops. 
And this government feels very strongly that we’re going to 
give this tool to the police. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, by introducing this Bill as 
pawn property and I understand that your comments, but it 
would almost seem that you’re tunnelling to pawnshops and 
pawnshops only as being the medium for fenced articles, if you 
wish. 
 
Is there consideration that your government is going to expand 
this to other businesses that may be operating in fenced 
property or stolen property? For an example, if your concern is 
— and the figures that you gave differ from the point five per 
cent — is this going to drive stolen property to other 
jurisdictions and other businesses? And I think we all know that 
there’s other businesses that actually fence property if the 
property is stolen. But this Bill doesn’t cover that. 
 
Is it the direction of the government to expand this legislation 
into other businesses? And I’ll give you the example of 
jewellery stores. Stolen property may end up in a jewellery 
store. Is that going to be a requirement under your legislation? 
 
Second-hand stores, and there’s a host of other businesses that 
may be the outlet, if you wish — and you’re relating it to stolen 
property — and I’m wondering if you’re considering expanding 
the legislation into other jurisdictions and other businesses or if 
it’s just a pawnshop one that we’ve tackled right now and 
leaving it with pawnshops? 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, it is contemplated that this sort of 
requirement may go to other dealers in second-hand property. 
The legislation itself contemplates that the requirement of 
reporting second-hand property brought into a business being 
reported to the police. That requirement of reporting to the 
police can be imposed by regulation on other businesses as 
well. 
 
The idea of this legislation, as I’ve said, we’ve had a three-year 
pilot project with Regina and Moose Jaw. And yes, we 
contemplate that as we work with the community and work 
with the police, if the community and the police advise us that 
this should be expanded to other areas, we will consider 
expanding it. 
 
We’re going to start with the pawnshops and if the police advise 
that there are problems, in their opinion, with stolen goods 
going through other sorts of businesses and that a requirement 
for reporting should be imposed on those businesses, the 
legislation contemplates that. We would not do so without 
consulting with the community, consulting with those 
businesses, perhaps doing a pilot project in other areas and 
proceeding. 
 
And I agree with the member, Mr. Chair, that this deals with 
one area where there’s a problem. We’re advised by the police 
that there is in fact a significant problem. And it may not deal 
with every area where a stolen good may be sold, I’ll grant the 
member that. But that it doesn’t deal with every single area is 
not a reason for tackling some of the areas. And we’re going to 
take it one step at a time. We have a proven system that has 
worked in Regina and Moose Jaw. 
 
And the member says, well somebody could take something out 
of the jurisdiction. Well that’s true. But the point is it makes it 
more difficult to move stolen property. If you have to produce 
identification when you bring the property in, if that property is 
identified to the police in real time in a way that lets them see if 
such property has been stolen, and if it makes it more difficult 
to get rid of stolen property or fence stolen property, that’s what 
we’re trying to do. 
 
And we can’t control people who may go to Edmonton or 
somewhere else, but perhaps at some point we should have a 
national system. 
 
But we do live in an age when we can do things that cut down 
on crime using information technology. And to have somebody 
at the police station sitting with boxes and boxes of pieces of 
paper and they don’t even have time to enter them into any 
system, and by the time it gets entered the stolen property is 
sold to somebody else, doesn’t make any sense at all. And 
we’re moving on it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I can understand the point of view, 
but I also understand the point of view from the owners of some 
of the businesses whereby they do record the information, they 
do ask for identification, except in a lot of cases it’s on paper. 
And I understand. 
 
And that’s why my comment earlier was: is the onus going to 
be on pawnshops rather than the policing services? And it 
would appear that your legislation is putting more onus on the 

pawnshop operators than on the policing services because you 
want real-time service and the police can’t . . . don’t have the 
time to enter it, so you’re suggesting that the pawnshop people 
are the ones that are going to have to enter it. 
 
And my question, Mr. Minister, is this: that there are pawnshop 
operators — and you’ve alluded to it about four times now — 
of the pilot projects, that they obviously have computers in their 
system. There’s an awful lot of pawnshop operators that I 
would also suggest do not have computers. Will this legislation 
force pawnshop operators to become computer businesses; 
where they would be, by legislation, have to have computers in 
their pawnshop before they could operate a pawn business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, it is a computer system. And I would 
be surprised, by the way . . . it’s certainly not out of the 
question, but most people do have computers in their offices, 
their businesses, and their homes for various reasons. They may 
do their accounting. 
 
Mr. Chair, pawnshops are required now to record information 
on paper and give it to police. This says that they will record the 
information on the computer and they will e-mail it to the police 
so that the police are advised of the item that has gone into the 
pawnshop. 
 
And when the member asks, well will the pawnshop owners 
have some responsibility? You bet they will and I’ll tell the 
member why. Because policing does not just fall on the 
shoulders of the police; policing falls on the shoulders of all of 
us in the community. And if there is a way that members of the 
community can assist the police in solving and preventing 
crime, that is a good thing. Policing is a responsibility of all the 
members of the community. 
 
And so if the member says, do the pawnbrokers have some 
responsibility to report to the police items that have come into 
the pawnshops? You bet they do under this legislation because 
we’re going to have a shared responsibility. And we’re going to 
make sure that if somebody brings a second-hand item into a 
pawnshop, that the pawnshop owner knows that the police are 
going to know that item is there, the police are going to seize it 
if it’s been reported as stolen, and they better make sure they 
know who brought it in, and care better be taken. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Chair, we will be unapologetic about 
that requirement because we are going to work with the police 
and we are going to prevent crime. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well it’s everybody’s idea to prevent 
crime. Again, I throw back, in this particular case it’s directing 
and forcing owners, and I may disagree with the member that 
not everybody does have computers. I’ve talked to various 
people that do not have computers for whatever reason. I think 
we even have people within this legislature that are not 
computer literate. 
 
So here we are now going to direct people to . . . And I assume 
it’s at their own expense; I would very much doubt there would 
be government money for them to buy computers for their 
business or to take computer courses. 
 
My next question, Mr. Minister, is this legislation going to 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

 

direct which software pawnshops are going to have to use? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer, Mr. Chair is no, the legislation 
does not say where the software should come from. And that 
would be something that would be tendered by municipalities in 
conjunction with their police services. They would contract 
with someone to provide the service. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Then I’d ask the minister how do we, 
and how does he, know that the software programs will be 
compatible with the police service, that he has expounded on 
about four or five times here that they have instantaneous 
service at their fingertips, if there’s no compatibility in the 
computer programming and software? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The regulations will specify that software 
will have to be compatible with the specifications in terms of 
what needs to be reported to police. And so the tender would 
specify that the software had to be compatible so that the 
system would work. 
 
And I would point out once again that this system has been 
working in Regina and Moose Jaw for three years. There also is 
a pilot project in Saskatoon that is underway and working as 
well. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Will the minister and staff be consulting 
with the stakeholders again prior to establishing regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we will. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — A final question, Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister. Will it be in regulation, or where does the costing 
of $1 per transaction come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, the reference to $1 per transaction is 
not in the legislation or the regulations, Mr. Chair. That is a 
maximum that has been set in Regina and Moose Jaw, a 
maximum charge of $1 per transaction. That will be determined 
in the tendering process and that will be determined at the local 
level, what the fee should be to pay for the operation of the 
system. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That concludes the questioning on Bill 
No. 30. 
 

Bill No. 35 – The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To 
my right is Wanda Lamberti, who is the executive director of 
finance and administration for the Department of Government 
Relations and Aboriginal Affairs. Behind Wanda is John Reid, 
the executive director of Aboriginal policy and operations. 
Keith Comstock is the policy manager, policy development 
branch. 

And as well I have from the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, Jim Engel, who is the executive director of policy 
and planning; and Fiona Cribb, who is the manager of policy 
and legislation for the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority as well. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of all, I realize 
that this Bill is changing First Nations Fund to First Nations 
trust, and if you could please explain, Mr. Minister, what 
actually is the difference between the First Nations Fund and 
the First Nations trust? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, really, the 
fundamental difference between the fund and the trust fund is 
that the trust will be directly responsible to the FSIN. 
 
The trustees will operate more independently from the 
provincial government but they are, however, going to be bound 
by a series of accountability provisions which are not at this 
point part of the current statutory requirements. 
 
The old fund had required six trustees that would be named by 
the FSIN. The trust fund would have seven trustees . . . fund 
named by the FSIN. Under the old fund, there were no 
qualification requirements. And under the trust fund, specific 
qualifications — business experience or education, that they 
cannot be holding elected office — and conflict of interest 
provisions respecting trustees are included in the new trust 
fund. 
 
As well, the filing of financial statement was the practice with 
the government with the old fund. Under the new trust fund, 
they are responsible to provide to government detailed audited 
financial statements and policy and procedure audit; an annual 
report which will include a list of all recipients and the amount 
each received; the management letter issued by the auditor for 
each audit, and as well the response to the management letter; a 
report that determine whether monies received by the First 
Nations trust are expended for the purposes outlined in the 2002 
framework agreement; and as well, access to documents that are 
submitted to the First Nations trust by recipients of funding 
from the First Nations trust if required for auditing. 
 
As well, under the old fund no specified accountability to First 
Nations beneficiaries was in that. Under the new trust fund, the 
First Nations beneficiaries will receive an annual report and 
additional access to records of the trustees. 
 
Under the old fund the audit could be by appointed auditor 
which may include the Provincial Auditor. And under the trust 
fund the audit . . . may audit if appointed . . . the Provincial 
Auditor may audit if appointed by the government as its agent. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe you 
mentioned that the First Nations beneficiaries will receive an 
annual report. Who are you referring to when you say 
beneficiary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That refers to the recipients of the 
funding. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize that. But 
how broad based is that? 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

I guess the concern today amongst First Nations people is that 
the funds are flowing through the Community Initiatives Fund, 
as well as the thirty-seven and a half per cent that is allocated 
through the gaming agreement. But there is very widespread 
concern amongst First Nations people about where those dollars 
are going. And they repeatedly ask of their leadership — 
whether it’s at the reserve level or at the level of the FSIN — 
for an accounting of the dollars, where they’re spent, and they 
in many cases fail to receive this accountability. 
 
What I’m asking is: when you say beneficiaries, who are you 
referring to specifically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well the beneficiaries could be and 
the purposes for the money from the, from the fund and for 
what it could be expended . . . And I’ll list them for you so that 
you’ll have an idea who the beneficiaries could be. 
 
There are two new purposes that are included in this fund, and 
that is for governance activities and for treaty protection. The 
other purposes are for economic development, for social 
programs, for justice initiatives, for education and education 
facilities, the development and operation of recreational 
facilities, senior and youth programs, cultural and spiritual 
development, the development and maintenance of community 
infrastructure, health initiatives, or other charitable purposes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I appreciate the 
list that’s I believe included in the framework agreement . . . or 
the agreement in principle. 
 
My question however is: how does the individual First Nations 
person in this province have an accounting of the dollars — first 
of all, the amount of dollars that are available through the trust 
fund, who receives those dollars, and how they are spent? And 
how do they know if they are eligible for receipt of some of 
those dollars and whether they actually never receive them? 
 
That is the concern, is that they believe that they are eligible for 
receipt of some of these gaming dollars and yet they do not see 
them and they do not receive any accounting when they ask of 
their leadership. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess the 
amount will very much depend on the amount of gaming 
revenue that flows through the casino operations because it’s 
based on a percentage. That amount would go to band councils, 
band members, for building recreational facilities, all of the list 
of things that we talked about here for economic development, 
social programs. 
 
And band members certainly have the opportunity to apply to 
the chief in council with a proposal, with a program, or with 
enough thought as to how in fact that money might best be used 
under the guidance of the list of initiatives that I shared with 
you a bit earlier. So clearly band members have the opportunity 
to approach your band council and the chief, and that’s how the 
system would operate. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, is there a certain amount of 
dollars that are allocated to each Indian band in Saskatchewan 
or how is it awarded to them? Do they each receive so much 
and then they make the determination at the band level how 

they’re going to allocate it on their reserve? Or is it a total 
dollar value and they have to apply to the First Nations trust? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, I’m told that that would be determined by the trustees 
of the fund. I’m also told that it’s put out based on a population 
and a pro-rated basis. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well which is it? Is 
it on population? If so . . . If the total value of the trust is say 
approximately $10 million and there’s X-number of First 
Nations people that are eligible, do they each receive so many 
dollars for their reserve? Or does the First Nations trust decide 
20 per cent is going to an individual band and only 2 per cent to 
another? How is this determined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think it’s fair to say that the 
FSIN could change the system that they use at any time. Right 
now what they do is give a base of $10,000 in terms of base 
funding, and the rest of it is delivered on a per capita basis. But 
that would certainly be their decision, not government’s. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, you said the FSIN now are the 
ones that make the decision. A few moments ago you said the 
First Nations trust. Is it one and the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well it would be the trust fund 
appointed by the FSIN. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So then it is the board members of the First 
Nations trust fund that actually make the decision. They give a 
base amount — just for clarification — a base amount of 
$10,000 for each band in Saskatchewan, and after that the 
dollars that go to the band are strictly allocated according to 
population and distributed accordingly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That’s what I understand their 
policy is, yes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Minister, could you tell me then if 
First Nations persons are living off-reserve, how are the dollars 
allocated to them? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well they would, as a member of 
the band, have the opportunity to apply for funding for a project 
as any other on-reserve band member would. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So, Mr. Minister, then just for clarification, if 
they’re living off-reserve, they are still considered to be 
members of the individual bands and they receive . . . the band 
receives dollars for them. Whether there’s 500 living 
off-reserve or 1,000 off-reserve, the dollars are divided and they 
receive part of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that the 
profits generated by the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation are 
distributed as follows: that 50 per cent goes to the General 
Revenue Fund; 25 per cent goes to the First Nations Fund; 25 
per cent goes to the Community Initiatives Fund, including $2 
million for the Métis Development Fund annually. That is 
funding for both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal. 



June 12, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

 

Profit generated by the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
are distributed as follows: 37.5 per cent to the General Revenue 
Fund; 37.5 per cent to the First Nations Fund; and 25 per cent to 
the community development corporations, if their associated 
casino is on-reserve, or the Community Initiatives Fund, if the 
associated casino is off-reserve. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My question 
however was, the dollars that are generated through the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, when they’re allocated to 
the bands, does that include the members of the band that live 
off-reserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m told that the allocation is based 
on the total band population which includes on- and off-reserve. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So just for 
clarification, members of the band that live off-reserve then are 
eligible to apply for funding under the regulations that have 
been outlined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Under the policy of the people who 
manage the allocation of the funds, the answer is yes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So when the dollars 
flow to the band, are they required to give an accounting to the 
members of the band of how they are spent? Who receives the 
dollars, how much, and for what purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, that would be up to 
the band council who are elected by band members. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Minister, the money is flowing from 
the Government of Saskatchewan because they are the sole 
owners of the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. The dollars 
are generated from Casino Regina and Casino Moose Jaw. 
 
And you’re bringing in a new Bill. The main problem around 
the dollars that are generated and flow to First Nations trust and 
now First Nations Fund — or pardon me, the other way around, 
will now be the First Nations trust — the major concern 
amongst First Nations people, on- and off-reserve, is 
accountability of these dollars. 
 
So what is the purpose of bringing in a Bill that changes the 
name if there is not any further accountability measures put into 
this Bill? How does this better serve the First Nations people of 
this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — To the member opposite, let me 
again read into the record the improved accountability processes 
that are in place in the new trust fund, and some of the 
requirements and the duties that the trustees of the First Nations 
trust will be required to act upon. 
 
One, they have to ensure that the beneficiary of the trust 
provide a yearly report that demonstrates that all monies 
received from the trust was used for the purpose intended. 
That’s new. Two, to maintain adequate records of all 
transactions and prepare annual audited financial statements. 
That’s new. Prepare an annual report that includes, one, copies 
of the audited financial statements, a statement of risk 
management practice, and a report on compliance with such 

practices, and a list as well of all recipients who received the 
money from the trust. 
 
This is all new. This was not part of the old fund but it is part of 
the accountability process and the recording process in the new 
trust fund. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate that. 
The question is, who are they accountable to? You indicated 
that they are accountable to make a report, they’re to file a 
financial statement, they’re to reiterate where the dollars went 
and to be accountable for it. But who are they accountable to? 
That is the major question. 
 
If they’re just going to report back to the band leadership, 
which were the ones that gave the dollars out in the first place, 
how is that being open and accountable to the First Nations 
individual on- and off-reserve in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me read into the record, the 
accountability will be transparent. The trustees will be 
providing a copy of the annual report and the financial 
statements to each beneficiary, to the FSIN legislative 
assembly, and to the government. This department will be 
working very closely with them to ensure that those things 
happen. 
 
In addition, the beneficiaries have additional authority to 
request from trustees, copies of minutes of meetings and other 
information — as an example, ledgers. The government will be 
able to access reports that the beneficiaries provide to the 
trustees as well as copies of the management letters issued by 
the trust auditor, and the trust’s response to such letters. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again I ask, will this 
information be public? Will it be . . . Will the members of the 
First Nations bands, on- and off-reserve, have access to this 
information, and will the general public of Saskatchewan have 
access to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The answer would be yes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — And through what process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Through the process I just 
articulated. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well if I understand you correctly then, Mr. 
Minister, there will be a public document tabled in this 
legislature that will be open to the scrutiny of all citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — There won’t be anything tabled 
specifically in the legislature but it will be public information as 
I indicated. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that there would 
be open disclosure of this fund. Now if that is not through the 
legislature, if it is not tabled through the legislature, how is it 
going to become a public document and open to the scrutiny of 
all members of the province of Saskatchewan, all people living 
here and in particular First Nations people who have been 
asking for this accountability for years? 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — In the same way the annual report 
of any oil company. These are all documents that we indicated 
will be made public. The accountability will go from the 
trustees who will be providing a copy of the annual report and 
financial statements to each beneficiary — to each beneficiary, 
which couldn’t be made more public — to the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian legislative assembly, and to the 
government. 
 
In addition the beneficiaries have the authority, the additional 
authority to request from the trustees the copies of minutes of 
meetings and other information, ledgers; the government will be 
able to access reports that the beneficiaries provide to the 
trustees as well as copies of the management letters issued by 
the trust auditor and by the trust’s response to such letters. So 
the beneficiaries will have all of the information that I’ve just 
articulated for you. 
 
Those will be documents that will be made widely public 
around this province, and I have no reason to assume that this 
increased accountability would not or should not be agreed to. 
As I indicated, this is much, much more stringent than the 
process under the old fund. 
 
And I don’t want to read the list of things that have tightened 
the accountability up because I’ve already read them into the 
record, so I don’t think I should do that again. But I want to say 
that this will be a much more accountable process. I’ve 
indicated to you that there is transparency to the beneficiaries, 
to the FSIN, to the legislative assembly of the FSIN, and to the 
government. 
 
We have no reason to assume that if a member of the opposition 
requested the information, that it would be made available. 
These are public documents. I’m sure dozens of people around 
this province would have all of the information that I’ve 
articulated here. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, 
you’ve indicated that the beneficiaries will receive whatever 
information they require or that they ask for. How does that 
help the people that are on the outside looking in and are the 
ones that are concerned about where these dollars are flowing? 
 
That’s very fine to say, well the one that received the money 
and the trustees that awarded the money have this interchange 
of information. What about the people on the outside looking in 
that are asking where are the dollars from gaming in 
Saskatchewan going? 
 
Because I live on the reserve or I live off-reserve in Regina or 
Saskatoon or P.A. and I fail to see one of these dollars and I 
have no way to access them, I have no way to receive 
accountability. I go to my leadership and I ask for an 
accounting and I receive none. I go to the government and I 
receive none. 
 
What they want to know is, if you are going to change this Act, 
how are you going to make it so that the dollars are more 
accountable? How are they going to have an understanding of 
where they’re going? And how are the First Nations people in 
this province going to benefit from this change in this Act? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would want to say 
that individual band members have the ability to contact their 
elected people, the same as people who live in the city of 
Regina have the opportunity to have access to their elected 
people. And that would be how the accountability process 
would work on a reserve, whether it was a reserve member who 
lived on-reserve or lived off of reserve. 
 
The other component of this, I’d want to say, is that, you know, 
I mean they have their elections as we do in the province and as 
we do in this country and they have access to their officials 
through the electoral process. And I think the member would 
know that. 
 
So I think what is written into this new agreement is a great deal 
more transparency. And this Act accounts for a great deal more 
transparency in all of the areas that I’ve indicated to you. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I see that the hour is 5 o’clock, past 5 o’clock, 
and so I would therefore. . . And I’m sure we’ll be coming back 
to these deliberations sometime shortly. So I would move that 
the committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(17:00) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 35. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:06. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1615 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1616 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1616 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1629 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1629 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1631 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1634 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1634 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................1637 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Pull of the Land Musical Drama 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1616 
 La Ronge Mushroom Business 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
 Rodeo Superstar 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
 National Rivers Day 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
 Wilkie Students Win Youth Business Institute Interprovincial Competition 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1617 
 Saskatchewan Express Launches Summer Tour 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1618 
 Naicam Recycling Programs 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1618 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support for Beef Industry 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1618 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1618 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1620 
 Municipal Revenue-Sharing Grants 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1620 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1620 
 North Battleford Sewage Treatment Plant 
  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1622 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1622 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Health Care Facility in Outlook 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1623 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1624 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1624 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1624 
  The Speaker..................................................................................................................................................................................... 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1625 
 
 



 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1625 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1625 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1633 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1633 
 Bill No. 30 – The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1635 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1636 
 Bill No. 35 – The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1639 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1639 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1642 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1642 
 Bill No. 30 — The Pawned Property (Recording) Act 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1642 
 


	THIRD READINGS
	Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act
	Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003
	THIRD READINGS
	Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act
	Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003

