















































Hansard: June 16, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1667 
 June 16, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again today present 
a petition on behalf of people in my constituency who are very 
concerned about the shape of Highway No. 49. The petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth in the area. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg and Mankota. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about the 
deplorable state of Highway No. 20. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 20 from Nokomis to Strasbourg in order to 
address safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth 
in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Strasbourg, Duval, 
Drake, Nokomis, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens that are very 
concerned about the condition of Highway 47. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan, Lampman, 
Regina, Macoun, Wapella, as well as various places in the four 
Western provinces. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of residents around the Qu’Appelle Valley. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nation people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level on the 
Qu’Appelle River system can be returned to its normal 
level and end the economic harm and uncertainty this 
dispute has caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Indian Head, Southey, 
and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by Saskatchewan people who are concerned that deregulation 
and privatization in the electric industry is causing electrical 
rates to increase dramatically in other jurisdictions. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, is not allowed. 
 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the goods folks 
from Regina. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens from Moose Jaw area 
who are very concerned about the lack of a hemodialysis unit. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for the community. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Regina, Meyronne, 
Edmonton, and the Moose Jaw area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

residents of my hometown who are proposing a constructive 
alternative to the government’s plans for a permanent CT 
(computerized tomography) scanner in the Swift Current 
Regional Hospital. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT 
scanner to Swift Current and instead provide a new CT 
scanner for the Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from citizens concerned about highway 
conditions in Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina, 
Gravelbourg, and Woodrow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
for fairness for Crown leaseholders. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Perdue, and Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
presenting a petition on the condition of Highway 14. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair the highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duly bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by the people from Wilkie. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens that are concerned with 
this government’s lack of action in the area of the Qu’Appelle 
Valley river system. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water level of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to its normal level and 
end the economic harm and uncertainty this dispute has 
caused. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Pasqua Lake and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
signed by Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned that 
deregulation and privatization in the electrical industry is 
causing electrical rates to increase dramatically in other 
jurisdictions. Now the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
deregulation and privatization of the electrical industry in 
Saskatchewan, including SaskPower, will not be allowed. 

 
And this petition is signed by people from Estevan, Shell Lake, 
Macoun, and Regina. 
 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 18, 35, 36, 114, 120, 126, 140, and no. 141. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — The Hon. Myron Kowalsky 
presents the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Communication which is hereby tabled. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member for Cannington: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

 

Communication be now concurred in. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 64 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: in the year 2003 did CIC sell any 
potato loading equipment either from the Broderick or 
Lucky Lake sheds; if so, could the minister please provide 
which equipment was sold and for what price; also, was 
this equipment tendered? 

 
Also I have a similar question dealing with year 2002. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also have a written 
question to the Highways minister. I give notice on day 64: 
 

What was the cost of installing the 110-kilometre highway 
signs, speed signs, on Sunday compared to installing them 
on a regular working day? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 62 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what are the contents of the 
independent audit conducted on the books of the finances 
of the Métis Addiction Council of Saskatchewan which was 
ordered by the Department of Health; and will the minister 
provide a copy of this audit to members of the legislature? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you may have 
observed in the west gallery a group of students, 46 in total, a 
good group, good-looking group of young people. They’re 
visiting us from St. Augustine Community School. They’re all 
grade 8 students. They’re here accompanied by their teacher 
Sandy White, Tina Shuker, and Marion Desjarlais and I look 
forward to visiting with them after the question period. 
 
And I might say that it’s normal for St. Augustine to always 
send a group to the legislature. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with 
me as they have in the past to extend a very warm welcome to 
these students and their teachers here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 21 is a very 
important date in the royal family, and it’s also a very important 
date in the Osika family, Mr. Speaker, because on April 21, just 
a little over four years ago, I announced the birth of a princess 
into the Osika family. And I would like to introduce that little 
princess that’s here today, along with her mother, Kim 
Osika-Schick, and my wife, Barbara. And they’re sitting in the 
VIP (very important person) section, Mr. Speaker, of your 
gallery. 
 
And I would ask all members to kindly join me in welcoming 

them and passing on to Colby Ron, Kierra’s little brother was 
not . . . didn’t feel quite up to being here today, Mr. Speaker. He 
said he’d watch on TV today. So please welcome Kierra, Kim, 
and Barbara. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres Annual Meeting 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last Friday 
evening I had the pleasure of joining with a number of people 
from across the province who gathered for their annual meeting. 
Mr. Speaker, this was the annual meeting of SARC, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres and, Mr. 
Speaker, of note it’s been 35 years since the association was 
formed. And through that 35 years this association has been 
reaching out to help meet the needs of people who are 
disadvantaged and people of disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly the evening was a worthwhile evening to 
attend. A Volunteer of Distinction Award presentation was 
made to Mrs. Elizabeth King, a lady from Moose Jaw, who has 
been involved for many years in providing services to people 
with disabilities. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the highlight of the evening, however, was 
the keynote presentation. The presentation was made by Diane 
Dupuy the founder of Famous People Players. And after 
listening to Ms. Dupuy’s presentation, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think there was anyone in the room whose heart wasn’t touched. 
 
Ms. Dupuy came from a home where they were really limited in 
their financial resources. Her father was an alcoholic and there 
were many challenges. But out of that challenge, Mr. Speaker, 
she developed the Famous People Players. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would recommend that if anyone has the opportunity at some 
time in their life, to take in this famous presentation. 
 
Congratulations to all the SARC members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Les Benjamin Remembered 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this morning, Saskatchewan 
and Canada lost a friend. About 8 o’clock this morning, 25-year 
MP (Member of Parliament) Les Benjamin passed away in the 
Pasqua Hospital. 
 
Les was first elected in the Trudeaumania sweep of 1968. The 
incumbent Tory at the time was a gentleman named Mr. More, 
and Les’s first campaign slogan was, get less with . . . or Get 
More With Les. He had it right; I didn’t. Les got it right; he 
won. He wasn’t supposed to win that election — he did — and 
his plurality grew every election thereafter. 
 
In his book, Rolling in the Grass Roots, Les wrote that, Beatrice 
Trew and her husband Albert sold me my first party 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

membership, and she and her husband were my mentors, Les 
wrote. They remained lifelong friends who, as we speak, are 
being now reunited, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My father fondly remembers, years later, being in Ottawa 
lobbying for farmers and Les introducing dad to the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) caucus. And he introduced him by saying, 
this man’s parents sold me my first party membership. 
Immediately the caucus chorus was, well we can’t hold that 
against him. Les’s colleagues and friends all knew of his love of 
life and his humour, a humour that Les Benjamin kept with him 
right to the end. When he was wheeled into the hospital he said, 
if I’d known there were two beautiful nurses waiting for me, I’d 
have come in sooner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Les is survived by his wife, Constance Friesen, 
four adult children, and their grandchildren. Today our 
condolences go out to the family of Les Benjamin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Richard Lemmerick Celebrates 105th Birthday 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday, June 12, Richard 
Lemmerick of St. Mary’s Villa in Humboldt celebrated his 
105th birthday. Mr. Lemmerick was born in 1898 in North 
Dakota and he immigrated to Canada in 1905. 
 
He took up farming in the Muenster district and he retired to 
Humboldt in 1957. For some years after his retirement he and 
his wife travelled frequently to Arizona, until her death in 1979. 
 
Mr. Lemmerick enjoys hunting, fishing, playing cards, and 
political wrangling. In 1996 Mr. Lemmerick moved to St. 
Mary’s Villa where he presently resides. He is still in good 
health. He walks with the aid of a walker. He enjoys sitting in 
his chair and visiting with family. 
 
Mr. Lemmerick has 6 children, 26 grandchildren, 46 
great-grandchildren and 2 great-great-grandchildren. They all 
celebrated with him on Father’s Day, June 15. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of visiting Mr. Lemmerick 
some time ago to present him with a three-century certificate 
and during my visit with him I was entertained by some very 
good stories of his life experiences. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, 105 years of life is truly remarkable. 
Congratulations to Mr. Lemmerick on achieving this wonderful 
milestone. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Service Week 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning three 
work teams and three individual Saskatchewan public servants 
were the first recipients of the Premier’s Award for Excellence 
in the Public Service. As recipients, these six are worthy 
representatives of all those who work for the people of 
Saskatchewan in the public service. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

ceremony this morning was a fitting way to begin what is being 
declared Public Service Week, a week set aside to recognize the 
many ways that public servants at all levels contribute to the 
quality of life of all Canadians. 
 
It is particularly appropriate that we observe this week in 
Saskatchewan because, as I said last year, it is internationally 
known that we in fact have the best civil service in the world. 
Whether they are fighting forest fires, working with farmers to 
prevent crop depredation, building the roads, or performing the 
hundreds of other jobs they do on a daily basis, they are doing 
so quietly and well, with dignity and professionalism. 
 
I know all members will join me in taking a moment to thank 
our public servants for making our jobs a bit easier and the 
public’s life a bit smoother. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Alameda Agricultural Society Fair 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to report today on the annual Alameda 
Agricultural Society Fair which was held last Saturday. This 
fair included three local 4-H clubs presenting their calves, as 
well as other people from around the communities having their 
animals there as well. 
 
There was a horse show, dog show, and ball games, Mr. 
Speaker. But the highlight of the day, Mr. Speaker, is the annual 
goat-milking contest. And this goat-milking contest has both 
amateurs and experts, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to give you an 
example. 
 
My friend, Murray Carnduff, who’s the local butcher in 
Alameda, had a goat and Murray, this was his first time in there 
so you would qualify him as an amateur. Well, Mr. Speaker, he 
didn’t get any milk because he was beat by the expert. Not me, 
Mr. Speaker, who was also milking at the same time, but rather 
the kids from that nanny had beat him to the goat before he had 
a chance to milk it. 
 
My goat, Mr. Speaker, was a very sneaky goat. I had a large 
supply of milk, about three inches in the pail. She took a swipe 
with her right foot and I managed to get the pail out of the road, 
but she tricked me and got me with the left foot and spilled all 
the milk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The winner of the goat milking though was Lillian Rode, 73 
years old, representing the Frobisher senior citizens and Lillian 
did an excellent job. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate 
everyone involved in both the goat show and the entire fair. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Burrowing Owl Interpretative Centre 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 
Burrowing Owl Interpretative Centre in Moose Jaw has been 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

 

experiencing some financial difficulties. But I’m pleased to say 
that thanks to the co-operation of several Saskatchewan 
organizations and the efforts of a group of students, the centre 
will remain open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contributions came from Sask Environment, the 
city of Moose Jaw, the Moose Jaw Wildlife Federation, Nature 
Moose Jaw, and the Wakamow Rotary Club. But I was most 
impressed with a group of students from École Saint Margaret 
who went door to door and raised $3,100 or nearly 10 per cent 
of the funds needed to ensure the centre could continue its 
education and conservation activities on behalf of the 
burrowing owls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the members of the Assembly will 
join me in thanking all the organizations who donated to this 
worthy cause and especially in commending the students from 
École Saint Margaret for their commitment to preserving 
endangered species. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of Swift Current Residents 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday evening I 
had the opportunity to attend a beef-on-a-bun supper hosted by 
Cypress Motors in Swift Current. The local auto dealership took 
it upon themselves to host the supper free of charge as a show 
of support for our local cattle producers in the wake of the BSE 
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy) scare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over 400 people came out in support of our cattle producers. 
The Stock Growers Association was involved and indeed 
Marilyn Jahnke made a bit of a presentation that evening as 
well. 
 
Congratulations and a big thank you to Jeff Parsons and all of 
the staff and volunteers that helped out Cypress Motors for a 
job well done. 
 
On Friday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I had the chance then to 
attend a ceremony in Swift Current for four nurses who work at 
the hemodialysis unit at the Swift Current Regional Hospital. 
They were presented with the first ever Award of Excellence in 
Patient Care. This was a first-time award by the Kidney 
Foundation and it recognizes outstanding service and 
contribution to the care of kidney patients. 
 
Congratulations to Nancy Franz, Brenda Taylor, Harriet 
Paterson, and Shelly Edgar-Cozine. They are the first recipients 
of the award and well deserving, well deserving, Mr. Speaker, 
as organizers for the Kidney Foundation and patients came 
forward to speak so glowingly of the kind of care they’re 
providing at the Swift Current Regional Hospital. 
 
I’d ask all members to help me thank these four nurses for their 
hard work, and Cypress Motors for their support for the cattle 
industry in the Southwest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member from 
Regina Victoria on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to revert to 
introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank the members for that, for giving 
leave. We’ve just been joined by a group of students who are 
seated in your gallery. This is a group of students who are 
enrolled at the University of Regina’s summer language bursary 
program. And in this case these students are here from the 
province of Quebec and there’s nine in total. 
 
They’re accompanied by Amanda Moreau and Sherri Briley, 
and I would ask the members to join with me, Mr. Speaker, to 
extend a warm welcome to Saskatchewan to these students and 
to enjoy . . . to wish them an enjoyable tour of the Legislative 
Building. 
 
And thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bienvenue à 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
an honour to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly 
seven grade 10 students in the east gallery from Simpson. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Neil Derby, and 
chaperone Darlene Gross. 
 
So it’s an honour to have them here with us. I hope they enjoy 
the proceedings and I would ask everyone to please help me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Beef Industry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday 
provincial ministers of Agriculture met with federal minister, 
Lyle Vanclief, in Victoria. Media reports suggest that the 
federal government is close to announcing a compensation 
package that would consist of loan guarantees and payments 
through the new NISA program (Net Income Stabilization 
Account). 
 
However, many in the industry — many people in the industry 
— are suggesting that NISA is not designed to address a 
problem of this magnitude. Also the government only puts 
money into your NISA account based on your net income. That 
means NISA won’t help cover a producer’s losses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the proposed federal package nothing more than 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

loan guarantees and payments through NISA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I can report to the House 
today that the position of the federal government was to move 
down the path of the NISA program and also loan guarantees. 
 
Upon the conclusion of the meeting, the federal government 
was clearly made aware by the provinces that it is in fact the 
premiers’ option that we want to see implemented in Canada for 
producers across the country, and that in fact loan guarantees 
are not what producers are needing today; it simply adds to the 
debt that they have. Plus there’ll be significant reduction 
already in what the value of the market animals are, even with 
the borders opening. What will happen with loan guarantees of 
course is that producers will end up getting less for their 
animals down the way, will have this debt outstanding, of 
which we didn’t support. 
 
The federal government returned to Ottawa. We’re told that by 
Tuesday or Wednesday, late Tuesday or Wednesday morning 
we should have a decision out of Ottawa in terms of what that 
compensation package might look like. Our interest is for it to 
be led by the premiers’ option which was proposed in Kelowna 
last week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened 
very closely to the minister’s answer and I did not hear 
confirmed that the package will not be anything more than loan 
guarantees and a compensation package through NISA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that concerns us because in trying to address the 
BSE problem through NISA alone, a University of 
Saskatchewan agricultural economist says that this could 
actually bankrupt the program. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, feedlot operator Brad Wildeman says 
that NISA won’t work in this instance because it doesn’t cover 
a producer’s losses, as I mentioned earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NISA seems like a flawed response to the current 
crisis. And so I ask the minister, what are you doing to ensure 
that this proposed federal package of loan guarantees and 
compensation through NISA is not the avenue the federal 
government is looking at but in fact that they are looking at the 
premiers’ option? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the Leader 
of the Opposition is articulating the same language again, 
because for months I’ve said this — this side of the House has 
said this — that the current NISA program first of all is 
underfunded, Mr. Speaker, underfunded as a new agreement at 
$600 million. 
 
The proposal by the federal government to take $400 million 
out of the NISA account today would cripple the NISA account 
through this course of this year and into the future. It is 
absolutely the most inappropriate place to take the money from. 

And we’ve said that and articulated it fully forever in the last 
several months. 
 
And we’ve said to the federal government, NISA is not the 
program. The producer organizations have said that NISA’s not 
the program. The federal . . . the provincial ministers have said 
that NISA’s not the program. The premiers have articulated 
very loudly that NISA’s not the program. 
 
What we need today, Mr. Speaker, is a $400 million package 
that should be shared on a provincial-federal disaster program 
for a variety of different reasons. And that’s the one that we’re 
staying with, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve been articulating this now 
for the last four weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning 
the minister said that he expected a compensation 
announcement by as early as tomorrow, and that it would be 
specifically geared toward feedlot operators and the packing 
plants. Has the minister received some word from Ottawa about 
that announcement? What form of compensation is the minister 
expecting for feedlot operators and for packing plants? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the undertaking that the 
federal minister provided, not only to the minister from 
Saskatchewan, but all of the ministers — Agriculture ministers 
— across Canada is that he would be taking our package back 
to Ottawa. They would be working on that package over the 
weekend and by Tuesday afternoon or Wednesday morning, the 
federal minister said he would announce to Canada what it is 
that the new package will be. 
 
In his new . . . in their package, they propose loan guarantees 
and they propose, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to look at the 
premiers’ option. Those are the commitments that Minister 
Vanclief has made. 
 
We’re waiting, over the next day or two here, to find out what 
the federal cabinet has in fact decided. The provinces are 
committed. The provinces have agreed as to what they’re going 
to do and they articulated that to Mr. Vanclief. It’s now up to 
Ottawa to tell Canadians and Agriculture ministers and the 
industry what it is that they’re prepared to adopt. And we’re 
supporting the premiers’ option, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And of course 
we are awaiting with bated breath and had hoped that the 
minister would have some indications what that plan might be 
. . . entail sooner. 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, there is still no indication as when the 
US (United States) border might reopen. The minister says that 
the scientific work is completed and the decision to reopen the 
border is moving from a scientific debate to a political one. 
 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my question is, what did Lyle Vanclief say 
on Friday about how those talks are going? How soon can we 
expect the US border to be opened? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vanclief said this to us: 
that on Thursday afternoon, the federal government provided to 
the USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) a copy of 
the work that’s completed in Canada regarding the work of 
CFIA (Canadian Food Inspection Agency) and a rationale as to 
why the border should be open. 
 
What Mr. Vanclief said to us, and has now said publicly I 
believe on Friday at the uni-mic, is that in fact there’ll be an 
expectation that they would let the United States review the 
package that went to them on Thursday, Tuesday or Wednesday 
of this week. The Canadian federal government is expecting the 
United States government to respond to their communiqué and 
to their letter. 
 
What Mr. Vanclief did say is that the expectation, from where 
he reads it and views it, is that the borders will not open fully 
immediately, that the borders will remain closed for a period of 
time and that entry of our Canadian beef into the US will be 
staged. Over what period that will take, we’re not aware. But 
we’ll need to wait until the US responds to the scientific data 
that we’ve prepared which we anticipate will be, as Mr. 
Vanclief put it, Tuesday or Wednesday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Weyburn Social Services Agency 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Community Resources and Employment. 
 
On May 26, the government announced that the Family Place, a 
community-based organization in Weyburn, would receive a 
$30,000 grant from the Community Initiatives Fund. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Weyburn and all of Saskatchewan 
should know that this is not new or additional grant money 
provided by the NDP. In fact, it is a grant they receive every 
year and comes on the heels of the NDP government actually 
cutting Family Place programming. 
 
After months of negotiation, the Family Place was forced to 
cancel the family support worker program that had been offered 
in the community for 19 years because the NDP government 
would not adequately fund the program and settle the contract 
with this valuable community-based organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP forced the Family Place to cut 
the family support worker program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
thank the hon. member for the question. 
 
I met with some of the representatives from Family Place last 
week and we discussed their decision, which they pointed out to 
me, Mr. Speaker, was not based on funding arrangements. In 

fact, relative to last year’s funding, the negotiations had in fact 
led to an offer of increase in funding in the amount of 18 per 
cent. 
 
The Family Place directors made the decision, after some 
discussion, that they preferred to focus on the services that 
they’re providing in other aspects. And we’re now in the 
process, Mr. Speaker, of moving forward and ensuring that 
those important services that they provide to very vulnerable 
families in that area will continue through other means. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — This program is at risk because Community 
Resources and Employment has refused to reach an acceptable 
agreement with Family Place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 22, just four days before the government’s 
photo op on announcing the grant money, the Family Place 
issued a press release, and I quote: 
 

The Family Place regrets announcing that we will no longer 
be able to provide the family support worker program. The 
Family Place and employees can no longer continue to 
subsidize this government program. The Family Place will 
not continue to allow further exploitation of their family 
support workers employees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the family support workers, the Family Place who 
administrates the program, and their board have been ill served 
by the local service area manager and employee . . . Community 
Resources and Employment department. That is why they came 
to meet with the minister last week. They came looking for a 
solution because this is about at-risk children and their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister allowing this proven service to 
be destroyed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the services that are being 
discussed here are services that are offered to families whose 
circumstance are that the children are at risk. These are very 
important services at very important times, critical times, for 
vulnerable families. 
 
When I met with the representatives from the Family Place, we 
agreed without hesitation, without question, that the single most 
important thing for us to be looking at is the assurance of 
continued services to these families. And the Family Place, 
although they have made a decision that they don’t wish to 
continue to offer those services — as I said before, there was an 
increase in funding offered in the range of 18 per cent — then, 
Mr. Speaker, after having had the information decided not to do 
that. 
 
We will ensure through the efforts of the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment that those vulnerable 
families that continue to receive those services. And I do 
appreciate the co-operation, the good service, that has been 
provided to those families by the Family Place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the greatness of any jurisdiction 
is often measured by the compassion shown to those less 
fortunate and to those who are in need of support. Who more so 
than at-risk families and children? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is mandated to provide this 
service and contract it through a community-based 
organization. They had a successful program already well 
established with the Family Place. And the volunteers, board, of 
the Family Place organization want to continue to provide this 
service because of their concern for the children in our 
community. 
 
They have made every attempt to negotiate a new contract in 
good faith but they have met no compromise by the 
department’s local service area manager. Mr. Speaker, members 
of the Family Place met with the minister last week in another 
attempt to settle this issue. But again the minister offered no 
compromise and no solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Family Place is no longer providing family 
place . . . the support worker program at the Family Place, who 
will provide it and what will be the cost to the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said in both 
of my previous answers, that the department will ensure that 
services will be offered and we will seek to locate over a period 
of time, an appropriate period of time, a community-based 
organization in order to continue to deliver those important 
services. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, while we are talking about resources, the hon. 
member may just want to lean over and talk to the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party who said this in the fall of ’01, who said 
that if he had his way, if he had his way with the people of 
Saskatchewan, it would be his choice to pay for tax cuts by 
ripping up to $50 million from the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member is sincere about her 
commitment to resources, necessary resources, then she should 
talk to her leader who says that if he has his way, he would take 
out $50 million. We’re not going there, Mr. Speaker. They may. 
We’re not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this minister has the nerve to get 
up and deflect criticism to the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
because he cannot defend what he has done in Weyburn. He 
cannot defend cutting the family support program so he deflects 
the criticism when it is his government that has misspent 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars across this country and in 
Saskatchewan and around the world. And he is blaming the 
Saskatchewan Party. I dare say we know where the blame lies, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program is in jeopardy and families and 
children are at risk. And I have many letters and these letters are 
from the children’s parents and they are from the family support 
care workers because they care about the children in the 

community of Weyburn and Carlyle and Estevan. And they 
want the minister to know that they have concerns and they 
want this program reinstated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to reopen 
negotiations with the Family Place and will he negotiate in 
good faith to find a solution and reinstate Family Place as 
administrator of this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, for the fourth time, I do 
assure the families that have needed these services that we will 
be working to provide those services in a temporary basis in the 
initial period and to reach a permanent settlement. The board 
has made their decision to withdraw their services and I accept 
that, and I respect their decision, Mr. Speaker, and I told them 
that when I met with them. 
 
But it would appear, Mr. Speaker, that it is a sensitive point 
with the member for Weyburn that when her leader, when the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party places his value on resources 
to serve the most vulnerable people of Saskatchewan, that from 
his point of view as he told the Leader-Post in October of ’01 
one day, and then the next day The StarPhoenix . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. All members will have their turn and opportunity 
if we are able to allow the members to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would be very interested in an explanation of the 
hard, right-wing perspective of the Leader of the Sask Party 
who says that he places very small value on the provision of 
resources to the most vulnerable of our citizens by ripping $50 
million out of the budget if he had his way. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan will make sure he never has his way 
with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Minds Eye Pictures 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, 
that minister and this House should know that, prime among 
whatever cuts are going to happen after the government 
changes, Mr. Speaker, the cuts that will happen will come in the 
number of NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
sitting across the way. That’s what the people of the province 
will cut. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
minister responsible for Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
That particular Crown corporation approved an additional $2 
million in investment into the government’s movie company, 
Minds Eye production. Now remember, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government already had 4.5 million taxpayers’ dollars into this 
movie company and had to write that investment down to 
$500,000. It didn’t stop them from approving another $2 
million in funding to this company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: how much of 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

 

the $2 million line of credit, if you will, or commitment that the 
NDP approved to Minds Eye in December has been provided 
by the taxpayer to the NDP movie company so far? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me say 
first of all, as I answered that question in the Assembly here 
some time ago, we approved the authorization of additional 
funds being advanced only, Mr. Speaker, and I say only under 
the condition that it was matched by private sector dollars. And 
that is exactly what occurred, Mr. Speaker. There were no funds 
advanced unless they were matched by private sector investors 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will get the specific amount for the member from Swift 
Current. I’ll get the specific amount, but as of the end of the 
year, Mr. Speaker, it was, to the best of my recollection, $1.125 
million and that was matched by private sector monies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that’s the 
information, that’s the information that the opposition has as 
well. The answer to the question, how much of the $2 million in 
pre-approved taxpayer credit, if you will, had been accessed is 
1.25 million more dollars. 
 
Now the question to the minister is this: in light of his 
commitment again that none of this money would flow unless 
Minds Eye, the NDP movie company, found private sector 
investors to match it, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of questions 
in the wake of that. 
 
The first question is, did the NDP approve another $1.25 
million after they had written off 4 million taxpayers’ dollars of 
the first $4.5 million investment? That’s the first question. Did 
they approve it after they had written off that investment? 
 
The second question, Mr. Speaker, is, what are the private 
sector companies that have invested into this particular venture 
to lever the 1.25 million in more taxpayers’ dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, in 
answer to the question, Mr. Speaker, there has been no 
additional authorizations approved. The original authorization 
through order in council, which was very public, Mr. Speaker, 
was $2 million. And I had indicated that there was 1.125 
million advanced subject to matching dollars by the private 
sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funds were matched. Mr. Speaker, the funds 
were matched out of the Crocus Fund which is based out of 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

Donation of Highway Sign 
 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Highways. Mr. Speaker, on Friday CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Saskatchewan held a garage sale to 
raise money for the food banks so I went over to check it out. 
 
You can imagine how shocked I was to see that someone had 
taken a brand new Department of Highways speed limit sign 
and was selling it at the garage sale. And not only that, Mr. 
Speaker, but they’d also vandalized it by writing all over it. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s okay; I have good news. I bought the sign and 
I can now return it to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Highways 
return this sign to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would you . . . Excuse me, 
would you just take that outside the door there, please? Outside. 
Order. I would remind the members about exhibits. Would the 
member go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister take the sign and 
return it to the Department of Highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the 
opportunity to address this issue. Mr. Speaker, that sign was 
generously donated by Scott Kirk, a young man who is manager 
at Signal Industries. So Signal Industries and Scott donated the 
sign at my suggestion to Scott, a young man who I married he 
and his wife a number of years ago. 
 
And they were concerned about the food bank and wanted to 
make a donation so that was a donation from the sign company 
which we jointly signed. If the member opposite would look he 
would see Signal Industries, Scott Kirk, plus my signature on 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m really sorry . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I just want to say that I am appreciative of the member opposite 
making his contribution to the food bank as well, by purchasing 
the sign. And if he wants to donate it back to the Department of 
Highways for use, I’m sure that we can make use of it in some 
way. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says that the sign was 
donated by Signal Industries yet on the on-line auction it was 
advertised as a donation from himself, Mr. Speaker. But that’s 
not surprising because after all, Mr. Speaker, he stole the 
110-kilometre speed limit idea from the Sask Party, and then is 
taking credit for donating the sign, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister . . . Now that the minister’s gotten 
the drivers on our divided highways to speed up, can he do us 
all a favour? Can he get the Premier to hurry up and call the 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. While I recognize 
the member’s tone is in jest, I do advise against the use of 
words such as stole and I ask him to use other words. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I was very happy to join with Scott Kirk in 
presenting that donated sign to CBC Radio. And both when I 
phoned before I offered the sign and when I took the sign in, I 
made it very clear that it was donated by Signal Industries and 
signed by myself. 
 
And I think it’s important, I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, 
that Mr. Kirk and Signal Industries also get credit; I’m happy to 
say that. And I’m sure that CBC would be happy to note as well 
that that was what was said when I donated the sign and 
brought it in at the beginning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 726 through 730 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 726, 727, ’28, ’29, and 730 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Community Resources and Employment 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (RE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
introduce officials who are assisting me today. To my 
immediate right, deputy minister, Bonnie Durnford; to my 
immediate left, assistant deputy minister, Darrell Jones. 
 
Back one row and to the right is deputy minister, Bob Wihlidal; 
who is next to Don Allen, executive director of finance and 
property management; and behind me is Shelley Hoover, 
assistant deputy minister. 
 
Behind the bar, Mr. Chair, are Phil Walsh, executive director of 
employment services and building economic independence; 
Deborah Bryck, director of child care; Marilyn Hedlund, the 

executive director of child and family services; Dorothea 
Warren, associate executive director of child and family 
services; Betty West, acting executive director of community 
living; and finally, Jan Morgan, acting director of career and 
employment services. 
 
And I’m looking forward, Mr. Chair, to questions from the hon. 
members and deliberations of the estimates. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials, and specifically the deputy minister 
and I see another lady at the back that I believe was with us on 
Friday night for the SARC, meeting with SARC. 
 
And for the deputy minister, unfortunately she missed a very 
special presentation. She wasn’t able to continue to be with us 
for the remainder of the evening. 
 
But I think the presentation by Diane Dupuy was something to 
behold and I think the minister will agree with me that it was 
very inspirational as we were challenged in how we look at 
people with disabilities and the fact that someone who just takes 
a little bit of time and care and is willing to give of their time 
. . . Indeed what people with disabilities can tell us about 
themselves and about life in general. And it was certainly a 
worthwhile event to participate in. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Having said that, Mr. Chair, though, I’d like to enter a little bit 
of debate and I know we’re probably going to be moving from 
one area to the next because of the length of time and the 
number of issues that we’re going to be facing. 
 
But fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is an issue that I think is . . . 
as governments we’re going to have to deal with and it’s going 
to become more, more of an issue even down the road than it is 
today. It’s becoming a very difficult issue even as we, as we 
debate the issue today. 
 
And what I’d like to just bring to the minister’s attention . . . 
and I’m not sure if the minister received the letter that I have in 
my hands. My guess is the minister probably would have, 
looking over the number of individuals that were sent this letter. 
But it comes from Regina, from a couple of parents concerned 
about a young individual that they had adopted into their home 
who is now a young man in his early 20s. It says: 
 

At present our 22 year old son . . . is standing before the 
courts AGAIN and no matter what the outcome there will 
be no appropriate place to put him . . . Last week I . . . 
found myself standing in front of Judge Smith and leaving 
court thrilled that he was more than willing to listen to a 
mother. He has stated that when I return to court he will be 
more than willing to hear any and all suggestions regarding 
placements for . . . (their son) as an alternative to prison. 
But it is the same old story — THERE ARE NO 
ALTERNATIVES TO PRISON. 
 
Every possible resource that my husband and I have 
researched have all given us the same answer ........ “there is 
no MONEY”. 

 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

 

And she goes on to say: 
 

Social Services are in total agreement with us that sooner or 
later there will have to be an alternative as FASD is an 
epidemic but there is a Big Gap in the system. 

 
And, Mr. Chairman, as I was reading through this letter I’m . . . 
And I think anyone who would take the time to read the letter 
would see that there were a couple of adoptive parents here, and 
they probably are speaking and a voice for many people across 
this province who have taken young children in. 
 
In this case, this family took this young, young child in when he 
was around 21 months of age. And by the time he was 21 
months of age, he had had 23 placements in foster families. And 
then of course as they’re writing this letter, this young person is 
now 22 years of age, has been in prison for a good period of 
time. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I guess the question is — I believe what we 
might have in this question is an overlap between community 
resources and development, Health, and even the judicial 
system — I guess what I’m asking of you, Mr. Minister: what is 
your department doing to try and work with the other agencies 
in addressing this very significant problem of FASD (fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder) and the fact that, just as a result of 
people’s inabilities to understand the consequences of their 
actions, and to date we just continue to use the corrections 
system and the prison system? 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if your department is coming up 
with some ideas or has been brainstorming to come up with 
some suggestions that would say, we’ve got to find another 
method of dealing with the individuals of this nature because 
what they need is not a prison system that really doesn’t give 
them any care or doesn’t provide for them. 
 
What they . . . What appears we need to start looking at is a 
system where we can assist these individuals in helping them 
deal with their inability to understand the consequences for their 
actions, and indeed starting to find out if we can channel them 
and use other resources and helpful resources that will actually 
assist these young men and women in becoming productive 
individuals in our society rather than locking them away. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for the 
question, which is a substantial question, and I’ll try and give it 
its due in responding in a substantial kind of way, Mr. Chair. 
 
In the circumstance that the hon. member uses as his cryptic 
example about FASD, and also the importance of addressing it 
in the context of how we address our support for people with 
disabilities, I would first of all want to say that it is I think 
partly in response to that particular case that the kinship care 
legislation, that has been put through the House in this session, 
would address some of that concern for insecurity that comes 
with many placements for a short period . . . over a short period 
of time in a child’s life, that we would hope to address to bring 
some stability, some predictability. 
 
I think it would be said by a good number that in supporting 
people with the spectrum of FASD, that it is a desirable 
characteristic that there is stability and predictability, and 

certainly that’s a factor there. 
 
It is I think important, Mr. Chair, that as we address the FASD 
needs that people have in our society, that we do it in the 
context of our supports for people with disabilities. And that 
was also one of the assumptions that the hon. member had in his 
question with which I agree. It’s in that context that we must 
look at our strategy as it relates to this particular disorder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our activity — and by our I mean government 
under the lead of the Department of Health actually, although 
Community Resources and Employment is certainly an active 
participant in it — that consultations are taking place with 
people here in Saskatchewan who have involvement and 
concerns related to fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, and that 
those consultations are based on the principles of recognition of 
the needs of individuals and families and communities but also 
the strengths of those individuals, families, and communities to 
take an approach in support of their needs which is 
strength-based. 
 
It also wants to ensure that there’s an active and full 
participation of individuals living with FASD, and their families 
and support networks, that are taken into consideration in our 
consultations; that there must be respect for all views and 
interests and also a respect for the fact that there must be, at the 
end of the day, a shared responsibility which includes 
government but is not exclusively of government to bring about 
the solutions that are necessary. 
 
As we look at providing supports for people with fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder, we would do that in a whole host of ways, 
Mr. Chair, that would be encompassed in many of the things 
that are in the department before us now. 
 
Some of those are supports related to the world of learning, and 
certainly the strategies used by the Department of Learning and 
the Kids First program, early learning and child development, 
the SchoolPLUS program. Those very much are necessary 
supports in the world of work. Our disability supports that we 
have introduced, we talked about I think in the last estimates, to 
support people dealing with their specific barriers and their 
attachment to employment. And also in the world of housing as 
we have brought forth our strategies related to enhancing 
affordable housing with a sensitivity to people with disabilities. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I think it’s fair to say that it must be a 
multi-faceted kind of approach if it’s going to be realistic in 
dealing with the supports that people with FASD need, and that 
would be the kind of strategy that Community Resources and 
Employment would engage in, in collaboration with other 
departments of government as well as the community at large. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I will agree with you the 
fact that with the new legislation and the recognition of the 
importance of not moving children hither and skelter and yon 
from one family to the next, just pushing to the next home. And 
the idea of the new legislation is to really take advantage — I 
shouldn’t say . . . I don’t want to use the word advantage — but 
utilize the efforts and the well-being of family members and 
their knowledge of a young child’s needs versus just moving 
them to a stranger’s home because an adoptive parent may find 
that they cannot cope with the individuals, continue to provide 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

the care. 
 
I think that’s something that when we’re talking about young 
children, hopefully as this program is implemented we will 
indeed begin to address some of the emotional stresses that a 
young child may face as they’re removed from a home, by the 
fact that they’re placed with an aunt and an uncle or a very 
close friend that they’ve become to know and appreciate. 
 
However in situations where we haven’t been able to do that 
and we find young . . . these individuals are now young adults, 
and as a result of their inability to comprehend they find 
themselves on many occasions facing the courts and the legal 
challenges of the law. 
 
And as the individual who wrote this letter mentions: 
 

This person . . . needs a loving, 24 hour supervised HOME 
with forced sobriety and workers willing to be his external 
brain. The workers need to be educated in the area of 
FASD and the punishment for his disabilities needs to be 
replaced with assisted direction. People with FASD are 
paying the price for a few drinks delivered to the womb. 
Through incarceration, . . . (this young gentleman) has sunk 
to a level that as Canadian citizens, we should be ashamed 
. . . To achieve rehabilitation, everything must be repeated, 
repeated and repeated because what is learned today will 
quite likely be forgotten tomorrow. 
 

And again, she says: 
 

This person . . . does know that in going back to prison, 
drugs will be readily available — easier than on the street, a 
statement that was whole heartedly was supported by 
previous courts over the past few years. 

 
We are very aware that . . . no existing Adult facilities to 
meet the needs, care and supervision of offenders with 
severe FASD (are available). 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . or Mr. Chairman, the minister 
will agree. 
 
Even just from Diane Dupuy’s presentation the other evening 
and her work with people challenged with disabilities, we can 
see that after many hours of repeated working with individuals 
. . . and we saw a young lady who, while there’s many 
challenges that young lady faces, she was still able to actually 
be able to speak and really showed a lot of pride in the work 
she’s able to do as a result of how Diane has worked with her 
and Famous People Players. 
 
However not everyone may have that opportunity. But at the 
same time, do we continue to incarcerate individuals? 
 
Or, Mr. Minister, are we going to start looking at ways in which 
we can, rather than incarceration — and we know what it costs 
to put a person behind bars — can we find a way of providing 
homes, a home where young individuals can be placed where 
there’s a requirement and where there’s actually the supervision 
that and the continuous work with that individual that will give 
them more productive life rather than in a prison system where 
they’re basically locked out of . . . out of view I guess, Mr. 

Minister? 
 
And I guess the question is, what is your department doing, 
working with Justice and Health, to address this issue that is 
going to become just a major issue in the very near future as 
more and more young people who are affected with FASD hit 
the system? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And again I thank 
the member for his question, and my answer will be very much 
in the context and tone of my previous answer. 
 
What the hon. member asks, Mr. Chair, relates to a range of 
supports that will be there to enable somebody with the fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder to be integrated into community 
activities in all walks of life. And it must be that that is where 
we go in looking for the solutions. 
 
It is very much the approach of the province to build on existing 
services and to build on existing strengths and to seek to, as I 
said earlier, with individuals — because ultimately it comes 
down to individuals — to be able to build on individual 
strengths and to enable an individual to reinforce those things 
which lead to good, what we’d call social functioning, and to 
diminish as possible those things that are anti-social or 
ultimately find an individual in conflict with the law. And then 
we get into a whole different system that none of us like to see 
and all recognize is pretty hard to make constructive once it gets 
to that point. 
 
And that’s why I go back, as I said before, Mr. Chair, to a series 
of involvements, that is to say in what way is the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment involved. Then it is 
involved as a participating partner with the lead Department of 
Learning in the Kids First program. Because the Kids First 
program is targeting those families which are most at risk — 
and many of those will be the same families who will be most at 
risk for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder — and bringing the 
parenting supports, in a whole host of ways, to that individual 
family with the individual. 
 
That flows then again to the supports for individuals in a more 
holistic kind of way, again under the leadership of Learning 
within the provincial government spectrum, but again with 
Community Resources and Employment being an active 
participant in that to supports for students once they hit the K to 
12 (kindergarten to grade 12) system. 
 
And the SchoolPLUS program then, or the SchoolPLUS philosophy, 
in our education system will enable — increasingly, I predict — 
for all of the helpers to bring the appropriate support resources 
to a student and his or her family as those are tagged as being 
necessary to deal with through the SchoolPLUS kind of contact. 
 
Again I point out that the services provided by Community 
Resources and Employment are not just those provided by 
department employees but many of those will be through 
community-based organizations that are funded through the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment and 
come into play in support ways in a number of ways there as 
students or as young people move from children, preschool into 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

 

the school age. 
 
When people get older then what’s also necessary in order to 
bring about the sense of security and consistency and 
predictability that is very, very desirable in the environment of 
the person with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, part of that is 
predictability in terms of a stable place to live. And therein then 
we deal with our housing strategies, which is now within also 
the Department of Community Resources and Employment, so 
to enable us to bring those resources to be available to a person 
who needs that kind of stability. 
 
The other side of the . . . Another part of that picture is also then 
the ability for a person to be self-sustaining as they grow older 
and to be successfully engaged in the world of work. And that 
brings into the picture then the Career and Employment 
Services portion of the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment. 
 
Again that may be support for education if additional education 
is part of the picture. Or it may be support for attachment to a 
specific employment circumstance where the resources of the 
department are used to address a specific barrier, as we talked 
about in the last time that we were before the House. 
 
So it is the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment, I think it’s fair to say, is in touch throughout the 
lifetime of a vulnerable individual, which will include a good 
number of people with FASD and many others too, of course, 
and some of that — much of that — in collaboration with other 
departments. 
 
But at the end of the day, the objective is to do . . . is to take a 
strength-based approach, addressing . . . not so much focusing 
on what it is that’s the diagnosis, the FASD diagnosis, but more 
importantly, what are the needs — what does the individual 
need in order to function effectively — and to focus on going 
there and building on the resources that we’ve got in place 
today. 
 
And we welcome, we welcome the recommendations and 
advice that those who live with FASD can bring to this 
discussion to enable us to move forward with greater 
effectiveness in our strategy, but I’m . . . I apologize for the 
length of time it takes, but it’s a substantial question and it 
deserves a substantial answer. And the fact of the matter is, it’s 
no single program but it’s a combination of things that 
hopefully would be the appropriate response at a different stage 
of life. 
 
The hon. member correctly points out that if the consequence of 
not having had those supports leads to criminal activity and 
having then come before the courts and into the incarceration 
system, that is a difficult . . . now we’re into a difficult 
circumstance to provide the support and consistency that is 
necessary for a person with FASD in order to function 
effectively as a responsible citizen in our society. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. Yes, Mr. Minister, 
you raised a number of issues. You raised the issue of 
education. You also raised the issue as well that we’ve been 
talking about, of how do we address the needs of individuals 
who already as young men or women find themselves with an 

inability to cope because of their lack of understanding, and as 
the letter points out, the need for that external brain, and the fact 
of establishing a routine. 
 
And I think we all would agree if in some way or form, we can 
provide and assist a young man or woman actually into some 
form of employment — and I would suggest that we may find 
we’d be fortunate if we found that we were able to have them 
employed for 50 per cent of the time. But at the same time 
they’re going to need those supports; that we need . . . you’ll 
need an individual who can be there to be that external brain for 
them, to assist them in that work opportunity. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, we will never assist them into a work 
or an employed opportunity if we continue to incarcerate them. 
And I think that’s what the family are raising here. We need 
something out of incarceration because, as is indicated, the 
courts are even recognizing that just to incarcerate a person is 
doing nothing for that individual because incarceration does not 
assist that person in becoming, or developing somewhat the 
abilities they may have and working with them to find some 
form of employment. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, what’s being asked in this letter and I 
guess the question I’m asking as well is, what is the department 
doing, recognizing the need that is coming down the road of 
looking at alternatives outside of incarceration whereby we can 
begin to work with these individuals in the best way that is 
possible to help them to develop and become somewhat 
productive citizens in our society? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, again I thank the hon. member 
for his question. Let me also agree with a point that I think he 
made during his last statement, that when it comes to dealing 
with FASD, prevention is the best policy, clearly. But it must 
not be the only policy. 
 
So in our discussion today, we’re dealing about when 
prevention hasn’t been the, you know, hasn’t been the mode 
that’s been most effective because people have fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder. 
 
And I want to come . . . Particularly it’s most appropriate that 
we’re dealing with it in these estimates because there is some 
1.8 million new dollars in this budget that’s before us now to 
address this kind of question for people with disabilities. Now, 
not limited . . . When I say $1.8 million, bringing to a total, I 
think, 2.35 if I remember correctly, the total budget, providing 
supports for people with disabilities to attach to the workforce 
through the Career and Employment Services that that’s . . . I’m 
by no means suggesting that that’s entirely dedicated to people, 
support for people with FASD, but certainly those folks can 
take advantage of the program. 
 
And the approach is this, Mr. Chair, is that it brings into play 
supports for employers to open the door to somebody with a 
disability and enable the person with the disability to function 
effectively as a productive employee in that place of 
employment. 
 
And the arrangements have all got to be made, obviously, in 
order for it to work on an individual basis. This not a 
cookie-cutter approach, one size fits all, but developed on an 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

individual basis where an employer . . . where a Career and 
Employment Services staff person will deal with an employer to 
address the specific barrier. Perhaps it’s an adaptation in the 
workplace, something to do with the physical layout or 
equipment or so on, but it could just as easily be putting in 
place a job coach or a mentor, or assistance with supervision, or 
advice for the employer as to how to deal with the needs of an 
employee, or perhaps related to scheduling or hiring, or the 
whole range of ways and putting in place supports that are not 
necessarily short term or stopgap — not at all. That if what’s 
necessary is to have that support in there for a long time, 
perhaps perpetually, that that’s the door that’s open. 
 
Because the end objective is this, is to build on strengths and to 
enable a person with disabilities to become part of the 
mainstream world of employment where he or she is 
performing a mainstream employment for mainstream benefits 
and with the potential to have a pension to retire. 
 
And so it is the kind of approach to supports in the world of 
work that is very much targeted to understanding the needs of 
the potential employee, the person with disability, the working 
relationship with an employer to address the particular . . . those 
specific barriers that will enable that employee to be a 
productive and useful employee for that employer. 
 
And that is a significant part of the approach to support for 
people with disabilities that comes out of this budget, and I 
think specifically addresses some of the issues that the hon. 
member brings to our question here today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 
that’s the point that I was raising along with the questions that 
are being asked here. And the fact that when we talk about 
support mechanisms, and I think if we look at the cost per day 
per each individual that’s incarcerated, if we could use some of 
the those resources in another way of assisting and building 
some kind of opportunities for these individuals rather than 
incarceration . . . And I guess that’s the suggestion. Maybe we 
need to start looking at, if they’re incarcerated it’s going to cost 
us X number of dollars a day. But if we can get away from the 
incarceration and find a way in which we can help mentor, if 
you will, these individuals and provide some employment . . . 
And you’re right; it’s going to cost us some money. 
 
(15:00) 
 
It just doesn’t come easy because these individuals, as has been 
indicated, need an external, if you will, brain to assist them in 
achieving some of those goals. So I think we need to take a look 
at how we can better utilize the funds that are there. 
 
Earlier on you talked about learning and I’d like to just read a 
few more comments from this letter. It says: 
 

Please — we do not need any more posters reading “Don’t 
Drink while you are Pregnant” for women who cannot read 
or are never sober long enough to comprehend that 
message. We would like to relate a conversation our eldest 
son had the other night with a young lady. She had said she 
had seen his mom on TV and cried when she heard how 
FASD had devastated his brother’s life and swore to our 
son that she would never drink when she got pregnant. We 

hated going on TV and sharing our private story with the 
public but felt very happy if only one young girl got the 
message. When we thanked our son for the encouragement, 
he said don’t get too happy mom......the girl was drunk 
when she said it! 
 

I think that’s one of the problems as well. Mr. Minister, we’ve 
got to find more effective tools of relating that message of the 
problems of drinking while pregnant so these young women can 
begin to really get . . . and be able to comprehend the problems 
that they are creating by drinking while pregnant. 
 
And if a person happens to be drunk when they’ve seen, like the 
story of this nature, and it emotionally challenges them, but at 
the same time, while they’ve said they’ll never do it, the reality 
is because of the state of the condition they were in it never 
really sank in, it didn’t get very far. And I think there’s a real 
challenge for us as to how we address this, deliver this message 
so that we begin to see some real reductions and response . . . 
young women really living responsibly while they’re pregnant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I do want to agree with the 
observation the hon. member makes that when we spend public 
dollars related to incarcerate people those are probably about 
among the least productive social dollars spent. I’m not saying 
they’re not necessary but in terms of productivity as it . . . in the 
context of how it touches people’s lives or how it impacts on 
our society, we’re not talking high return. 
 
And therefore it is so wise for us as we’re debating here in this 
Assembly the expenditure of public dollars, that we do give 
credence to the significance of preventive supports. Clearly a 
dollar spent, as the hon. member points out, to support 
somebody to be able to hold down a job and to do it 
successfully, and perhaps, perhaps for the first time forever to 
hold down a job for an extended period of time, must be 
measured not only in comparing the direct expenditure of 
support, be it a job coach for example, as compared to the cost 
of social assistance. 
 
Sure, yes, that’s one way of measuring it but another way of 
measuring it as well is the cost of an individual not being able 
to have that stability and that means to support him or herself, 
and then the consequences of somebody who is without roots 
finding themselves in conflict with the law and then we begin 
that vicious cycle of public spending. 
 
So I do accept the point. I think it’s a point well made and it’s a 
point well taken, and I think it’s reflected in the budgetary 
decisions this year to expand the supports for people with 
disabilities to address the barriers that they have to the world of 
work. And I’m advised that we expect the number of people we 
are able to serve specifically in this budget year as a result of 
the budget increase, to increase by some 900 to 1,000, bringing 
to us in the range of 14 to 1,500 people in Saskatchewan, 
people with disabilities, that we’ll be able to assist. 
 
And I know as I’ve talked with people since coming to this 
portfolio nearly two years ago who are concerned about the 
support for people with disabilities, they’ve clearly said to me, 
when you . . . there’s a whole lot of things need to be attended 
to but at the top of the list is support for the world of 
employment; that with that, a whole host of other very 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

 

important things come in a person’s life. 
 
So therefore I’m pleased that we are able to find the money in 
this year’s budget to — the one that’s before us right now — to 
expand that by some one point, I think $1.85 million, to help 
assist some near 1,500 people in Saskatchewan to make that 
transition to gainful employment. And included in those 
numbers then, the some with FASD, whose supports will come 
quite likely in the form of a job coach or a mentor, but a person 
working together with them with contact and to ensure that 
those behaviours that lead to success in the workplace are used, 
and if errors are made that they’re dealt with constructively; and 
to work not only with the individual but with the employer, and 
in the long-term interest of not only the individual but the 
long-term interest of the employer, and ultimately in the 
long-term interest of the taxpayer and the caring citizen of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, before I move on I’d 
like to . . . at least one more question on this issue. And I’d like 
to know, Mr. Minister, if there is any federal money coming to 
the province to address the issues of FASD? If so, how much 
and whether or not the province is actually putting any money 
into trying to address this issue as well. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you’ve given a 
consideration as well to putting money towards funding a 
diagnostic centre. You talked earlier on about addressing and 
actually just being able to diagnose at an earlier age so we can 
begin to deal with the situation. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if 
your department’s given any thought to funding or at least 
talking to the Department of Health, whether there’s an issue 
here about funding a diagnostic centre so we can address this 
issue and be able to determine earlier on whether or not a 
person has a significant problem in their lives as a result of 
FASD? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. To the hon. member, 
the federal government will be directing funds that come to 
Saskatchewan that enable us to be a part of the strategy of 
addressing the needs for people with FASD. And they will be 
. . . I don’t think it would be accurate to represent them as . . . 
Money is transferred to Saskatchewan for FASD, you know, 
specifically to address FASD issues; it’s to address a number of 
issues, one of which is FASD. So it’s difficult for me to sort out 
money and say how much, you know, how much of that money 
is for FASD — I don’t know that anybody could honestly 
answer that question for you. 
 
But federal funds do flow to Saskatchewan through the Early 
Childhood Development Agreement, and that in the program 
that we refer to in Saskatchewan as Kids First, that’s our 
version of it here in Saskatchewan. And it was certainly 
recognized in that FASD is part of . . . presents a good . . . some 
of the problems that are being focused on with supports for the 
Kids First program, with the home visits that are done to 
identify with parents what the needs are and to ensure that 
they’re getting the best kind of supports that are available. 
 
So we do receive some federal funding there that is . . . that we 
use then for our Kids First program. Federally there is the Head 
Start program, which is a prenatal nutrition program which is 
targeted to the First Nations — both on- and off-reserve 

population. And also the employment assistance for persons 
with disabilities, the EAPD (employability assistance for people 
with disabilities) program, would be another form of federal 
funds that would come to us, assist people with disabilities, 
some of whom then would be people who are affected by 
FASD, engaged in either training or employment attachment. 
 
So those would be some of the ways. On the matter of 
diagnostic centre, that’s not something that the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment would be addressing 
because with FASD being a health condition, it’s a question 
that’s more appropriately addressed to the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and I recognize that. 
However I would just consider the fact that this is an issue 
because a lot of people with this problem end up in your 
department with support mechanisms. The question was 
whether or not . . . what you’re doing as well to reinforce the 
importance of this issue with the Department of Health to 
address those concerns, Mr. Minister. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Minister, I just was wondering what 
. . . whether or not you pursued this issue with the Department 
of Health, knowing the significant impact that it has on your 
department as a result of having to deal with individuals with 
this problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment will work together with Health, and 
Health is certainly aware of the needs, and it’s Health’s 
jurisdiction to address it. But certainly there’s . . . I’m very, 
very confident that there is full communication between the 
departments. And Health approaches their addressing of dealing 
with the health diagnose issue in full understanding of the 
context of the social implications, which I think is the question 
you’re asking, because it’ll be Community Resources and 
Employment that will deal with the social implications. 
 
It’s also helpful to know, perhaps, that there has been a 
partnership established among the ministries of seven different 
jurisdictions here in the West — in addition to ourselves, 
Alberta, Manitoba, and British Columbia, and the three northern 
territories — entitled the Canada northwest fetal alcohol 
syndrome partnership, and which brings together on an annual 
basis service providers and those who are immersed in issues 
related to FASD to be a part of an ongoing education. 
 
I think it would be accurate to say that there’s none of us who 
are of the view that we know all there is to know about FASD 
and the appropriate way of dealing with it, and that we must all 
be committed to continuing to understand the issues and how 
they’re being effectively addressed so that we can learn from 
best practices from one another and move forward in that kind 
of way. So that’s something that’s important as well. 
 
Just going back to the funding question that you ask. Of the $13 
million that flows to the provincial government through the 
Kids First program, it would break out largely between three 
different departments in terms of how it’s spent in support of 
early childhood development. And it’s important to note as well 
that some of that is to direct attention to prenatal education, so 
that it’s . . . Kids First doesn’t just come into play after a child 
is born. Certainly there are . . . there’s hospital testing that’s 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

done to try to identify the at-risk families and then to bring the 
offer of support to at-risk families after that. But there’s also 
prenatal education that goes on. 
 
(15:15) 
 
That $3 million breaks down roughly this way: $3 million to 
Learning, which is largely dedicated to the early-learning 
component; some $6.7 million to Health, and that’s primarily 
dedicated to the home-visiting program that I referred to as well 
as mental and addictions components which are unfortunately 
all too common as well; and then some $3.3 million to 
Community Resources and Employment which would largely 
be related to the provision of child care to children who are at 
risk. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, my questions are 
along the same line as my colleague, the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
We see all too often unfortunate situations where we have 
single parents who have a problem with substance abuse and 
unable to look after their family, their children. Quite often their 
children are taken into care by your department. And as part of 
the condition of the children being returned to the single parent, 
quite often it’s suggested — in fact probably is made mandatory 
— that this individual receive treatment for their substance 
abuse. 
 
I’ve been made aware of a number of situations where that 
happened. The individual goes and receives treatment for 
substance abuse. After a while the children are returned to the 
single parent and the whole cycle seems to start all over again 
because of the fact that, it seems to me, there is no support for 
the individual after they’ve received treatment. They tend to go 
back and live in the same environment that they were living in 
when they . . . when the whole problem started. 
 
And my question is: has your department got programs in place 
to assist these parents with their problems, whether it be 
counselling or mentoring or a combination of programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, it would be I think common that the 
caseworkers that we would have who work for the Department 
of Community Resources and Employment would be people 
who are informed and knowledgeable about addiction matters 
and would certainly have a good handle on the appropriate 
referrals that would be necessary. 
 
The Department of Community Resources and Employment 
don’t ourselves deliver addictions services, that would . . . 
addiction services would be delivered through Health funding 
in a variety ways, through health districts, health regions I 
should say, and CBO’s (community-based organization) to 
some degree. 
 
We would have also, funded by Department of Community 
Resources and Employment, community-based organizations 
that would be there to provide supports to families. And 
included in that as well would be people who would be 
knowledgeable about the appropriate referrals to people in order 
to assist them doing what they need to do to meet the 

circumstances that would provide for a safe environment for a 
child to be raised within a family. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, a few cases 
that I am familiar with, it seems to me what happens is that after 
a period of time, once it’s been established that there is a safe 
environment for the children to return to the care of the parent, 
things seem to go along fairly smoothly for a while but then it 
just seems that the individuals have a great difficulty in 
changing their lifestyle and so on. And quite often what 
happens is that the unfortunate cycle repeats itself and it repeats 
itself perhaps a number of times. 
 
And it just seems to me that perhaps we need to find some 
additional resources whereby these individuals can be mentored 
and guided and perhaps . . . and encouraged, and maybe in a 
fairly stern manner, to change their lifestyle for the betterment 
of themselves and their children. 
 
And I would urge you to, and your department, to see if there 
are some resources available to address that matter. Because the 
experience that I have had and seen is that quite often the family 
situation is monitored for a while, and as I said, things seem to 
go fairly smoothly but really nothing has changed other than 
perhaps the parent who has the addictions problem makes a 
concerted effort for a while to not use these various harmful 
substances. 
 
But after a while it seems through a combination of things, I 
suppose, whether it be family pressures and just the overall 
unhappiness with their state of affairs, it’s quite often some of 
these people don’t really see any hope in the future. They really 
have nowhere to go. They’re quite often on social assistance 
and that sort of thing. And as I said, the whole cycle repeats 
itself. 
 
And it just seems to me that there’s a need there that needs to be 
addressed. And I realize that, you know, there’s a great need out 
there but perhaps some resources could be directed in to that 
area to help break that cycle, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I think the hon. member brings 
a concern to our discussion which is a continuation of the 
discussion in essence that I’ve been having with the hon. 
member from Moosomin. 
 
Let me say two things. One, the hon. member makes a, I think, 
a good argument in support of kinship care which is, as he will 
know, is a piece of legislation that this House has passed earlier 
in this session and that will bring into place a system of caring 
for kids that’s closer to home than has been the traditional case 
in the past. Without going into the details because we debated 
that, but the important thing there being that it directs resources 
in support of kinship care when the child is removed from the 
family for safety reasons, people who are closer to the natural 
home, always with the objective as much as we can possibly 
manage that the child will eventually return home, and where 
home is a safe environment and where we’ve brought some 
supports as well to enable the parent or parents to be able to 
better function as supportive parents, which is what the hon. 
member wants to see done. 
 
I would remind the hon. member as well that what he describes 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

 

is in many ways the core philosophy of the Kids First program 
here in Saskatchewan. When we received the federal funding in 
support of programs to target towards vulnerable families and 
early childhood development kinds of supports, basically I 
guess we had two decisions. 
 
One is to take that money and spread it across the population 
and take some things that we were doing for and enhance them 
a little bit so that everyone — quotes, “everyone” — can benefit 
from that. 
 
The other choice we had, which is the one we made, was to take 
those funds and target them to — I believe it’s the nine, if I 
remember correctly — nine communities identified as having 
the largest number of at-risk families to bring a much broader 
range of supports to that family to give them a chance to . . . in 
order to succeed; recognizing that the status quo means that 
families with a lot of things going against them, addictions can 
be among them, but all too often, addictions, poverty, violence, 
illiteracy, these all too often come together, and recognizing 
that if you’re going to give a kid who’s growing up in a 
seriously at-risk family a chance, then you have to be holistic in 
the way that you bring those supports and that you have to be 
there for a while, not just for a few weeks or for a few months. 
 
I know when I’ve talked with some of the home visitors in the 
Kids First program, they talk about the importance of 
establishing the trust relationship with a mom or parents who 
are there, and then coming into that family to be seen as an ally, 
somebody’s who’s on their side and helping them sort out and 
to trust the various kinds of supports that we’ve got. And all too 
often, you know, what happens is that the family that’s most at 
risk is least inclined to use the supports that are available 
through our tax dollars, you know. 
 
And so Kids First program is intended to overcome that barrier, 
to get those folks in touch with somebody who understands the 
supports available, who they come to know and trust to believe 
is on their side, and to assist them in dealing with those and take 
advantage of those, whether they’re health, or social . . . you 
know, in the range of social services, community resources and 
employment, or they’re education, right — it doesn’t matter 
where they come from — that they’re there to assist you to 
enable you to give a kid a chance to . . . 
 
You know at the end of the day, the whole objective of this is to 
try to ensure that these youngsters that grow up in these homes 
when they, you know, when they get to kindergarten or grade 1, 
that they can line up with their toes right on the same starting 
line as the other kids. That’s what it’s all about. That’s what it’s 
all about, is to give these kids a chance to be there with the rest 
of the kids. And knowing that we haven’t been . . . As much as 
we would like to have been, we haven’t been as successful for 
the families in the greatest need. 
 
And I think that’s the point that the hon. member raises, Mr. 
Chair. I want to assure him that those, I think, are being 
addressed, and in many ways we’ll be able to measure progress 
as we go along. But at the end of the day, ultimately I think it’ll 
probably take us a generation. It’ll take us a generation to really 
accurately measure the degree of success that we experience. 
 
Whether it’s tackling child poverty through the Building 

Independence program or family vulnerability through the Kids 
First program, at the end of the day it’s when kids grow up to 
become responsible attitudes . . . to responsible adults, I should 
say, and who are the kind of role models for their children that 
we would all want them to be and that they want to be, that the 
benefit for our society pays off. 
 
So I thank the hon. member for a very cryptic . . . critical 
question about the significance of our public investments in 
support of vulnerable families. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, I’ve been 
made aware of a situation that is very . . . is exactly what we’ve 
been talking about. And there was one observation that I would 
perhaps like to present at this time. 
 
It has to do with a young mother whose children were taken 
into care by the department because of substance abuse and 
poverty and a number of these things. I understand the situation 
is that the children are still in care but there is visitations and so 
on. And this is . . . I believe this has transpired over several 
months. 
 
The young mother did receive treatment for substance abuse 
and so on, but the part that concerns me is that in the interim I 
understand that the young mother is still on social assistance, 
and I’m not sure whether she has been encouraged to seek 
employment. And I’m not . . . My major concern isn’t that she’s 
on social assistance and that being the fact, although I mean we 
all like to see judicious use of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
But the fact that there are jobs, even though they may be entry 
level jobs and so on available, I think it would be important that 
that individual and individuals like that person be encouraged 
and in fact be mandated to seek some employment, you know 
strictly for self-esteem, and re-entering the workforce and 
perhaps changing the environment that they’re living in and 
those sorts of things. 
 
So if in fact that is the case, Minister, I would strongly urge 
your department to look at those situations and rather than 
having these people being on social assistance with really not 
. . . no reason for it because they no longer have a young family 
to look forward to, it would seem to me that their life would 
have a whole lot more purpose if they had something to go to. 
 
I understand some of these individuals have been through the 
gamut of education whether it be career counselling and 
upgrading and those sorts of things. And there comes a point in 
time where some of these individuals maybe have to need a 
helping hand to enter the workforce and I would strongly 
suggest that that be looked at, Minister. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the theoretical case — because 
we’re not here talking about specific cases; we can’t and we 
know that — that the hon. member brings is one that I think 
must and is responded to in a pretty constructive kind of way. It 
clearly is the expectation of the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment that any employable person who is 
receiving social assistance is required to be engaged in the 
pursuit of employment. 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

And as the hon. member will know, through the Building 
Independence program, that we have put in place supports in a 
variety of ways to support that, including, I would point out, 
child care which . . . because ultimately, at the end of the day, 
we would hope for the child and the family that the child . . . 
And the child is only away from the . . . has only been removed 
by the courts — not by a social worker but by the courts — 
from the family for one reason and that’s because the home 
environment is not safe. 
 
And the objective is to work with the family, with the parent to 
enable that child to return safely to the place he or she belongs, 
where she was born, he was born. And that it is the intention 
that through our variety of our programs, whether income 
security or they’re related to child welfare or they’re related to 
housing or they’re related to child care, that we bring together 
those pieces that support a family getting it together and 
becoming self-sufficient. 
 
So it is, I think the kind of concern the hon. member brings to 
this discussion, I think it’s fair to say it’s represented in the 
approach that the department takes in dealing with families. 
And I think it points out very cryptically that in the real world 
. . . You know, we would like to think that there are problems 
and there are simple solutions. And you got a problem, you 
apply a simple solution, the problem is solved and life goes on. 
 
And the fact of the matter is we recognize that when it comes to 
human services, it is so important to deal with people 
holistically because that’s how they live. They don’t live their 
lives in nice, neat little stovepipes. And I think that’s the point 
the hon. member makes and I appreciate his observation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, just a couple 
of short questions with regard to Sask Housing. Sask Housing 
instituted a new rental regime recently and part of that change 
in rental calculations, if I understand it correctly, the maximum 
rental rates went from $400 per month to $800 per month, or 
will be going over a period of time. And this causes some 
problems, particularly in some of the units in rural 
Saskatchewan where $800 per month is way higher than the 
market value of that particular property. And I’ve had a number 
of local housing authorities talk to me about this situation. 
 
It seems as if some communities have maximum rental ceilings 
in place and other ones don’t. Some of the ones that don’t have 
these maximum rental ceilings in place have had units empty 
for quite some time because frankly they’re just too costly and 
there doesn’t seem to be, at least to the local housing 
authorities, any rationale as to why one community will have a 
ceiling on their rental rates and another one won’t. 
 
Could you explain the rationale and the policy behind that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the hon. member for his question 
and do want to add to my previous response as well, that in 
reference to his concern about supports for people, single-parent 
families, that since the Building Independence program was 
introduced — well in fact prior to that, comparing back to 1994 
— that in Saskatchewan today the number of families requiring 
social assistance, single-parent families requiring social 
assistance, has dropped by 32 per cent, so nearly a third, 
indicates I think, some helpful progress has been made. 

Addressing specifically the question the hon. member asks, the 
simple answer is this: is that there are two kinds of housing, 
there is affordable housing and social housing. Affordable 
housing is where everyone pays the same rent regardless of 
their means, and authorities will, local authorities will set those 
rates. They’ll be at the low end of the market. 
 
The question the hon. member asks is about social housing, 
which is not that. It’s when your rent is a percentage of your 
income. And the fact of the matter is that the maximum rent 
charged under social housing will be $800, and that’s true 
province-wide. 
 
But it will only come into play in some communities. Some 
communities will have vacancies and then will make their units 
available, in order to fill the vacancies, to people who want to 
rent, and because it’s social housing — it’s specifically put 
there to be made available as a percentage of income — then 
people will pay that percentage of their income. 
 
The percentage is moving over the next three years to 29 per 
cent of income; it’s only 26 per cent of income. The national 
standard is 30. So we’re at 26, 7, 8, 9; national standard 30. But 
it’s a percentage of income. So you can get your calculator out 
— I don’t have one with me — but if 26 per cent of your 
income, of your gross income was over $800 and you were in 
one of the social housing units, then you’d pay $800 max. 
 
But some communities will not have vacancies and therefore 
the maximum rent will not kick in because the people who are 
taking advantage of the social housing units are lower-income 
people and when, as a percentage of their income, it’s assigned, 
it never does get up to the $800 range. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister: Minister, that’s 
precisely the problem or the question that these local housing 
authorities have. 
 
We’ll have one community 10 kilometres down the highway 
will have social housing and they have had vacancies and they 
can’t rent their units so they get permission to have a maximum 
which is considerably below the $800; another community will 
have similar circumstances and yet they don’t have a maximum. 
If someone wants to rent that unit and if their income dictates 
that it’s $800 a month, that’s the rent that they’ll pay. 
 
And what the housing authorities tell me is that $800 is way 
beyond market value for some of these communities and 
therefore these units will never be rented, and they’re asking 
why is there one set of rules for one community and one for 
another. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the policy is this. And again let 
me add perhaps for clarification that applying the graduated 
rental scale that I’ve referred to earlier, the maximum province 
wide is $800. There will be in the case then, in some 
communities where their housing stock — social housing stock 
— has vacancies, they can apply in order to make use of that, to 
make use of that stock. They can apply for a reduced maximum 
so that it brings it into the range that would be considered 
affordable in the standard of that community. 
 
At the end of the day, it must . . . It is never the objective of 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

 

Sask Housing or the housing authority to be in competition with 
the private housing market. The purpose of our social housing 
. . . of our housing programs is to support access to quality, 
affordable, living facilities for lower-income families. 
 
So that will be an accommodation that will be done in the best 
interest of the local community given the vacancy 
circumstances of the housing stock and to put it into a context 
that’s standard for that community. 
 
But at the end of the day, it’s first purpose will always be . . . 
It’ll have to go back to the first purpose being support of 
low-income families. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just a quick 
follow-up in regards to the graduated rent scale that’s going up. 
 
In a letter here, I think it was sent to you from an individual in 
North Battleford, just the end of last year, and the issue talks 
about the increase from the 25 to the 29. Also it raises a number 
of issues of increases that as tenants they’ve seen — electrical 
rates, plug-in rates. And the fact that the housing unit or the 
apartment unit they happen to be in, it’s something like this 
Legislative Assembly. You get a certain time of the year, you 
shut off the heat and you go to cooling mode. Unfortunately 
they don’t have a cooling mode so they’re seeing additional 
costs there as they use other alternative sources of heat. 
 
But the one, the real issue they raise here is the 25 per cent, and 
they’re indicating on gross income and they’re suggesting it 
should be on net income because there’s quite a difference 
versus your gross and net. And I’m wondering if you . . . if 
there is a quick response as to, is it indeed the rental rate is the 
gross income or do you look at net income as to what they 
would have for disposable income? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Yes, the standard is on gross household 
income. It’s the same standard that would be used nationwide. 
And as I say, the national standard for housing is 30 per cent of 
gross household income. Here in Saskatchewan currently it’s 26 
and will be moving to 29 over the next three years. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I actually wouldn’t mind 
following up on that a bit but there’s a number of other issues 
I’d like to address as well and I understand that we might be 
limited in our debate today. I think we could go till 5 and later 
in the evening if you’d like. I’m sure your officials wouldn’t 
mind sitting here and getting it dealt with. 
 
However, there’s an issue I really would like to address and it’s 
respite care for families with disabilities. And I believe you 
received a letter from an individual in Prince Albert in fact 
regarding this issue. And I’m not exactly sure; I think you may 
have received some of, if not a copy of most of the letters that 
have come from the community of Esterhazy. That’s been . . . 
has developed a respite care for . . . and at this time I believe it’s 
assisting 17 families, and it’s not just 17 families right in 
Esterhazy but certainly from the area — Yorkton, Melville, 
Rocanville, and Langenburg — communities like that. 
 
And just to . . . a couple of quotes I’d like to . . . or issues I’d 
like to raise from people who have brought this to my attention. 
 

I am writing this letter as a parent of 3 children, 2 of which 
have multiple handicaps and are totally dependant. We live 
in rural Saskatchewan. In 1996 a group of desperate parents 
of special needs children got together and recognized the 
need for respite. We worked extremely hard looking for 
funding and fund raising ourselves and in 1998 opened the 
out-of-home respite program. Our community has been 
extremely supportive and has helped out tremendously. 
This is a huge expectation of a small community and can 
no longer go on. If our group does not find some 
sustainable funding we will be forced to close our doors, 
leaving families with no respite alternatives. 
 

(15:45) 
 
And, Mr. Minister, there’s other letters as well talking about the 
need and how this respite program has certainly worked and 
assisted families. And I’d like to quote from a child action 
planning committee member: 
 

Esterhazy is very fortunate to have an out of home respite 
service that has come about because of a great need and 
belief that the best place to care for a child with a disability 
is in the child’s home and community. There is no 
guaranteed government funding for this program. Monies 
raised in the community are kept in the community-based 
service. Without a diversion like respite, stress can be 
overwhelming as you well know (and we all know of the 
Robert Latimer case). Guaranteed support would take a lot 
of stress off of the shoulders of the community, staff and 
families of respite recipients. 
 

Mr. Minister, I think we all can appreciate the difficulties that 
families with children with disabilities face, and the ongoing 
needs. And we all know that each individual is a little 
somewhat different but the required needs for these children 
becomes even greater as they continue to grow, and of course 
the physical needs and the lifting and the caring for these 
children. 
 
And the community of Esterhazy has arrived at . . . or was able 
to arrive at a respite program where families could call ahead 
and they could get some 24-hour care, and recognizing the fact 
that their child or children would be cared for very . . . with 
very lovingly and caringly and also giving the families the 
opportunity to get some relief. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you did respond to the community. But I’m 
asking you, Mr. Minister, if you’ve taken the time and your 
department has taken the time to look at the program and 
whether or not there are avenues your department has looked at 
and has decided or has . . . realizes that what the program does 
is relieves your department of a lot of financial resources. 
Because if the parents weren’t caring for the children and you 
had to place them in a special needs or a care home, the cost 
there again would be substantially higher simply because the 
costs of caring for that type of a person. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, what I’m asking on behalf of the people 
of Esterhazy is whether or not your department has looked very 
carefully at the request that has been brought forward and 
whether or not you’ve been able to find some resources or 
determine whether there is an avenue whereby we can help 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

meet some of the needs so that this worthy program can 
continue to move forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
question and I do understand the importance of the respite 
services to the families in Esterhazy and area. It has been a 
matter of discussion that has been taking place with the 
department, with officials. And there has been an agreement 
that has been reached to transfer $10,000 in annual funding 
from the existing community living division respite budget to 
the Esterhazy Association for Community Living out-of-home 
respite program. So it would be my hope that this will enable — 
this additional resources — will enable the families there to 
meet their respite needs. 
 
I know it’s been a matter of serious discussions taking place for 
some time. I know the hon. member has mentioned it to me 
behind the bar on more than one occasion as well. And I’m 
optimistic that we’ve been able to find, together, a solution that 
will work for the families in the Esterhazy area. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, I thank the minister. I think certainly 
the people around Esterhazy would be appreciative of that, that 
offer for some support because certainly it’s . . . As you can say, 
the stress of even just trying to raise the funds to keep the 
program alive and having the province recognize that this is 
meeting a specific need, as well, and it certainly takes away 
from some of the load that may end up on our shoulders if we 
don’t do something. To assist, I think would be appreciated. 
 
Mr. Minister, I recognize, I understand that there’s some needs 
to get on and we have to move out of Community Resources, as 
much as there’s a number of other issues I’d like to address 
with you. I hope we can get that opportunity at a later date. But 
at this time I’d like to thank you and your officials for the 
response to the questions we’ve raised today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the questions of the 
hon. member, the critic for Community Resources and 
Employment, and his colleagues have brought today, and for 
what I think has been a substantial discussion about the 
provisions of services with the resources provided to us by the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just before taking my place, Mr. Chair, I too would like to 
acknowledge the important support work that the officials who 
are here in the committee today bring on an ongoing basis to the 
deliberations of the department, development of policy, and 
most importantly, effective application of policy through 
programs to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I particularly, before I take my place, want to acknowledge the 
excellence of one of the officials, in fact who is not here today, 
but by the name of Don Fairbairn, who is the executive director 
of intergovernmental relations division of the department. And 
we’ve been talking during estimates here today about the Early 
Childhood Agreement and the importance to the Kids First 
program that it provides for our province. And I’d simply like 
to point out that Mr. Fairbairn played a key leadership role in 
negotiating the early childhood agreements with the federal 
government. And he was acknowledged as one of the Premier’s 
Award for Excellence in Public Service recipients earlier this 
day just outside of the Assembly. 

And so, Mr. Chair, with appreciation for the questions, for the 
support for the officials, I would now like to move that the 
committee report progress and proceed to estimates on the 
Department of Industry and Resources. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. The first . . . the second item before the 
committee are the consideration of estimates for the Department 
of Industry and Resources, vote 23, found on page 76 of the 
Estimates book. And I would recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Seated to 
my left is Larry Spannier who’s the deputy minister of Industry 
and Resources. And to his left is Debbie Wilkie, the executive 
director of corporate services for the department. And to my 
right is Bruce Wilson, the assistant deputy minister for 
petroleum and natural gas. Behind Ms. Wilkie is Mr. Hal 
Sanders, the executive director of mineral revenue and 
investment services. Behind Mr. Spannier, is Mr. George 
Patterson, who is the executive director of exploration and 
geological services. Behind me is Jim Marshall, the assistant 
deputy minister in charge of resource and economic policy. 
Behind Bruce Wilson is Denise Haas, the acting assistant 
deputy minister of industry development. And also at the back 
of the room are Gerry Adamson, who is the vice-president of 
the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership; as well as Roy 
Anderson, who is the president and CEO (chief executive 
officer) of Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like also to 
welcome the officials. We always find them very helpful, and 
we appreciate your time today. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I may proceed, I’m looking at an article that’s 
purported to be from The Edmonton Journal, the headline of 
which is: “Looming natural gas crisis threatens record high 
prices.” It suggests that in Alberta at least alternative energy 
sources will need to be explored. 
 
I know that Alberta uses a much higher percentage of natural 
gas for their power generation than we do, but I wonder what 
percentage of our power is being generated by natural gas this 
year and are alternative energy sources being explored? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I appreciate the question. I believe — we 
don’t have the figures in front of us — but I believe, roughly 
speaking, in Saskatchewan about 60 per cent of our power is 
generated by coal, and I believe approximately 10 per cent is 
generated by hydro, and I believe roughly the balance, 
approximately 30 per cent, is generated by natural gas. Now 
these are rough figures but it gives you some idea. And of 
course they fluctuate from year to year. Last year there was 
more gas, less hydro, because of less water coming out of the 
mountains, but I believe that that’s about the case. 
 
I might offer the additional observation that we use a lot of coal 
because we have invested over the years in coal-generating 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

 

power stations, as the member knows. So we have a big 
investment in that kind of infrastructure. And also we have a 
coal industry in Saskatchewan which isn’t the — with no 
offence to the coal industry — it’s not the best coal in the 
world, but we have been using that coal; and that’s in part to 
support the coal industry which we’ve been making an effort to 
support both by using it and also some very good tax measures 
for the coal industry. 
 
I might also say, since the member started out asking his 
question about alternative energy sources and mentioned the 
cost of natural gas, I actually had a very interesting 
conversation at a luncheon in Saskatoon at noon where I was 
talking to an executive from Dow Chemical. And we were 
talking about the cost of natural gas, and they use a lot of 
natural gas and alternative energy sources. 
 
But then we were wondering if, you know, if the cost of natural 
gas was high and if you had an alternative to natural gas, the 
price of that commodity might be high as well because . . . or 
almost as high as natural gas in the sense that people would sell 
the alternative energy generating capacity for what the market 
might bear. So it’s somewhat unknown whether, if you had a lot 
of alternative sources, given that the cost of natural gas is 
driven by world demand, whether that would indeed keep the 
price of the alternatives low. But I don’t say that that’s for sure, 
but just to say it’s a somewhat speculative topic as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In light of the fact 
that natural gas is becoming extremely expensive — at least it 
appears that it will be — and that the high cost of natural gas is 
probably a more or less permanent fixture on our economic 
horizon, and I see that coal plants are being studied now with an 
eye to the sulphur emissions that come from them causing 
learning disabilities in children, I wonder, is your government 
involved in any active exploration of alternative power sources? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We are involved through the Department 
of Industry and Resources in the clean coal initiative that is, I 
think, headed up by SaskPower. And we’re involved to the tune 
of giving them approximately $300,000 per year to explore 
ways to go to cleaner coal. 
 
(16:00) 
 
But I should say to the member, not to downplay the 
importance of the questions because they’re very good 
questions, but this actually is something that the Department of 
Industry and Resources is not in charge of. This is a file of 
SaskPower, and the minister in charge of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), well I suppose of 
the Crown Corporations Committee, would be really 
responsible for this area more so than the Department of 
Industry and Resources. 
 
In fact in one sense we are working to promote industry 
sometimes in a way that leads us to want, say, SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy to provide power in a certain way. And we’re more 
interested in power generation in terms of a supply for industry, 
whereas SaskPower is taking the direct responsibility for 
examining clean coal initiatives, for example. 
 
Although I might make this observation, that we have a great 

interest in the possibility of the CO2 emissions, which are a 
by-product of coal-powered . . . coal-fuelled power generation, 
and whether that can be injected into the ground and assist us in 
producing more oil. And the member will know that we have 
the carbon dioxide sink test centre in Regina and also an 
initiative with SaskPower down at Coronach . . . Boundary 
dam, I guess. And so we’re interested in it from the point of 
view of whether the CO2 from coal production could be used to 
enhance the recovery of oil. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, it 
appears that the federal government is poised, at least in the 
not-too-distant future, to spend some substantial sum of money 
on a clean-coal pilot project. It appears that that’ll be up for sort 
of grabs between Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
 
Has your government been active in pursuing that opportunity; 
and if so, what measures have been taken, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
we are actively pursuing this. And again, the lead entity to 
pursue it actually is SaskPower, but they are pursuing getting 
some of that federal money to study initiatives with respect to 
clean coal. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, on 
another front, it appears or it seems that the Energy and 
Paperworkers Union and COGEMA are having some labour 
difficulties. I wonder, can the minister give us an update on this 
situation and what progress is being made, if any? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have 
resolved their differences. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, I take it from your answer that 
the parties are . . . that the issue has been resolved and there will 
be no work stoppage. 
 
The flooded mine at McArthur River is another important 
question. Is there a recent update on the status of that mine 
project and when that mine may come back on line and . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, my understanding is that they have 
got the flooding under control. My understanding of the 
situation is that there always is water that seeps into the mine, 
but what they need to do all the time is to pump the water out. 
And of course what happened this spring is the water started 
coming in faster than they were pumping it out. 
 
And at the present time they have got the matter under control 
and they have advanced the situation to the point where they 
believe that they will be into production again at the mine they 
estimate late August, which is somewhat earlier than they had 
projected. So things seem to be going along well for them in 
terms of having this flooding under control. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if the 
minister can inform as to what is being done with the water 
that’s pumped out of the mine at McArthur River, and if that 
poses any kind of an environmental problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I’m advised that the water is pumped 
into a holding pond where it is appropriately treated, after 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

which it is released into Reed Creek. But before it is released 
into Reed Creek, it’s tested provincially and federally to ensure 
that it meets the appropriate standards to be safely released. 
And indeed, it does exceed requirements for release before it is 
being released. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’re aware . . . 
Mr. Minister, I understand that the water meets Department of 
the Environment regulations. I wonder if it’s clean enough to 
satisfy the inter-church monitoring group that have been 
causing problems up there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I cannot comment on that in the sense that I 
do not know if the Inter-church Uranium Committee’s 
standards are different than the regulations. 
 
But speaking on behalf of the government, the water before it’s 
released meets the lawful regulations of the federal government 
and the provincial government before it’s released. And our job 
is to ensure that those are met. 
 
And I don’t know if the Inter-church Uranium Committee has a 
different standard, so I can’t comment on that. But certainly we 
ensure that it meets the laws and regulations of Canada and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving for a 
moment to the Shackleton gas find in the Swift Current area, it 
seems from a headline in the Leader-Post on June 9 that the . . . 
It says, “Gigantic gas play heats up industry”. And it goes on to 
say that the gas find is turning out to be even bigger than 
anyone had anticipated. 
 
I wonder how much impact will this additional gas, this gas find 
at Shackleton have on the, on number one, provincial revenues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we project that the revenue will probably be about the 
same this year as last year, which is roughly about $130 million 
for natural gas revenues. 
 
But we project that the average price for natural gas this year 
will be approximately 7.5 per cent lower than last year. So you 
can see that we will have more production to the tune of, you 
know, somewhere between 5 and 10 per cent but the price is a 
bit lower. So we expect the revenues to be about the same — 
about $130 million. 
 
Now having said that, there’s a lot of drilling going on so there 
may be a lot of activity in addition this year. 
 
I think that this projection may be somewhat cautious, that 
indeed perhaps we’ll do somewhat better than that. But the 
department officials tell me that we really . . . In the budget we 
said $120 million roughly, 119. I suspect it will be more like 
130 million which is the same amount as last year basically but 
the price is lower. Maybe we’re being a little bit cautious. 
Maybe it will be somewhat higher and I hope it will be. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, this year out of total capital spending of $55 million, 
Profico corporation — the corporation that’s doing most of the 
work in the Shackleton field — is going to spend $40 million of 

that $55 million in the Shackleton area. 
 
Does your department have any sort of a formula to calculate 
the spinoff from this kind of initial investment into the 
economy? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in answer to the 
question, no, there is no precise formula. We know that when 
there’s direct investment by any of the companies in gas or oil 
drilling, that there’s a large spinoff, especially in the 
communities that are nearby. So we know that it’s very 
positive. 
 
In terms of quantifying that or putting a formula on it, no we 
don’t have one. I’m not sure anyone else does either, but we do 
know that it’s extremely positive. And so I’ll leave it at that, 
other than to say that it’s especially positive with respect to 
Saskatchewan companies that employ a lot of Saskatchewan 
people — say their geologists, engineers. 
 
It’s also positive with respect to the out-of-province companies, 
but one can appreciate that a large oil company in Calgary will 
still employ its geologists and engineers in Alberta. They do 
work in Alberta as well so they don’t actually move here, 
although they may come here. But the Saskatchewan companies 
will tend to employ people directly here in the professional 
capacities, as well as the actual physical work that goes on in 
drilling. 
 
But it’s all positive for sure. But we can’t . . . We don’t have a 
formula, no. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, further on that theme. Has any 
thought been given to incentives or any sort of an inducement 
for oil and gas companies to use Saskatchewan-based 
professionals and contractors more in their service work and in 
providing services to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
we certainly encourage the industry to use local sources. We’re 
very successful in that regard; they do use a lot of local people 
and local services. 
 
The other thing I can tell you is that we, through the 
Department of Finance, we enforce the PST (provincial sales 
tax) rules. Which mean that if you’re an Alberta company with 
equipment let’s say and you bring it into Saskatchewan instead 
of using a Saskatchewan company, then we will make you pay 
a pro-rated amount of PST which would be equivalent to a 
Saskatchewan company that has to pay PST on their equipment 
when they purchase it. So that we try to create a level playing 
field. 
 
And so we take those measures, we provide encouragement. 
And talking to the service industry that services the oil and gas 
sector, anecdotally, and I’ve talked to them quite a bit as I travel 
around to . . . oil show at Weyburn and so on, they are quite 
busy. So the industry is reasonably happy I think with the way 
in which it interacts with the oil and gas sector. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, continuing on that theme, how 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

 

many tax enforcement officers are currently working to ensure 
that contractors pay the PST that’s due the province, in oil and 
gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Actually they work in the Department of 
Finance as opposed to the Department of Industry and 
Resources so we don’t necessarily have that number, but I’d be 
happy to obtain the number and send it over to the member. 
We’ll undertake to do that. 
 
I will say that my recollection — when I was minister of 
Finance, I met with the various contractors from Saskatchewan 
to discuss this issue — and I do recall, if my memory serves me 
correctly, that the auditing function that they had in the 
Department of Finance resulted in something like $9 million per 
year in additional PST that, you know, that we collected. 
 
And so it . . . I’ll say that they certainly make it a serious effort. 
I’m not sure how many auditors there are but I’ll get that 
information and send it over to the member. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. 
Recently, Mr. Norm Beug, president of the Saskatchewan 
Mining Association, in an address to the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce and Association of Professional 
Engineers and Geoscientists, when he was speaking of the 
diamond play in the Prince Albert-Melfort areas, 
Fort-à-la-Corne specifically, he stated this. He said, and I quote: 
 

One of the obstacles to new mine development is 
Saskatchewan’s “reputation of being a high-tax 
jurisdiction,” Beug said . . . 

 
Mr. Minister, what has been done or is being done to address 
the fact that Saskatchewan is seen as a high-tax jurisdiction by 
all investors and particularly those in the mining industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I read Mr. Beug’s comments and 
certainly Mr. Beug I think would agree with me that those 
comments don’t really apply to the diamond industry because 
the capital tax surcharge for example, which is one of the 
complaints, does not apply to the diamond sector. So there’s 
absolutely no problem there. 
 
With respect to a royalty structure for diamonds, we don’t have 
a royalty structure for diamonds as of yet. But I’ve met 
personally on behalf of the government with the diamond 
industry, and we have assured them in informal meetings and 
also meetings with other mining people present, that we’re 
going to develop a competitive diamond royalty system. 
 
There’s no problem there, and in fact we have now for most 
sectors outside potash and uranium the most competitive system 
of taxes in the country. Not high tax — we have the most 
competitive system of taxes in the country. And for gold and 
base metal mines, for example, they have . . . they pay no 
royalties for 10 years for new mines. 
 
So obviously there is no problem developing the mining 
industry, that arises through taxation. There’s no problem 
whatsoever. I think what Mr. Beug is referring to more so is the 
regime of taxation that applies to the uranium and potash 
industries because, as I say, our taxes are better in the other 

sectors. And we are working with potash and uranium 
industries to review the system of taxation royalties. 
 
But I do want to make this point. We all would always like to 
see lower taxes in . . . Everybody wants lower taxes. Sometimes 
they want better services but they want lower taxes. Of course 
we’ve made a lot of progress, as the member knows, in this 
jurisdiction to lower the taxes quite aggressively. 
 
But I do want to say, for uranium and potash, we have to 
remember there are two areas in mining where Canada is the 
number one sector in the . . . or number one supplier in the 
world. Only two areas, uranium and potash, where Canada is 
number one. Both of those industries are located in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So if somebody says — which I’m sure no one would say — 
that you can’t do mining in Saskatchewan, I of course would 
ask them the question: well how is it that we have the world’s 
largest potash industry in Saskatchewan? We have the world’s 
largest uranium industry in Saskatchewan. It obviously is a 
place where you can do mining very successfully. Now there 
may be some irritants about taxes. We’re talking to those 
industries about that. 
 
But I want to point out to the member, Mr. Chair, that with 
respect to the diamonds, any irritants there exist for the potash 
and uranium industries certainly don’t exist for the diamond 
industry. Because as I said, they’re not subject to the capital tax 
surcharge. And we have committed to them to developing a 
competitive royalties structure. And of course they know we’re 
serious because last fall we actually came up with a 10-year 
royalty holiday for new gold and base metal mines. 
 
So the mining sector knows we’re serious. They know that 
we’re going to move forward with diamond mining. 
 
The obstacle to diamond mining right now — well they’ve been 
moving along with it — but isn’t government; it isn’t taxation. 
It’s doing the assessment to figure out whether the quality and 
the quantity of diamonds in our kimberlite is such that it would 
warrant a commercial investment in mining. And the simple 
reality is that the two companies that are involved in that sector, 
which are Shore Gold and Kensington Resources, are this year 
doing that assessment. 
 
Shore Gold, I think, is taking out 25,000 tonnes of kimberlite, 
25,000 tonnes. And they’re going to mill and sift that and 
they’re going to see if the amount of diamonds that they get 
after they sift through it all and the quality is such that it would 
pay to make a major investment of hundreds of millions of 
dollars to build a mine. And that’s what they need to go 
through. 
 
But I assure the member and I assure the House and I assure the 
public, Mr. Chair, that if those diamonds are of minable quality 
and quantity, taxation will not in any way, shape, or form 
prevent the diamond industry being built in this province. It will 
be built. And as long as this government is in power, we will 
aggressively set up the right taxation regime for that mining 
industry to be built and it will be built. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I’m very pleased to hear that, Mr. Minister. 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

But you alluded to the taxation and royalty regimes in the 
potash and uranium industries. You seem to be saying that we 
can’t afford to deal with those because it is such a huge part of 
our provincial revenues. 
 
I understand that the government did recently reduce oil and gas 
royalties substantially. I’m wondering since then, what has 
happened to government revenues in oil and gas? Have they 
declined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, they have not declined. And actually I 
did not say, Mr. Chair, that we could not afford to deal with the 
oil . . . or the uranium and potash industries. What I said in fact 
was that we were currently engaged in discussions with the 
potash and uranium industries to see if there is a way that we 
can change the royalties which would incent more production in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And this government has a very good record in terms of 
arriving at arrangements for oil and gas — not just recently but 
in the last number of years — for horizontal drilling, wells with 
excessive water in them. We have changed the potash and 
uranium royalty structures over the past few years, and we’ll do 
more. We have a very good record working with the mining 
industry to do so. 
 
What I said to the member was not that we couldn’t afford to do 
anything, but that we’re . . . discussions were continuing. And 
those discussions will continue in the same spirit that they’ve 
been going on in the last number of years which is this: that 
we’re going to seek ways that we can find an appropriate 
balance between the needs of the industry to make a profit. And 
we acknowledge the uranium sector and the potash sector, they 
have to make a profit. Well they do make a profit — there’s no 
question about that — but maybe we should fix the royalties a 
bit so that they can invest more and create more jobs. That 
would be good. 
 
And at the same time we are mindful that the people of the 
province are entitled to have a fair rate of return from the 
exploitation of those resources. And we seek the appropriate 
balance between the needs of the companies on the one hand 
and the needs of the people on the other hand to get some return 
that can go into programs like health, education, and the like. 
 
And so where this balance lies is always a matter of judgment. 
We’re prepared to try to seek, to adjust the balance if it means 
that we can have more jobs. We have a very good record in 
seeking that kind of balance and we’re moving forward in 
partnership with the uranium and potash sector to seek ways to 
have even bigger development in Saskatchewan, even though, 
as I said, we are the world’s number one potash producer, we’re 
the world’s number one uranium producer. 
 
I might add that most of that development, or much of it, has 
taken place under the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) and NDP governments. We haven’t stood in the 
way of development and we certainly won’t begin to stand in 
the way of development now. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, I’m delighted to hear that there 
is negotiations underway with the potash and uranium 
industries to work out a new tax and royalty regime. And I’m 

wondering if you can give us some sort of an update as to what 
stage those talks are at? Are they very preliminary or are we 
getting down to detail? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We have been talking to both industries for 
several months and will continue to talk to them. I think the 
talks are well along but I wouldn’t say they’re necessarily close 
to a conclusion. And they will be concluded when we’re able to 
find a way that industry and government can work together on a 
go-forward basis to ensure that there is greater investment in 
Saskatchewan and more jobs. 
 
And when we’re sure that we’ve arrived at a situation where the 
investment and the jobs are assured, then we’re hopeful that we 
can arrive at a consensus with the industry as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Minister, the oil and gas industry, we see 
headlines that drilling will be up 70 per cent this year, that land 
sales may top $100 million this year, and we’re very pleased 
with that. The oil and gas industry I believe is either our first, 
either vies with agriculture for our largest or second largest 
industry — no matter really how you calculate it — year after 
year. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, the oil and gas industry feels that 
it’s not well recognized that they’re as important in the province 
as they are, and I’m wondering in light of the fact that I’ve 
introduced a private member’s Bill that would lay out an oil and 
gas appreciation week in the first week of June every year, I 
wonder if the minister would be prepared to support that Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well first of all I’d like to say that the idea 
that the oil and gas industry is underappreciated in 
Saskatchewan, nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. 
Chair — nothing could be further from the truth. For the 
information of the member, both I and probably the Minister of 
Finance and the Premier meet with the Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers on a regular basis. They attend at our 
offices in Regina. We’re very happy to receive them, listen to 
them, and dialogue with them. 
 
We also visit them in their offices in Calgary. The member 
should know that. We occasionally attend the annual dinners of 
the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. We can’t 
always go but often we do. We also attend meetings and dinners 
of the pipeline industry. 
 
My door is open to the oil and gas sector and the member might 
like to know that quite often people involved in that industry 
come to visit me. That is a regular occurrence. I was just at the 
Weyburn Oil and Gas Show which our government supports in 
terms of sponsorship. 
 
We attend many, many meetings and events of the oil and gas 
industry. And at every single opportunity, we say and 
acknowledge that the oil and gas industry . . . The member’s 
wondering where it stands; is it number one or number two? For 
the past few years it’s been the largest industry in this province 
— the largest industry in this province. And agriculture is 
second and mining is third, but not too far behind agriculture. 
 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

 

And at every single opportunity that is available I, the Premier, 
the Minister of Finance, other members of the cabinet, and the 
MLAs on this side of the House talk about the importance of 
the oil and gas industry. And so we consider this industry to be 
extremely, extremely important. 
 
And all I can say is, if the member has not heard myself and 
other members of the government talking about the importance 
of this industry to our province, then with all due respect, Mr. 
Chair, the member hasn’t been listening because this has been 
said again and again and again. 
 
So we’re very, very appreciative of the role that the oil and gas 
industry plays in our province and it’s very important. And I 
might also add that it has been growing considerably while our 
party has been in office. So if there’s anybody that suggests, 
wrongly, that there’s something that this government or this 
party would do to prevent development of the oil and gas 
industry, that would not be a statement of fact. That would not 
be true. 
 
And so we all appreciate it. I haven’t heard of the member’s 
Bill to have a week of appreciation for the oil and gas industry. 
We’ll look at and consider it, but I would say that every week, 
Mr. Chair, every week is a week to appreciate all of the industry 
in Saskatchewan, including the oil and gas sector. 
 
And setting aside one week might be a good thing but I want 
that member to know and his colleagues, I appreciate the 
contributions of the oil and gas sector every single day and 
every single week of the year. And we recognize it every single 
day and every single year and will continue to do so. 
 
And I want the member to know also, since his colleagues seem 
to have some doubt about it, that I meet with the oil and gas 
sector quite regularly, Mr. Chair. And you know what they tell 
me? And there have been many pronouncements in the 
newspaper. They tell me, Mr. Chair, that they appreciate doing 
business in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I wish I had some of these quotes in front of me because 
when I was at the Weyburn Oil and Gas Show, where some of 
those members were, Mr. Clayton Woitas of the gas industry 
got up. And you know what he said, Mr. Chair? He said, I like 
doing business in Saskatchewan; I consider myself an honorary 
resident of Saskatchewan and doing business in Saskatchewan 
is so good that I call it the Saskatchewan advantage. That’s 
what he said, Mr. Chair. 
 
And I want those members over there who are chirping from 
their seats, and quite frankly, Mr. Chair, don’t know very much 
apparently about what’s happening in oil and gas, that drilling 
in this province is up about 70 per cent over what it was last 
year — 70 per cent. And in the last 10 years, Mr. Chair, in the 
last 10 years — and I wish the member from Arm River would 
listen to this because it might edify him somewhat — in the last 
10 years, Mr. Chair, oil production in Saskatchewan has 
doubled. It has doubled. 
 
And I want the public of this province to know that when those 
gloom and doom members over there go around as they do and 
say, you can’t have mining in Saskatchewan — they say, 
sometimes — I’ve already pointed out, we have the world’s 

largest uranium mining sector, the world’s largest potash 
mining sector. And they say you can’t do mining. And when 
they say, Mr. Chair, that somehow you can’t produce oil and 
gas in Saskatchewan, I want the public to know that what they 
say is not true, Mr. Chair, because the production of oil has 
doubled in the last 10 years. 
 
So one has to ask, why do they say those things, Mr. Chair? 
Everybody else, including the oil and gas industry, is positive 
about Saskatchewan. Everywhere I go people are positive about 
Saskatchewan. And they sit there and say, you can’t do business 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I’m here to tell the world the truth, Mr. Chair, which is, 
you can do business in Saskatchewan. People are doing 
business in Saskatchewan. And as long as we have a positive 
government in power and not a bunch of naysayers, they’ll 
continue to do business in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I hope somewhere in that answer there wasn’t 
a no. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am aware of how important the oil and gas 
industry is to this province and I know that you are. Agriculture 
is huge in this province. Everybody appreciates how big it is. 
It’s our history. The mining industry has a week dedicated so 
that they can educate people about their industry and what they 
contribute to the province. 
 
I was at the Oil and Gas Show in Weyburn as well and people 
from the industry talked to me on many occasions during that 
show and at other times about how they don’t feel that the 
ordinary people of Saskatchewan realize how important they are 
to the industry. And I really, sincerely mean that I hope that 
there wasn’t a no in that answer, and I hope you will support the 
private member’s Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you at least consider — you and your caucus 
— at least consider supporting that Bill? And I’ll send you a 
copy of it if you like. 
 
The industry’s asking for it. I think it could make us all look 
good in this place if we can do that for them. They don’t believe 
that they are appreciated, not by you, Mr. Minister, but by the 
ordinary people of this province. They don’t think they’re 
understood or appreciated or that their value is recognized. And 
I hope, sincerely hope, that you and your government can see 
your way clear to support that private member’s Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we’ll certainly consider that and I 
appreciate the member’s suggestion, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the minister 
and his officials, I’d like to just ask a couple of questions if I 
could, really about the budget numbers that are coming down. 
And I know we’re going to maybe run a little bit short of time 
but there’s a couple of things that I would like to explore. 
 
One of them that I’d like to explore a little bit is under the 
heading, Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. As you 
know, this was quite a vital part of economic development and 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2003 

 

the economic development plans of this government. And now 
the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation portfolio has been 
turned over to CIC, or to the Crowns. And I’m just frankly not 
sure just what has happened there. 
 
And also Saskatchewan Government Growth Funds was an 
integral part of the strategy at one time, and that too has been 
virtually . . . I guess it continues, but certainly it hasn’t become 
the focus of economic development. 
 
Could you give me an idea, Mr. Minister, where those two 
programs have gone? Where has the investment gone? And the 
initiative that they were using to develop economic 
development in this province, what is in place now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In terms of the Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Fund, they have not been collecting any new money 
since 1998, so that’s five years now. But they are continuing to 
invest monies that they have collected and so they’re continuing 
in that sense. 
 
In terms of SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation), 
when the Premier announced, about a year and three months 
ago roughly, that the government was being reorganized and 
streamlined and I believe there were one or two departments 
that disappeared, SOCO was . . . had an investment function. 
They lent money to enterprises, but there also were people in 
CIC that performed the same function. So the feeling was that 
there should be one arm of government doing investing and 
lending in the private sector where that was required, generally 
speaking, rather than two. 
 
And some of the people from SOCO were moved over to CIC, 
but it very much was not to say that there should never be any 
lending through government but that there should be a 
streamlining and not duplication. And so there are fewer people 
doing that function today, but that was part of making 
government more efficient, which of course we’ve heard should 
be done. And so we’re attending to that. 
 
I think there’s a feeling also that we want to encourage the 
private sector to be more involved in venture capital in 
Saskatchewan. And CIC has been making some efforts with the 
credit unions and others to create venture capital funds — I 
think the Royal Bank may have been involved to some extent as 
well — so that government might work in co-operation with 
agencies, organizations like the credit unions and the banks 
together to create more venture capital funding. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I guess the intent of SOCO 
and other forms of incentives or lending for different businesses 
and different priorities, that now has become shielded from the 
budgetary process, is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I don’t believe that the budgetary scrutiny 
would really change in the sense that SOCO, SOCO’s 
investment activities were scrutinized by CIC, and similarly 
CIC’s investment activities would be scrutinized by CIC. 
 
The budgetary process with respect to SOCO would have been 
the amount of money that SOCO was allocated, but the 

budgetary process wouldn’t really look into the investment 
activities of SOCO. That would be more so through the Crown 
corporations process and that hasn’t really changed. There 
would be scrutiny through the Crown Corporations Committee. 
SOCO certainly would be audited by an auditor — probably a 
private sector auditor, I would think — but the Provincial 
Auditor ultimately has some responsibility here. CIC’s books 
are also audited, private sector supervised or in collaboration 
with the Provincial Auditor. So I don’t believe that the member 
could make a case that the level of scrutiny has changed. I think 
it would be just about the same. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, at one time we had the 
opportunity, during these discussions reviewing the budgetary 
process under these estimates, as to what the directions were 
that the government had in terms of its investment strategy — 
the sectors that it wished to focus on because of the 
involvement of SOCO under the earlier Economic and 
Co-operative Development budget, and that vote. 
 
Now you just . . . We have to wait until annual reports to make 
sure that we understand that the auditing is done, but we can’t 
. . . we don’t have an opportunity now to see what kind of an 
economic development initiative is occurring with the 
investment directly out of the government intentions of the day. 
That’s where I see the difference. 
 
And I think it’s . . . That’s why I refer to it as shielding us as 
legislators from the budgetary process, the budgetary initiatives 
as to where the government wants to go. Am I reading that 
wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I don’t believe that anything has 
substantially changed. Departments and agencies, you know, 
are required to have business plans and to have goals and 
objectives that are published. And the opposition is quite 
entitled to ask questions about those in the legislature, to the 
minister in charge of the Crown Investments Corporation in this 
case, or at the Crown Corporations Committee. So there are 
many opportunities to ask questions about the strategy, the 
policy of the CIC, and investing. 
 
And certainly we’d be more than happy to obtain any 
information within the rules and laws that the member requires 
as to what the investment strategy of the CIC and SOCO would 
be, and more than pleased to answer questions either in the 
House or at the Crown Corporations Committee with respect to 
those policies. 
 
Some of the questions might be directed to the minister in 
charge of the Crown corporations as opposed to myself, but 
someone ultimately has to be accountable for these objectives, 
and they must be published for public scrutiny as well. That’s 
one of the things we’ve done in the last several years, is 
required government entities to publish their plans so that they 
can be scrutinized by members of the legislature and indeed by 
members of the general public. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In an estimate 
forum such as this where we’re asking questions about the 
budgetary numbers, here’s an example. I would like to be able 
to ask you why the research parks division — and I’m looking 
at vote (IR11) under SOCO — why the research parks division 



June 16, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

 

has increased its budgetary estimates over 70 per cent. 
 
These are the kinds of things that are quite important when we 
are talking about the budget for a particular department so we 
have an idea of the direction and how much money is going 
toward those. I think that’s quite important. 
 
And I’m going to also use another example, on vote (IR03) 
where it’s called industry development. There’s a couple of 
items there. There’s business development. There’s marketing 
and corporate affairs that have substantive increases one year to 
the next. Those are the kinds of things that we would like to 
understand if we’re going to try and vote off what your budget 
means to the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the answer is that this is estimates and 
if the member has questions about some of the votes contained 
in the estimates, the member can ask those questions. There’s 
no difficulty whatsoever with that. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, why then has the research 
parks division in vote (IR11) gone up nearly 70 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We don’t have SOCO officials here but I’d 
be happy to undertake to get that information and to provide a 
detailed answer in writing to the member. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, this is vote (IR11), the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation in the budgetary . . . 
in the budget of this year. This is still part of your department. I 
would expect that we would have an answer for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I just indicated, Mr. Chair, that I don’t 
have the official here. I don’t have the information. The 
member will have an answer. I’ve undertaken to answer the 
question. There’s absolutely no problem with that, I simply 
can’t answer it at this moment. And I’ve said that I will provide 
the member with the written answer and I’ll be happy to do that. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I’ve been asked to have one more question 
and then I’ll . . . and I guess I would try and wind this up by a 
just a general question, Mr. Minister. 
 
If things are moving along well in this province and by 
indications it looks like things are, in terms of the numbers, the 
stats, why is the province not growing? Why are we losing 
people in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think that what we have seen over 
the last few years is some loss of population. But I want to say 
to the member that the loss of population, even after two years 
of drought, is not as bad as it has been in the past, by far. 
 
And I want to say to the member also that more growth is 
predicted in Saskatchewan. I’m looking at the Regina 
Leader-Post of March 25 of this year and the Whitewood 
Herald of January 7 of this year, “Saskatchewan business 
optimistic about 2003.” And what I would say to the member is 
I think that we are starting to turn the corner in terms of the 
population. 
 
But I also want to . . . the member to know that one of the 
reasons we see in many parts of Canada, not just Saskatchewan, 

that the population is relatively stagnant has to do with a very 
low, a very low birth rate. 
 
We see growth in population in the large urban centres in 
Alberta, Calgary and Edmonton, not necessarily everywhere in 
Alberta. We see population growth, I think, in Toronto. And 
elsewhere we see relatively stable population. 
 
And that is true also in many countries of Europe. And it had a 
lot to do with a very low birth rate. And so that’s part of the 
reason. 
 
But I want to say to the member that things actually are going 
quite well in Saskatchewan and we need to be positive about 
that. There’s no reason why we should be pessimistic or 
negative. You have to have a positive attitude in order to 
succeed. Certainly this government has a positive attitude and I 
believe that we are succeeding, Mr. Chair. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1667 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1668 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1668 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1668 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Communication 
  Clerk Assistant (Committees) ................................................................................................................................................1668 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1668 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen.................................................................................................................................................................1669, 1671 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1671 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres Annual Meeting 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
 Les Benjamin Remembered  
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1669 
 Richard Lemmerick Celebrates 105th Birthday 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
 Public Service Week 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
 Alameda Agricultural Society Fair 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1670 
 Burrowing Owl Interpretative Centre 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1670 
 Recognition of Swift Current Residents 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1671 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support for Beef Industry 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1671 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1672 
 Funding for Weyburn Social Services Agency 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1673 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1673 
 Investment in Minds Eye Pictures 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1674 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1675 
 Donation of Highway Sign 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1675 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1675 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1676 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1676 
 
 
 



 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Community Resources and Employment — Vote 36 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1676 
  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................1676, 1685 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1682 
 General Revenue Fund — Industry and Resources — Vote 23 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1686 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1686 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1691 
 


