















































Hansard: April 14, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 551 
 April 14, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the education portion of property tax which has 
grown as the provincial government has reduced its share of 
education funding in Saskatchewan. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Kylemore and Wadena. And I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased also to 
stand today to read a petition from people who are concerned 
about the cost of education on property owners: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand on 
behalf of producers in the constituency of Cypress Hills 
concerned about cost increases associated with this year’s crop 
insurance program. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been signed by producers in 
the communities of Liebenthal and Mendham. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the intolerable lack 
of a hemodialysis unit in the Union Hospital in Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens all from the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I stand to present a petition on behalf of people that have 
grave concerns regarding the condition of Highway 47 between 
Estevan and the Boundary dam resort: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Estevan and Bienfait. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of those citizens that are concerned about the 
increase in crop insurance. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Lampman, Kipling, 
Ogema, McTaggart, and Carlyle. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition from producers in the Kindersley area who are 
concerned with the rapid and too high increase in the crop 
insurance premiums. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And in duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is presented . . . is signed by the 
good folks from Marengo, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to improve Highway 42. 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Eyebrow and Brownlee. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from citizens opposed to the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance 2003 premium increases to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present today on behalf of constituents who are 
concerned with the condition of Highway 22, particularly that 
section of highway between Junction 6 and Junction 20. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Southey, and Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petition has 
been reviewed and hereby read and received as an addendum to 
the previously tabled petition being sessional paper no. 13. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: in reference to the 6.8 per cent 
growth in GDP forecast in the 2003-2004 budget and the 
related revenue estimates, what would be the revenue 
estimates generated based on a 2.8 per cent GDP growth as 
projected by the Finance department of the Government of 
Canada? 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d be very pleased to introduce to you and through 
you to all members of the House, His Excellency Sir Andrew 
Burns who is the High Commissioner of Britain. He’s 
accompanied by Dr. Michael Jackson, chief of protocol. 
 
Sir Andrew took up his appointment as the British High 
Commissioner to Canada in August 2000 and this is his first 
official visit to Saskatchewan. He was planning a trip last April 
but the unfortunate passing of the Queen Mother . . . due to that 
event the trip was postponed. 
 
I know he’s meeting with a number of officials in the province 
in the interest of exploring mutual interests between United 
Kingdom and Saskatchewan. I was able to meet with him this 
morning, Mr. Speaker — a very helpful meeting. I understand 
you hosted Sir Andrew for lunch. He will be meeting with the 
Premier this afternoon. 
 
And I’d like to ask all members to give a very warm 
Saskatchewan welcome to Sir Andrew Burns. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming His Excellency Sir Andrew 
Burns to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
I had the distinct pleasure of meeting with His Excellency this 
morning in my office and we discussed a number of issues of 
mutual concern, the good relationship that Canada, and within 
Canada, Saskatchewan, has with Great Britain. We discussed 
the rather courageous position taken by the Prime Minister of 
Britain, Mr. Blair, in regards to the action in Iraq, and we 
discussed potential future good relations between Saskatchewan 
and Great Britain. 
 
So it’s our pleasure to welcome His Excellency to the Assembly 
this afternoon and I hope he enjoys the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery 
here to visit with us this afternoon, I’m very pleased to 
welcome and introduce His Worship Mayor Wayne Ray, who is 
also accompanied by city manager, Jim Toye. And I’d like the 
members of the Assembly to kindly join me in welcoming them 
here for this afternoon’s proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I also want to 
join in welcoming Mayor Wayne Ray and city commissioner, 
Jim Toye, who came to Regina today for meetings with the 
Premier. They inform me that those meetings were cordial and 
constructive, and we are very hopeful that it will result in the 
early construction of the sewage treatment plant as 
recommended by Commissioner Laing. 
 
And they are pleased with their work here in Regina and I ask 
all members to join in welcoming them to the legislature this 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

 

afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like this 
afternoon to introduce to you and through you to other members 
of this legislature, eight home-schoolers seated in your gallery. 
They are from my constituency and they are spending some 
time in Regina doing, I believe, an educational component on 
government and a few other things that this city has to offer. 
 
And I would like to introduce them specifically to the 
legislature this afternoon: Mr. Ron Derksen, Heidi Derksen, 
Levi Derksen, and Joshua Derksen. And another group of . . . 
another family that’s here as well: Mr. Gordon Penner, Mrs. 
Susan Penner, Caleb Penner, and Sarah Penner. And I hope also 
to be able to meet with them afterwards and explain to them the 
details and nuances of everything they are going to see this 
afternoon. 
 
So would you join me in welcoming them to the legislature 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Seated in the west gallery are a group of men and women who 
are here today to deal with the agriculture implement board Act 
that will be introduced in second reading, too, later this 
afternoon. And I want to just introduce them individually, Mr. 
Speaker, and they might just give us a wave from their chairs. 
 
On the board of the ag implements dealers, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. 
Norm Overland from Churchbridge; Mr. Allan Smith, who’s 
the Vice-Chair from Swift Current; Mr. Doug Slough from 
Bulyea, Saskatchewan — he’s a farmer there. Also have from 
the Canada West Implement Dealers Association, Mr. John 
Schmeiser; Gerry Engel from PIMA (Prairie Implement 
Manufacturers Association). Also with PIMA is Zelda 
Davidson, who is the manager of corporate affairs; and two 
staff from the Department of Ag and Food, Mr. Lorne Tangjerd 
and Mr. Andy Jansen. 
 
I look forward to introducing second reading later this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and speak more about the work of the 
industry. And I appreciate them being here this afternoon and 
ask all the House to recognize them with me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I would like to join the Minister of 
Agriculture in welcoming the representatives from the 
Implement Dealers Association. And we will also be looking 
forward to meeting some of them to discuss the upcoming Bill 
that the government has proposed. So I hope they enjoy the 
procedures this afternoon, and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a guest who’s joined us. She’s seated behind the bar, 

so to speak, Mr. Speaker. And that is Violet Stanger, a former 
member of the Assembly from 1991 to 1999. And I would ask 
all members to bid her a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, Otuyumiw. Mr. Speaker, in 
your gallery we have special visitors to the legislature. These 
are First Nations people who are dealing with issues of 
governance and accountability. 
 
Now I notice, Mr. Speaker, that in your gallery we have 
Charley Rockthunder with granddaughter Kiese Sunshine, and 
we also have Chad Nahnepowisky, Darcy Alexson, Claude 
Cody, Rod Peigan, Frederick Fox, Edward Badger, Marcel 
Fayant. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Welcome, please, all members of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the legislature another 
registered home-schooling family from my constituency; that’s 
the Craig family with Mrs. Cathy Craig. They’re sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery, and they’re here learning about the 
legislature which happens to be in their neighbourhood. 
 
So let’s all welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, we’d also like to welcome the members of 
the people from the Piapot Reserve that have brought issues to 
the legislature. 
 
I’m hoping that you’ll enjoy the proceedings this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Resource Sector 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, more good news 
for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
government has a vision, a plan for this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that plan is working. The Saskatchewan economy is on 
a roll, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sale of oil and gas rights in April reached a six-year high, 
generating $35.7 million in revenue, Mr. Speaker. And not only 
do these land sales produce revenues for the provincial coffers, 
Mr. Speaker, they also indicate . . . are good indicators, pardon 
me, of future drilling activity, Mr. Speaker, which is already up 
80 per cent over the first quarter of 2002. As of April 4, 667 
total wells have been drilled, including 374 oil wells and 240 
gas wells. 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, these wells don’t drill themselves. They need 
workers, which might be one reason why Saskatchewan’s 
employment numbers are going up, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
has experienced 11 straight months of job growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has nothing to offer but empty 
slogans, predictions of doom and gloom, and a leader whose 
leadership abilities are highly suspect according to the weekend 
poll, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s future is wide open because this 
government has a plan based on performance, not slogans. And 
that plan includes the initiatives that have resulted in the 
resource sector of the economy expanding, moving into new 
areas of the province, and benefiting more people than ever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the future is wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police Charity Ball  
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Saturday my wife, Lois, and I had the privilege of attending the 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Charity Ball in support of the 
Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services. 
 
This annual event is hosted by the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) Depot and “F” Divisions here in Regina. The 
charity ball is a wonderful opportunity for the RCMP to show 
its support and gratitude to the community, and in the process 
raise funds which are then donated to a local charity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the second year in a row, the funds raised from 
this year’s RCMP Charity Ball will be donated to the 
Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services Inc. to assist 
them in helping people with disability meet the challenges of 
everyday life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the goals of the Saskatchewan Deaf and 
Hard of Hearing Society this year is to foster pride in our youth, 
and that’s why proceeds from this year’s event will be focused 
on the development of programs and services for deaf and hard 
of hearing youth in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only was this impressive event a fundraiser for 
a very worthwhile organization, it was also an excellent 
opportunity to meet new people including the many friendly 
RCMP officers from across Canada who acted as hosts for each 
of the tables. In addition, those who attended were able to meet 
with members of the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
Services, along with some of the individuals who benefit from 
the services this organization provides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate RCMP Depot and “F” 
Divisions for hosting yet another successful charity ball. I ask 
all the members of the House to join with me in recognizing 
them for their efforts and supporting the many worthwhile 
causes in our community through their local fundraiser. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

British Columbia Government’s Approach 
to Collective Bargaining 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, teachers right across this country are concerned with 
the British Columbia government’s approach to collective 
bargaining — an approach that has earned censure from the 
United Nations. A short time ago the UN (United Nations) 
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against 
Women singled out the BC (British Columbia) government for 
not meeting its obligations to women under international human 
rights law. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, a UN body has taken the right-wing BC 
Liberals to task for their treatment of public sector unions, 
saying laws that stripped teachers of the right to strike and 
imposed contracts in education, health, and community services 
violate international agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is on record as saying they like 
what the Liberals are doing in BC. The Sask Party has even 
bandied about the idea of adopting BC Liberal policy 
wholesale, never mind that the BC Liberal policies have 
outraged BC voters or that the United Nations find BC Liberal 
policies towards teachers and other public sector employees 
reprehensible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, teachers and other labour organizations in this 
province should be very concerned with the Sask Party and its 
leader’s desire to implement an ideologically and morally 
unsound, right-wing agenda in this province, just like the one 
the UN has found such fault with in BC. 
 
And I ask all members in this Assembly to join me in 
condemning the BC government’s lack of respect for worker’s 
basic democratic rights. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mike Weir Wins Masters Golf Tournament 
 

Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday afternoon I must 
confess that my kids and my wife were looking at me a little bit 
strange. During four solid hours of commercial-free broadcasts 
of the Masters I, like so many other Canadians, went from 
jumping around the room for joy to biting my nails and being a 
little nervous. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t been that nervous 
watching someone golf since the last time I was out with the 
member for Arm River — he can hit, he can hit even his own 
playing partners from anywhere on the course. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the source of the emotional roller coaster was 
Bright’s Grove, Ontario resident Mike Weir. What a great day 
for Canadian golf, Mr. Speaker. Mike shattered through so 
many barriers with his fantastic, gritty win at the biggest 
tournament of golf. He is the first left-hander in over three 
decades to win a major; the first left-hander ever to win at 
Augusta; the first Canadian ever to win at Augusta; and the first 
Canadian to win any of the four majors. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, like Mike, I too am a short, left-handed 
Canadian golfer, and I have a green jacket. Sadly, sadly, that is 
where the similarities in terms of golf end. But we can all be 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

 

fans. And we can be proud fans today, proud Canadians, of 
what Mike Weir did yesterday on international television. 
 
You know, Mike Weir was talking at his press conference about 
the advice he got from Jack Nicklaus. He wrote to him as a 
youngster and asked Jack if he should switch from left to right. 
Jack wrote him back and said, stay left. And we’re glad he did. 
We’re glad he did. Now you’ve got to give me some . . . 
(inaudible) . . . But, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that 
Mike Weir won the Masters on a shot, his approach shot into 
the overtime hole that moved from left to right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Seventh Annual Festival of Words in Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this is the House that runs on 
words. And in Moose Jaw words are cause for a festival. The 
seventh annual Saskatchewan Festival of Words has lined up a 
kaleidoscope of talent that would blow your mind, Mr. Speaker. 
Talented poets, playwrights, songwriters, authors of fiction and 
non-fiction will come from across Canada and include over 30 
of the nation’s best. 
 
The four-day festival will include readings, presentations, 
workshops, film, and drama, including no less than six 
Governor General Award winners and 11 of Saskatchewan’s 
top literary talents. A special event will be a musical about the 
Sandra Schmirler rink’s quest for Olympic gold entitled, Gold 
on Ice. 
 
A highlight will be the Saturday night banquet tribute to the 
late, great, Peter Gzowski, held at Temple Gardens Mineral 
Spa, where Peter hosted his final Morningside show. It will 
feature one of Canada’s favourite satirical songwriters and 
singers, Nancy White, along with CBC’s (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Shelagh Rogers, Booker Prize 
winner Yann Martel, Gloria Sawai, Robert Currie, Sharon 
Butala, Guy Vanderhaeghe, Mel Hurtig, and many more. 
They’ll all be there, Mr. Speaker, and so can the rest of the 
world. It’s July 24 to 27 in Moose Jaw, and it’s a can’t miss, 
arts lovers’ dream come true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

South East Regional 4-H Public Speak-Off 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this last 
Saturday I, along with Colin Beaulieu, the extension agrologist 
for the Estevan area, and Cal Gratton, morning man for CJ1280 
Radio, had the pleasure of judging the South East Regional 4-H 
Public Speak-Off held in Estevan. 
 
Twenty young people participated at this level of competition. 
And while they are all winners, Mr. Speaker, we had a very 
tough decision in deciding who would represent the Southeast 
at the provincial finals taking place in Moose Jaw on April 26 
and 27. 
 
In the junior category, aged 9 to 12 years, the winner was 
Dakota Jackson of the Fillmore-Francis Beef Club; runner-up 
was Justin Van De Woestyne of the Benson Beef Club. 
 

In the intermediate category, aged 13 to 15, winner was Nicole 
Wood of the Corning Multiple 4-H Club; runner-up was Roxy 
Mutton of the Black Gold Light Horse Club. In the senior 
category, aged 16 to 21, the winner was Matt Thompson of the 
Carievale Beef Club; runner-up was Jamie Mack of the Benson 
Beef Club. 
 
4-H clubs are very much alive and very strong, with the 
southeast region boasting 964 members. Mr. Speaker, there are 
over 5,000 members throughout the province. 
 
Hats off to Wes Mack, Chair of the South East Speak-Off, for 
organizing this successful event. Wes has worked tirelessly for 
the 4-H for many years. 
 
Congratulations and best of luck to Dakota, Nicole, and Matt as 
they compete at the national level. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Living with Diabetes 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to commend 
three of our legislative colleagues, the members for Regina 
Coronation Park, Saskatoon Idylwyld, and Saskatoon Mount 
Royal, who accepted a challenge to live with diabetes for one 
day. 
 
In a small way, Mr. Speaker, for one day they were walking in 
the moccasins of the 53,000 people in this province who live 
with diabetes every day of their lives, including staff and MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) in this Assembly. 
 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, the courage it must take to have the 
symptoms and risks of diabetes as a constant daily companion. 
Imagine the daily insulin injections, glucose monitoring, 
nutritional evaluation, and exercise routines. 
 
The members reported on their experience with Type 1 diabetes 
at our annual meeting with the Canadian Diabetes Association. 
At this meeting we were introduced to a new public awareness 
campaign being launched by the CDA (Canadian Diabetes 
Association). In turn, the Minister of Health elaborated on the 
provincial diabetes plan, which is dedicating $650,000 to 
support diabetes initiatives including primary care, prevention, 
education, and surveillance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a worthwhile and informative evening for 
all present. And I know all members will offer their 
encouragement and support to the work of the Canadian 
Diabetes Association. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Out-of-Province Investments 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, we 
see this NDP (New Democratic Party) government blowing 
millions of dollars to cover its losses on out-of-province 
investments. An order in council released today shows that this 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

government has dumped another $9.4 million into Coachman 
Insurance, its money-losing subsidiary in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recently learned that SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) lost $11 million last year on Coachman 
which took SGI CANADA from a profit to a loss last year. 
Now we learn that SGI is putting yet another $9 million into 
Coachman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is: why is the NDP throwing good 
money after bad? Why did they pour another $9.4 million into 
this money-losing insurance company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well first of all let me be absolutely clear. They’re not putting 
another $9.4 million in. They’re simply transferring from SGI 
CANADA into Coachman, 9.4, Mr. Speaker. It remains under 
the control of SGI and SGI CANADA, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
not additional money put in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I say this attack from the Saskatchewan 
Party opposition, Mr. Speaker, is nothing more than an agenda 
that will discredit our Crowns so they can position themselves 
to privatize and sell our Crowns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
all know that SGI owns all of Coachman Insurance so they’re 
putting another $9.4 million into it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in SGI CANADA’s annual report, there’s a 
section entitled, measuring success. It says, and I quote: 
 

Financial success at SGI CANADA is measured through 
the Corporation’s ability to provide an above average return 
on the equity invested by the shareholder. 

 
So what kind of return did SGI CANADA have last year? They 
lost $8 million because of their $11 million loss in Ontario. Mr. 
Speaker, SGI’s annual report clearly defines how they measure 
success. 
 
Will the minister admit that SGI did not have a successful year 
in 2002 due to its investment in the Ontario insurance 
company? 
 
(14:00) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Sask 
Party over there says, will I admit that the Sask Party didn’t . . . 
that SGI didn’t have a successful year last year, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I’m going to ask him to defend this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look in The Globe and Mail on the weekend and I see, “Auto 
insurance increases across Canada,” Mr. Speaker. Auto 
insurance increases across Canada — Alberta 60 per cent, 
Ontario 30 per cent, Quebec 37 per cent, New Brunswick 70 per 
cent, Nova Scotia 66 per cent, Manitoba 7.2 per cent, 

Saskatchewan 9.5 per cent, and BC 7.3 per cent. 
 
Did SGI have a successful year? I don’t know; you be the 
judge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is making the case for me. SGI CANADA lost $8 
million — not on its investments in Saskatchewan. They made 
money in Saskatchewan but that profit was wiped out because 
they lost $11 million in Ontario. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same NDP 
government that has no money for the College of Medicine. 
This is the same government that has no money for a North 
Battleford sewage treatment plant. Mr. Speaker, this is the same 
NDP government that has no money to keep crop insurance 
premiums down, yet they lost $11 million in Ontario and now 
they’re putting another $9.4 million into that venture. 
 
How does the NDP justify losing millions of dollars in Ontario? 
How is that going to get Saskatchewan growing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, this Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party wants to be Premier of the province and 
this leader doesn’t understand. This leader . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this leader, this leader wants, Mr. Speaker, this Leader 
of the Sask Party wants to lead this province and this leader 
doesn’t understand, doesn’t understand how the auto insurance 
works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no connection, Mr. Speaker, there’s no connection 
between an investment in Ontario and the Auto Fund. The Auto 
Fund looks after itself, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t even 
understand how it works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Please, Mr. Speaker, understand, people of Saskatchewan, this 
is all about — this doesn’t matter that he doesn’t understand — 
this is about discrediting our Crowns and selling them. That’s 
what it’s about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard some math 
from the other side that defies logic in the past. But no matter 
how you cut it, this is a huge loss, especially when you consider 
that the government paid $8 million for Coachman in the first 
place. Now the NDP has lost more money on Coachman than it 
was worth in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we lost $28 million, the NDP lost $28 million on 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Corporation). Mr. Speaker, they lost nearly $30 million on 
dot-coms in the United States. They lost $6 million on bingo, 
Mr. Speaker. And now they lost $11 million in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve already added up $75 million lost by the 
NDP government for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, that is 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

 

money that could have been invested in health care. That is 
money that is gone forever because of the mismanagement of 
the NDP. 
 
My question: how much more money is the NDP going to lose 
before it learns to stop making these terrible kinds of 
investments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear 
where this leader of the Sask Party is going with Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a constant attack on the investments; it’s a 
constant attack on the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What have our Crowns done, Mr. Speaker? They employ 9,000 
people. They buy goods from over 12,000 businesses in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they have paid dividends 
and equity payments to our General Revenue Fund of $1.6 
billion, Mr. Speaker — 1.6 billion. 
 
What do they want to do? What do they want to do? They want 
to sell our Crowns, Mr. Speaker — sell them. It makes no sense 
and the people of Saskatchewan don’t agree with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is 
nothing, nothing that discredits or attacks our Crown 
corporations more than that minister and that NDP government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan). When the 
NDP first considered the computerization of our paper-based 
land titles system, the estimated price tag was $19 million. Five 
years later they’ve spent $107 million and the land titles system 
is still full of problems, Mr. Speaker. And now land titles fees 
are increasing, increasing, by a total of $4.3 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new land titles system is 500 per cent over 
their very first budget. And now they’re imposing a 
multi-million dollar rate hike to pay for the financial mess that 
they’ve created. Will the minister finally admit, Mr. Speaker, 
will he finally admit that the NDP is raising land titles fees by 
4.3 million to pay for its $107 million disaster that is the 
Information Services Corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want the people of this 
province to know that that member sat in the Crown 
Corporations Committee last year and accused the ISC of 
misspending money in the development of the system. 
 
That member, Mr. Speaker, called for a special audit by the 
Provincial Auditor to see how that money was spent and that 
member said that if the auditor showed the money was properly 
spent, he would apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m quoting from the Crown Corporations transcript of 

June 18, 2002 where that member said this, Mr. Speaker. He 
said that if the auditor found that no costs were buried, he 
would apologize. And then he goes on to say he would 
apologize because there was no activity of that sort done, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
And that member is getting up in the House today and 
misleading the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the Provincial Auditor said 
was that the accounting principles were right. What we say 
today is that the NDP government has been wrong, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s the NDP government that has let down 
taxpayers. 
 
And notice the difference. On this side of the House we make 
that commitment to apologize; it’s kept. And meanwhile that 
minister that lost $28 million — the minister for SPUDCO — 
and lied about it for six years, stayed . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Well members, I would just ask . . . Order. 
Order. Order, please. Order, please, members. Things get a little 
warm and people get a little excited at times, but there is a line 
in this House which has just been crossed and I would ask the 
member . . . Order. There’s another line about to be crossed 
here. Order, please. Order. I would ask the member from Swift 
Current to withdraw the statement he just made and apologize 
to the House. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the statement and 
apologize to the House. My question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, Minister. I would ask members to 
be . . . I would ask members to be mindful of their language 
throughout the rest of the question period and on to the future. 
Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this side 
of the House will accept no hectoring, no lecturing on the truth 
from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker — not today and not 
ever. 
 
The question for the minister of Information Services 
Corporation is this. We know what the total cost of the land 
titles system is. What has been invested by the taxpayers is 
$107 million. We also know now that the old paper-based 
system used to provide a dividend back to the taxpayers of $11 
million a year and now because of this NDP debacle, the 
taxpayers will receive nothing, Mr. Speaker — nothing. 
 
So the question to the minister is this: is this the minister’s idea 
of success — the creation of a Crown corporation that runs 500 
per cent over budget, loses millions of dollars, and creates a 
land titles system that doesn’t yet work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I think we can see who the 
strangers to the truth are when we see the Leader of the 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

Opposition having to apologize to Grant Schmidt in Melville. 
We see the member here having to apologize today as he did in 
the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
And just to show how ridiculous the statements and allegations 
of the members opposite are, Mr. Speaker, the member gets up 
again and says that $107 million was spent to build the land 
titles system for ISC, when the special report of the auditor, Mr. 
Speaker, showed that the cost was $60.5 million. 
 
Now how is it, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition can ask for a 
special report from the auditor, can get the report, can apologize 
for the misinformation they’ve got out there, and get up and 
make the same false allegations again, Mr. Speaker? And the 
reason is that this is a group of individuals who will stop at 
nothing in order to attain power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
minister to also be careful with his language. When he uses 
phrases like, stranger to the truth, that is an indirect way of 
something we should not be saying and I would ask him to 
withdraw that remark at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I withdraw the remark and apologize, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister was reading the 
poll over the weekend, but he should calm down; he’s going to 
pull something over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the minister is this. The problem 
with, the problem with Information Services Corporation is that 
the NDP were really, really excited about this new Crown 
corporation. And nobody in the NDP — even as this thing 
began to go downhill and out of control — nobody in the NDP 
would raise any concerns about the fact that it continued to lose 
millions of dollars; that the land titles system wasn’t working as 
it should; that they would have to increase fees by $4.3 million; 
that the previous dividend it used to pay to taxpayers would 
now be eliminated to zero; and that out-of-province travel was 
in the order of 200,000 a year to try to sell the system around 
the world. Nobody except the former Finance minister, Janice 
MacKinnon. Nobody except her. She, Mr. Speaker, she warned 
the government about how out of control ISC is. 
 
And so the question is to the minister is this, simply and plainly: 
why in the world did he ignore the good advice of the former 
minister of Finance and let ISC get so far out of control? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want the people of the 
province to know that no one is suggesting that the land titles 
system didn’t need to be computerized, and that has been done. 
And I want the people of the province to know that that project 
came within 5 per cent of budget, Mr. Speaker. And that 
information comes from the Provincial Auditor. And the 
opposition can laugh, but that information comes from the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
 

And I also want the people of the province to know that the 
system is working, Mr. Speaker. It is a state-of-the-art system 
that is getting the transfers through in about three days and 
lately about one day turnaround, Mr. Speaker, because they are 
good and dedicated people working at that system who are 
doing a good job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is simply another example of the opposition trying to 
discredit the men and women in this province who work for 
Crown corporations and provide good service, Mr. Speaker, 
because they have one ultimate objective and that is to sell off 
the public assets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, it’s no great 
accomplishment to come within 5 per cent of the budget when 
you keep increasing the budget, Mr. Speaker. Even the NDP 
can do that, Mr. Speaker. I thought the Premier would have 
taken the opportunity over the weekend or sooner to read Janice 
MacKinnon’s book. It’s very informative when it comes to the 
Information Services Corporation because Ms. MacKinnon says 
she never really supported the Premier and the government’s 
decision to expand ISC that far beyond its mandate. That’s 
where they got into all the trouble. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Well because there was no business plan 
other than that which Frank Hart doodled on the back of a 
napkin maybe, Mr. Speaker. And that meant there were serious 
potential for ISC to lose millions of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon was right. Will the Premier 
admit, will the Premier today admit that Janice MacKinnon and 
the Saskatchewan Party were right, that the NDP were wrong? 
Will the Premier stand in this House and apologize for this $107 
million disaster to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, what that member is saying is 
absolutely false. Mr. Speaker, I am quoting from the Provincial 
Auditor in the special report that that member asked for. First 
the member made the same kind of allegations he’s making 
today. The auditor’s note, Mr. Speaker, at page 2-13 of the 
report, and I’m quoting: 
 

. . . this level of variance (in the costs) for a complex 
project involving substantial technology and major changes 
in policies . . . (etc.) is low in comparison to similar 
technology projects of this size. 

 
What the Provincial Auditor said, Mr. Speaker, in response to 
those allegations . . . And they asked for a report. A special 
report was done. The auditor said that the project was well close 
to budget, only a 5 per cent variance. And the auditor said the 
cost was 60 million and yet, Mr. Speaker, we see this kind of 
allegation repeated again today when the Provincial Auditor has 
said it is false, Mr. Speaker. And that is shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

 

Comments by Former Finance Minister 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Janice MacKinnon’s book is now officially, 
officially out and it couldn’t be more timely, Mr. Speaker. 
Things like ISC and Coachman Insurance, these are exactly the 
kinds of bad investments she wanted to stop. But the Premier 
wouldn’t let her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what Janice MacKinnon said about CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), and I 
quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

My goal was . . . to move out some of the wheeler-dealers 
who had lost their sense of accountability to cabinet and 
caucus, and to try one last bold stroke to move the 
government out of making direct investment in companies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t the NDP listen to this advice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we all recognize that 
Janice MacKinnon was a former member of this government 
and a former member of this cabinet. And she sat around the 
cabinet table and the Treasury Board when many of these 
decisions that are being talked about today were made, and fully 
concurred with those decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reality of the day, that they don’t want to dwell on the 
good news of the budget today, they want to dwell in the past. 
They don’t want to talk about the $2.5 billion we’re putting into 
health care this year, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to talk 
about the record $1.2 billion we’re putting into education this 
year, Mr. Speaker. And they certainly don’t want to talk about 
the $650 million in capital investment that the Crowns are 
putting into the province this year. They don’t want to talk 
about that because that good news is too good for those doom 
and gloomers over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure which cabinet 
meeting the Finance minister was attending, but I want to read 
to the minister and to this House the quotations directly from 
Janice MacKinnon. Here’s what she said about ISC. She said, 
and I quote: 
 

A new Crown corporation, ISC, was created to automate 
the government’s land titles system but it soon produced a 
vague business plan to move into other information 
technology areas in direct competition with many small and 
struggling private companies. To make matters worse, there 
were cost overruns and the need for more injections of 
government cash that I had always considered 
ill-conceived. 

 
So those are the real words of Janice MacKinnon, probably also 
said at the cabinet meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t the NDP listen to Janice MacKinnon? 
Why did they blow over $100 million setting up a land titles 
system that still doesn’t work properly? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we have the 
opposition getting up and saying the system cost $100 million, 
when the Provincial Auditor has already investigated and said it 
cost $60 million. That’s what we have in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite and I want to say to 
the people of this province that I, as minister in charge of ISC, 
and the president of ISC, Mark MacLeod, held a news 
conference some time ago — I think the member from Swift 
Current was there — where we laid out the cost of the system 
which had been audited by the Provincial Auditor. And we said, 
Mr. Speaker, that our objective was not to provide other 
services outside of Saskatchewan — that we had realized that 
the objective of the ISC should be to provide good service to 
people within Saskatchewan, that that’s what we were going to 
do. 
 
And we have been working diligently, Mr. Speaker, to do just 
that and the members opposite should be very pleased because 
that system is working. And since the beginning of this year, the 
average turnaround time for a title to go through the land titles 
system is three days where it used to be a month, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s 
continue to look at the things that Janice MacKinnon slams. Let 
me see. She slams the investment in ISC. She slams the NDP 
investment in ethanol. She slams the NDP’s investment in 
SPUDCO. And then, Mr. Speaker, then she asks the following 
question, and I quote from her book: 
 

Why were we investing time, energy, and taxpayers’ 
dollars returning to the 1970s view that governments can 
use economic engineering to kick-start the economy? Why 
were we not focusing our efforts and dollars on the critical 
jobs . . . government needed to do effectively . . . education 
. . . health care . . . and infrastructure . . . The government 
seemed to be reverting to the patterns of the past more than 
addressing the challenges of the future. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP continue to cling to these 
failing economic policies when all the evidence, including the 
words of Janice MacKinnon, are telling them it simply doesn’t 
work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . apparently has not read Ms. 
MacKinnon’s book very thoroughly because I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, what exactly it is that she slams. She slams the 
right-wing extreme mentality represented by that party that 
governed this province during the decade of the ’80s that 
brought this province to the very brink of bankruptcy. That’s 
what she slams, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he wants to stand . . . The Finance critic over there wants 
to stand and talk about failed economic, failed economic 
policies. Mr. Speaker, failed economic policy, not on your life 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

— 11,400 new jobs under this economic policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Leadership, leadership, Mr. Speaker, in 
the ethanol industry. That’s developing the economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, record housing starts, 
record new housing starts in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s the economic policy. The failed 
economic policy we witnessed in the 1980s, and it is replicated 
by the ladies and gentlemen across this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a 
point of order, Beauchesne’s rule no. 489, page 186. It deals 
with the words that are allowable for use in the Assembly, and 
how they’re words . . . 
 
The Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, used the words as he 
pointed to the member from Swift Current and said, that 
member is misleading the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Clearly under Beauchesne's it says the words that are 
prohibited — misleading the public. Mr. Speaker, the public 
and the people of Saskatchewan are the same. 
 
I ask that the minister rise in his place, retract those statements, 
and apologize unequivocally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to 
respond to the point of order raised by the Sask Party House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this . . . to put it plain and simple, this House is all 
about debate. And there will be frequently, frequently 
differences of views, Mr. Speaker, from points of views of 
members of this House and sometimes they get pretty 
passionate as they did today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of Justice made it very clear 
that there was a distinct difference between the perspective 
being represented by the member for Swift Current regarding 
the cost related to ISC and the auditor’s amount represented by 
the auditor, and that he was of the view that there was a distinct 
difference in view about the cost. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Justice specifically 

did not, the Minister of Justice specifically did not use . . . refer 
to the member for Swift Current as intentionally misleading, 
which would be a violation, which would clearly be a violation 
of the rules of the House in debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do make the point of view the debate was passionate, there 
was a difference in point of view, but the member . . . for the 
minister for Justice, debate was clearly within order and I would 
ask that you would find it the same. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members of the Assembly, the 
member for Cannington was quite accurate in his representation 
of what was said in the House. I did hear it quite clearly at the 
time . . . Order. 
 
The protocol that the Speaker in this House has used is to 
distinguish between when a member has said that people have 
been misled or when members have been allegedly intentionally 
misled. 
 
There have been many times over the past two years that the 
word misled has been used. And because of the protocol that 
was established, which is that there wasn’t any intent mentioned 
or alleged in the statement, the Speaker has continuously not 
ruled on that word being abused in that sense. Order, please. 
 
Now I will review this with the House leaders, and if the House 
leaders agree upon it at a future time that any time the word 
misled is used that the Speaker should call it, I could easily 
adjust to that, it would not be a difficult thing. But at this stage 
the point of order is not well taken. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — With leave, to introduce guests please, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce a Member of Parliament to the Assembly, Ms. 
Carol Skelton, the Member of Parliament for Saskatoon 
Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
I have the privilege of being Ms. Skelton’s MLA, unfortunately 
she does not have the responsibility of being my Member of 
Parliament. But we do want to welcome her to the Assembly 
today. I have a hunch she’s in Regina visiting grandchildren, 
but I’m not sure. We welcome you to our Assembly and hope 
you’re enjoying it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Dewdney on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
through you and . . . to you and through you to all members of 
the House, two friends of mine sitting in the government 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Bob Bymoen and his wife Gail, good, 
long-term friends of mine and I hope all members join me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 81 through 85 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 81 to 85 have been 
submitted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and convert for 
debates returnable questions no. 86 through 128 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 86 to 126 . . . 128, to 128 have 
been converted to orders for return debatable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much. Earlier this day, 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to introduce some folks who 
were involved in the consultation around The Agricultural 
Implements Act, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very pleased to have had 
the co-operation of all the industry in bringing this Act to its 
fruition today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the end of my remarks, I will move second reading of the 
amendments of The Agricultural Implements Act. 
 
The Act, which was initially passed in 1968 and last updated in 
1979, is clearly in need of amendment. The Act needs to be 
updated to do a number of things, Mr. Speaker. It needs to 
reflect the current market in agricultural implements; it needs to 
maintain and improve protection for farmers; it needs to balance 
the rights and responsibilities between farmers, implement 
dealers, and manufacturers; and it needs to make the 
Saskatchewan legislation similar to laws of other Prairie 
provinces. 
 
In doing so, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are directly a result 
of a series of consultations, of which I’ve talked about earlier, 
with key stakeholders who have worked with the government to 
improve and strengthen The Agricultural Implements Act. 
Those stakeholders provided their expertise and thoughtful 

advice; they spoke with us, Mr. Speaker, and we listened. 
Today, we act with the introduction of the amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in consultation over the past 18 months we 
concluded our conversations with the Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Implements Board, the Agricultural Manufacturers 
of Canada, PIMA, the Canada West Implement Dealers 
Association, the Canadian Farm & Industrial Implement 
Institute, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 
the Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan, and 
finally, financial institutions and other agricultural groups. 
 
The Saskatchewan Agricultural Implements Board, which 
includes members from PIMA and CWEDA (Canada West 
Equipment Dealers Association), achieved the consensus of 
changes that have been incorporated into this legislation. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to share some of those changes with members 
of this Assembly today. 
 
Provisions of The Agricultural Implements Act now will apply 
to leases as well as sales. Amendments will clearly allow 
financial institutions such as the credit unions, the banks, and 
the Farm Credit Corporation Canada to provide farm implement 
leases, while at the same time ensuring that warranty and other 
rights of producers are protected. This provides more options 
for farmers to lease agricultural equipment. 
 
Warranty provisions now will apply from date of first use of the 
agricultural implement rather than on the date of delivery. This 
provision makes Saskatchewan laws consistent with both 
Alberta and Manitoba. 
 
Amendments will allow the Saskatchewan Agricultural 
Implements Board to establish a penalty fee under certain 
conditions such as repeated offences, failure to attend hearings 
without adequate excuses, or intention disregarding the 
warranty and the Acts. 
 
Another large, large change deletes the requirement for the 
implement dealers to change prices as a set of lists . . . list 
provided to the Agricultural Implements Board. No other 
province has such a requirement. 
 
The 72-hour time frame for providing emergency repair parts 
now will also include Saturdays. The requirement for a 
manufacturer to buy back unused parts and equipment when an 
implement dealer closes is another area of the Act that’s being 
updated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that these changes were 
developed through the consultation process with groups 
including farmers, implement manufacturers, and implement 
dealers. The changes represent consensus on what the 2003 
agricultural implement Act should look like. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that these changes will have a positive 
impact on agriculture, on rural Saskatchewan, and on the 
provincial economy for years to come. Therefore this afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move that the amendments to The 
Agricultural Implements Act be read a second time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a fairly extensive Bill, dealing with a very 
important segment of the agricultural industry that we have in 
Saskatchewan — that dealing with implement manufacturers, 
dealers, Mr. Speaker, and the farmers that use those 
implements. 
 
They’re all a part of this particular Act, Mr. Speaker. They are 
all covered under the protection provisions and the 
responsibilities that each and every one of them has to play in 
the entire system, Mr. Speaker — from the manufacturer, the 
sale and purchase, Mr. Speaker, including in that as well are the 
financial institutions which bear some of the responsibility for 
financing, Mr. Speaker, particularly on the leasing side which is 
a new area, Mr. Speaker, dealing under this Act. 
 
There are, I’m sure, going to be questions from people on both 
sides, Mr. Speaker — from the people who are doing the 
leasing and from the people who are putting the leases out, Mr. 
Speaker — on just how this Act is going to impact on them at 
the local level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the financial institutions — the 
banks, the Credit Union Central — has worked through these 
themselves to their own satisfaction, but at the local level how 
are the branch managers, how are the credit union managers 
going to be affected, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I think there are a number of issues like that that still need 
to be pursued just to determine, Mr. Speaker, how this is all 
going to work — how it’s going to affect the dealers that are 
going into the business, how it’s going to affect the dealers that 
are exiting the businesses, Mr. Speaker. And what happens with 
the products that they have sitting on their lots? Who has the 
responsibility for those, Mr. Speaker? 
 
That’s all part of this Bill and I think it needs time for the 
public, for all of the stakeholders in this to digest this, to see if 
it’s exactly what they were asking for, Mr. Speaker. Therefore 
at this time I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
It is necessary to amend the Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Plan to improve benefits to plan members and to create a new 
structure and composition for the Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, based upon consultations with employers and 
members in the education sector, the Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Commission is recommending the crediting of 
pensionable service on a 10-month year for plan members who 
are employed in the education sector and have their 
employment tied to the academic year. 

The members’ pensionable service will be pro-rated based on a 
10-month year where the member works a portion of an 
academic year. The proposed changes will treat term employees 
employed on an academic year more equitably, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On application to the commission, and with the commission’s 
approval, all members who are contributing to the pension plan 
on the date this amendment comes into effect will retroactively 
receive credit of pensionable service if they normally work in a 
10-month academic position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is desirable to restructure the composition of the 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Commission based upon the 
outcomes of consultations with stakeholders of the pension 
plan. The intent, Mr. Speaker, is to maintain fair and equal 
representation between employees and employers on the 
commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, upon termination of employment or retirement, a 
calculation is performed by the pension plan to determine if the 
member has paid for 50 per cent of their pension benefit. The 
amount by which the member’s contributions with interest 
exceed half the value of the pension is known as excess 
contributions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the member has excess contributions at 
retirement, the member may receive the excess contributions in 
cash less income tax or use the excess contributions to enhance 
his or her pension benefit. This amendment allows the pension 
plan to use the excess contributions to enhance the member’s 
pension where the member has not chosen to exercise one of the 
above options within 120 days of being informed of them. 
 
Prior to the payment of the pension benefit, the member may 
transfer the value of the pension out of the plan to a financial 
institution of personal preference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I hereby move second reading of The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to speak to Bill No. 11, An Act to amend The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Act. 
 
Listening to the minister and having a chance to briefly go 
through the Bill, it looks like there are some changes here that 
are probably going in the right direction. They’re not significant 
changes but certainly improving the benefits for different 
people that are covered under this pension plan. The minister 
talked about the improvement of benefits for the teachers 
because they are on a 10-month schedule as opposed to a 12. 
And pro-rating that over the 12 months would seem to make 
sense and would be a benefit to them. 
 
I think there is always a . . . maybe a question or an issue when 
we look at The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act and we look 
at the whole issue around . . . And I know this Act covers more 
than just municipal employees per se, but when you’re 
changing some of the benefit structure in the packages that are 
offered, how does that affect then the municipalities themself? 
Will it have some effect on some of the municipalities? 
 
This Act doesn’t just cover municipal employees as we would 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

 

think of municipal employees. But as the minister has spoke, it 
talks about the teachers, the School Trustees Association — 
these are some of the areas that it would affect — SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), urban 
municipalities, school trustees, rural municipalities, 
administrators, and other school board officials. 
 
So this Bill, although it’s not a real lengthy Bill and looks like 
it’s moving in the right direction, there are a number of groups 
that it will affect. And especially these groups need to and, as 
the minister has probably mentioned, have been talked to and 
it’s probably driven from those groups themselves. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we would like to have an opportunity to talk 
to not only the people that it’s going to affect directly, but some 
of the people that it’s going to affect indirectly, some of the 
managers of these . . . whether it’s municipalities or the school 
trustees, that type of thing, Mr. Speaker. So at this time we’d 
move to adjourn debate until we are able to consult a little bit 
further. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2003. This Bill is the result of this 
government’s decision to review and modernize 
Saskatchewan’s financial services legislation. The changes 
outlined in the Bill are part of an ongoing process to update the 
legislation. A number of the provisions are aimed at either 
removing unnecessary requirements or updating outdated 
requirements. In addition, the proposed amendments harmonize 
Saskatchewan’s legislation with the legislation of other 
provinces. 
 
The first amendment eliminates the deposit requirements for 
insurers. In the existing legislation, certain classes of insurers 
are required to deposit securities with the minister in the 
amounts of $25,000 or $50,000 as a condition of obtaining a 
licence. The original purpose of the deposit was to serve as 
security for the payment of claims against the insurer in the 
event the insurer became insolvent or unable to pay claims. 
 
Today, solvency regulation of insurers is more effectively 
achieved in other ways such as liquidity and capital adequacy 
requirements. A number of other provinces have repealed their 
deposit provisions and there has been support for the repeal of 
these sections by stakeholders in Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill also updates and revises the annual 
filing requirements for insurers. For example, the amendments 
harmonize the annual provincial filing deadlines with the 
deadlines of the federal regulator. In addition, the proposed 
amendments allow federal insurers to make — excuse me, Mr. 
Speaker — to make one filing with the federal regulator instead 
of having to file a separate annual return in Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:45) 
 
The federal regulator is then able to use electronic means to 

forward the relevant parts of the annual return on to the 
Saskatchewan Superintendent of Insurance. Stakeholders 
support these amendments as they reduce overlapping filing 
requirements. 
 
The amendments also provide an exemption from the Act for 
mutual benefit societies. Mutual benefit societies are 
organizations that offer funeral benefits not exceeding $400 or 
sickness, accident, and disability benefits not exceeding $12 per 
week. Any organization offering benefits in excess of these 
stipulated amounts would be required to be licensed as another 
class of insurer and would have to meet the requirements of the 
Act. These amendments are consistent with the approach taken 
in other provinces. 
 
The Bill also proposes changes in the area of fraternal societies. 
A fraternal society provides life or accident and sickness 
insurance to its members. It may offer death benefits that do not 
exceed $10,000. The amendments provide that no new 
provincial or extra-provincial entities may obtain a licence as a 
fraternal society but they allow federal fraternal societies and 
the two existing provincial fraternal societies to continue to be 
licensed. 
 
Participation in fraternal societies is on the decline and it is 
anticipated that there will not be any new organizations wishing 
to offer these limited benefits to their members. In terms of 
consumer protection the Bill includes disclosure requirements 
for insurance agents that place insurance with unlicensed 
insurers. Under the existing legislation unlicensed insurers are 
allowed to transact insurance in Saskatchewan in very limited 
circumstances to ensure reasonable access to insurance. 
However, there is some concern about consumers entering into 
contracts of insurance with unlicensed insurers as claims may 
not be paid. 
 
Accordingly, a proper balance must be reached between 
consumer protection and the accessibility to insurers. These 
amendments achieve this balance. They allow unlicensed 
insurers to sell insurance in Saskatchewan in limited situations, 
but require agents to disclose the risks associated with dealing 
with unlicensed insurers to consumers. This ensures that 
consumers are informed of the risks before purchasing 
insurance. 
 
Further amendments, Mr. Speaker, include moving the classes 
of insurance from the Act to the regulations, and moving the 
details regarding the guarantee fund, and reserve fund 
requirements for reciprocal insurance exchanges, to the 
regulations. 
 
In addition a number of outdated requirements have been 
removed in the area of fraternal societies, and changes have 
been made to the liquidation provisions to specify that The 
Companies Winding Up Act does not apply to all provincial 
insurers in the case of liquidation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in reviewing this legislation we have consulted 
with all licensed insurers, other provincial regulators, industry 
groups, and consumers. The results of the consultations have 
been positive as they show that there is broad industry support 
for the changes. 
 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again it’s a privilege to enter the discussion . . . debate on Bill 
No. 15, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
 
The minister spoke of a number of changes that will be taking 
place when this Bill passes, if this Bill passes — a number of 
changes such as removing some unnecessary provisions which, 
you know, I think if there’s provisions in place . . . We hear 
over and over again, not only from insurance companies but 
other companies where it seems like they have to go through a 
lot of necessary . . . unnecessary hoops. And there are a number 
of provisions they have to meet that really they question are 
they necessarily needed. 
 
The minister talks about really what this does, at the start of the 
Bill anyways, cleaning up the Act, and removing some and 
discarding some provisions that are no longer necessary. 
 
He also spoke about — it was interesting — the 25,000 to the 
$50,000, and he didn’t really call it a bond, but that is paid to 
the minister in case there are some problems with payment of 
insurance. And he’s saying that in case of solvency, there’s a 
better way of handling things. And he quoted a couple of 
examples where insurance companies could handle it a little 
differently than the process that’s in place now. 
 
I guess we’d have some questions in making sure that the ways 
that the minister had explained that insurance companies will be 
handling this issue do make sense and are better for the 
industry. But not only better for the industry, better for the 
person that has purchased insurance and has a claim, and if by 
some chance the company has had trouble that they will get 
paid out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that . . . Although the minister talks about a couple of 
different ways, until I get my mind around how that all works, 
Mr. Speaker, we’d certainly have some questions on into the 
future. 
 
Although it talks also again about annual filing — provincial 
and federal — and harmonizing those dates, that makes perfect 
sense to me. Again we’d like to talk to the insurance companies 
and make sure that that was what they would want, although I 
could really question why they wouldn’t want the 
harmonization of that so that it’s done in one process as 
opposed to at different time frames. 
 
The minister spoke that most of the stakeholders are in favour 
of the changes being made. The proposed changes in the 
fraternal society — I found that kind of interesting. I don’t have 
a whole lot of background in any of that but I’d be interested in 
finding out how those proposed changes work with those 
groups and those societies and if it is really the direction that 
they want to see it . . . this Bill go. 
 
The one other area that the minister talked about was unlicensed 
insurers and selling insurance. And he talks about the Bill 
making sure that in this process, when there’s some unlicensed 
insurers insuring, that the person that’s purchasing insurance is 
properly informed, that he knows the consequences of this . . . 

dealing with an unlicensed insurer. Because, I mean, it’s all fine 
and dandy as long as they have the proper information and 
that’s certainly what this Bill, I believe, is moving towards, is 
making sure they have the proper information before they enter 
into contracts with unlicensed insurers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are a number of changes in this Bill that will be 
impacting the insurance business in a number of different levels 
that the minister spoke on and I’ve just had a chance to listen to 
and read through. 
 
I think until we have the opportunity to consult with not only 
the insurance companies but the people that are purchasing 
insurance and making sure that it’s going in the right direction 
for them . . . I think it’s far too often . . . I know in different 
situations that I’ve been involved in, sometimes people really 
don’t know the insurance that they have and all the ins and outs 
and idiosyncrasies of an insurance policy until they have a 
claim and they’re put in that position. And unfortunately 
sometimes we’re maybe not covered like we thought we were 
covered or whatever. 
 
So any time you’re dealing with the Insurance Act and people 
that are reliant on buying insurance to be covered properly, Mr. 
Speaker, if we’re looking at changes in this Act we had better 
make sure that the changes are welcome both by the insurance 
companies and by the people that are buying insurance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, until that is done and the proper consultation 
is done from our side of this House, Mr. Speaker, I’d move that 
we would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Coroners Act, 1999 provides a framework for 
the coroners system. That system is designed to ensure that 
unnatural deaths will be investigated to determine the facts 
surrounding the death, and to make recommendations to avoid 
preventable deaths in the future, and to maintain public 
confidence that deaths that occur in unusual circumstances are 
examined. 
 
The legislation sets out the rules respecting which deaths must 
be reported, how investigations of the circumstances 
surrounding the death will occur, and the rules respecting 
inquests. 
 
One of the amendments will eliminate the requirement for a 
mandatory inquest where a person in custody has died from 
natural causes. In recent years, inmates with terminal illnesses 
have been transferred to the federal Regional Psychiatric Centre 
in Saskatoon because of the availability of care for the 
terminally ill at that institution. In these cases, Mr. Speaker, we 
know what the cause of death is. It is known at the time the 
person is admitted that the person is dying and will likely die of 
their illness, and extensive documentation is maintained with 
respect to the person’s health problem. 
 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

 

In July 2002, the jury in a coroner’s inquest respecting the death 
of a terminally ill inmate recommended that an inquest not be 
held in cases of natural death of persons in custody. Inquests 
into such deaths involve significant expense and rarely produce 
meaningful recommendations because we already know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the person was transferred to the institution 
because they were terminally ill and dying. The amendment 
leaves the holding of an inquest into the natural death of an 
inmate to the discretion of the Chief Coroner. 
 
Another amendment, Mr. Speaker, will allow coroners to seize 
bodily fluids taken from the decedent prior to his or her death, 
where these fluids may assist in determining the cause of death. 
 
There have been cases where individuals are seriously injured 
and blood samples are taken at the time of admission to the 
hospital. The individual subsequently dies and these earlier 
blood samples are relevant to the coroners’ investigations. 
Hospitals are reluctant to provide these samples to coroners 
without specific authority in the legislation. The proposed 
amendment clarifies this authority. 
 
Other minor amendments allow coroners to obtain photocopies 
of records and confirm that reference to oral testimony in an 
inquest includes evidence by a telephone conference call. These 
amendments facilitate the investigative and hearing processes. 
 
The proposed amendments recognize the coroners’ 
investigations and inquests should be thorough, efficient, and 
effective and are designed to achieve these objectives. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Coroners Act, 1999. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to be able 
to speak on Bill No. 16, An Act to amend The Coroners Act, 
1999. 
 
As the minister outlined, it relates to inmates, deaths of inmates 
that are considered or deemed that a death from natural causes 
is one of the areas of concern, and in that case that an inquest 
would not have to be held in those cases where an inmate died 
from natural causes. 
 
It’s very important, though, that we keep in mind that not only 
with inmates in correctional institutions but that all people that 
have passed away, that investigations are done and the cause of 
death is determined. And we do not want to leave any holes in 
the Act or in the justice system that would allow a possible 
unnatural death to not be investigated and a possible murder or 
something like that would take place where the cause of death 
would not be determined. 
 
The Minister of Justice also went on to talk about some other, 
basically housekeeping duties that this Bill would straighten out 
concerning access to body fluids that may be asked for by the 
coroner in case of a death in a hospital, and related information 
from hospital records so that the corner could have the 
information concerning the death of a patient or a citizen. And 
also it clarifies that a coroner may make copies of relevant 
documents instead of having to have the originals in place, and 
so on and so forth. It seems like that it’s just bringing the Act up 
to date. 
 

(15:00) 
 
It also goes on to talk about relief from jury service and also 
concerning testimony from witnesses that could be done over 
the phone. This is a very important . . . an Act and we certainly 
would like to speak to all the stakeholders and people in the law 
enforcement area and the coroners of Saskatchewan and . . . just 
to get their view on whether these changes are necessary and to 
improve how their work will be done in the future, and really 
want to make sure that there are no slip-ups or holes left in the 
justice system that things may fall through. 
 
So at this time we’d like to take this back to the people of 
Saskatchewan and discuss with individual groups concerning 
this Bill. And at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 
2003. 
 
The Land Surveys Act, 2000 was passed in part to modernize 
the rules respecting surveying of provincial land and in part to 
facilitate the implementation of the new LAND (Land Titles 
Automated Network Development) system. The Act was 
proclaimed in June 2001 and has been in operation across the 
province since August 2002. 
 
In the last two years ongoing consultations with stakeholders 
have led to some suggestions for improvements. The proposed 
amendments will: firstly, provide certainty with the definition 
of the expression, legal description; secondly, provide 
flexibility in requiring a surveyor to conduct a field inspection 
on a survey that is more than two years old; and thirdly, 
enhance the provincial survey system by requiring surveyors to 
re-establish lost monuments in some situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, dealing with land surveys and the land survey system 
in Saskatchewan is certainly full of pratfalls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the new government’s ISC attempt to 
register land and deal with legal descriptions, Mr. Speaker, and 
hopefully this piece of legislation will help clarify the legal 
descriptions of the land. 
 
But one of the big issues, Mr. Speaker, on the legal descriptions 
of land is determining who the owner is, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
the new $107 million system that they have in Moose Jaw can’t 
do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was just listening to Gormley over the weekend and somebody 
is phoning in there complaining because every Jim Smith in the 
province is getting caveats put against his property because the 
new system can’t determine who owns the piece of land in 
question, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, while the government 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

may be providing a better definition for the term, legal 
description of the land, they’ve got to do a heck of a lot better 
job of getting the legal description of the owners, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly much more so than they have. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, under the old system it actually 
worked; you could tell who owned it. You got the legal 
description of the property and you had everything on one piece 
of paper detailing the requirements of that land, any caveats and 
liens. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, under this new system you get reams and 
reams and reams of paper and it’s still wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also deals with the replacement of lost 
monuments. Over the last hundred years, Mr. Speaker, that has 
been a . . . there’s been a major loss of monuments when it 
comes to surveying. What they were, Mr. Speaker, in most 
cases, is a long steel rod that was driven into the ground at the 
northeast corner of the section and it detailed the legal land 
description at that time — the section, township, range where 
this was at. And a lot of these have disappeared, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was a mound that was dug by the original surveyors and 
the stake was placed in the centre of that. Those have been 
worked over; they have been pulled out. A number of people 
look at them as nice souvenirs to have, Mr. Speaker. But what it 
does is when you come now to do a survey, you don’t have the 
original marker to make the determination from and it makes it 
a lot more difficult. 
 
I’m sure that with the new, modern technology that does work, 
Mr. Speaker — as opposed to the government’s land registry 
system — new technology such as GPSs (Global Positioning 
System) can make that determination very accurately, Mr. 
Speaker. And so that helps a lot when it comes to doing the land 
surveys, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the government is certainly falling way behind when it 
comes to providing the ownership description. So hopefully 
they can get the terms, a legal description, done correctly and 
that it works properly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we’re going to have to take some time to check this over to 
see if the government has their act together or not on this 
particular issue, because they have certainly failed when it 
comes to the whole land registry system recording in this 
province. So, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Northern Affairs 

Vote 75 
 
Subvote (NA01) 
 
The Chair: — First I would like to recognize the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my immediate right is Alan Parkinson, the deputy minister of 
Northern Affairs, and directly behind me is Cheryl Stecyk 
who’s the business affairs and human resources manager. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome this afternoon and to your officials. It’ll be a 
pleasure to be able to spend an afternoon here being able to 
discuss the affairs that go on in northern Saskatchewan. And 
certainly we know that in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, 
there are many challenges in front of everyone in regards to 
economic opportunity, to quality job placement, and certainly 
it’s incumbent upon all of us to be able to provide the type of 
open atmosphere, Mr. Minister, that the people of northern 
Saskatchewan will feel a welcome part of the entire province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if we may start out with kind of a 
generalization of the Department of Northern Affairs, just what 
all the department is involved in so that the people of 
Saskatchewan who are following along may have an 
opportunity, Mr. Minister, to be able to keep up, Mr. Minister, 
with the affairs of the Department of Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question, 
Mr. Chair. First of all, the mandate of the office is to promote 
the social and economic development of northern Saskatchewan 
communities, in partnership with the federal government and 
northern communities, by supporting regional development and 
development of businesses and industries and coordinating 
government activities in the northern administration district of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And some of our key focus areas, for the member’s 
information, is on economic development, business advisory 
services, co-op development, Northern Development Fund, the 
Northern Development Agreement, and the community 
sub-regional economic development planning. 
 
On resource and industry development we do mineral surface 
lease administration, northern mines monitoring secretariat, the 
environmental quality committees. We’re the lead on the 
northern abandoned mines reclamation, northern forest products 
in timber and non-timber efforts, tourism planning partnership 
with Tourism Saskatchewan, and on broad policy coordination 
with the northern strategy, the northern accord, the Northern 
Development Board, and we’re key participants on other policy 
development. And the example I’d use in this case is the Métis 
and off-reserve strategy. 
 
So, clearly, I think with the direction of our mandate and our 
key focus areas that we keep a fairly busy and tight schedule. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chair, to the minister, it’s quite a pleasure this year. That’s 
probably the briefest briefing I’ve ever had from a minister on 
Northern Affairs. Certainly in the past we’ve been used to 
20-minute preambles and hopefully we can get some very clear 
direction in the future questioning here this afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, as we expand on many of the areas that you talked 
about. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to at first stay within the parameters of the 
actual budgeting for the department because, Mr. Minister, I 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

 

noticed that under the full-time staff complement, that there is 
going to be a half-time increase in the department, going from 
35.1 to 35.6, and yet I notice in administration that there is a 
significant reduction in staff salaries. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you’d be able to explain to 
the House this afternoon how it is that you’re going to be able 
to increase staffing in your department and yet be able to have 
such a significant reduction of over $200,000, Mr. Minister, in 
your salaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
First of all, I’d say . . . I was hoping to be able to say, well 
that’s because we have a pretty good Northern Affairs minister. 
But obviously what I’ll point out is that the reason why you 
have a staff salary that’s, you know, the staff numbers that’s 
higher and the staff costs that are lower on the estimates, is 
you’re looking at the administration section and we have other 
staff that are in programs, other staff that are in support roles. 
 
So clearly I think the staff costs have gone up this year, the staff 
complement stays the same, and the extra dollars of course are 
all being used for staff costs overall. So clearly I think those 
costs you’re looking at, if I’m correct, clearly are just for the 
administrative purposes. There’s other staff salaries that are in 
programs and support work. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess we’re trying 
to clearly understand here on this side of the House and that 
what has really happened then, is that there’s been a shuffling 
of the staff out of administration into more project-specific roles 
in regards to the department in trying to establish in the North 
some continuity in the delivery of programs. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to stay again . . . We’ll just stay on this 
entire page here for several minutes. I notice that there are some 
significant changes in the northern strategy and of course, I 
guess we’re going to be confused on this side of the House, Mr. 
Minister. And you’re going to need to provide some very clear 
direction here that in the year 2003-2004, this significant 
increase of $300,000 for the northern strategy, the bulk of 
which is going for supplies and other payments is why, since 
1996, you’ve had to have such a significant increase this year 
for northern strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Clearly, I think a lot of folks in the North might say well 
$300,000 is a nice amount of money, but of course a lot of 
effort is required in the North. But that’s the increase that we 
have in reference to some of the work that we have to do when 
it comes to the Northern Development Agreement. 
 
And as you know, the Northern Development Agreement is 
something that I’ve been working with the federal government 
on for a number of years and that agreement has been signed 
and we’re moving forward. So the initial dollars are to help 
complement some of the work we’re doing under that 
agreement. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In your response you 
talked about the federal agreement that you struck in regards to 

the northern strategy. Is this increase, this dramatic increase, 
then to be accounted by not a sheer expenditure by the 
department but rather because of funding that had come from 
the federal government, specifically for the northern strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. If I 
take a few minutes here just to explain to the member opposite 
the process of the Northern Development Agreement and how 
we wrote . . . we arrived at that. And what we signed last fall, or 
this past year, was an agreement between the federal and 
provincial governments and this agreement was the Northern 
Development Agreement. 
 
And there’s two components to what we signed with the federal 
government. One is the Northern Development Accord, which 
was kind of a umbrella agreement, and the specific Northern 
Development Agreement is one component under the umbrella 
agreement if you will. 
 
And we hope to accomplish other agreements with the federal 
government whether it’s mines cleanup or whether it’s a 
specific training program. So at the end of the day you have a 
federal-provincial accord, and under the accord you have seven 
or eight or nine or ten agreements. That’s what we hope to 
eventually achieve and accomplish with the federal government 
because we feel the federal government’s got to do their part in 
northern Saskatchewan to help move along things like 
infrastructure needs, social development, economic strategies, 
so on and so forth. 
 
So as a province we’ve engaged the federal government, we’ve 
signed the accord, and under the accord we have one agreement 
in place and this is the Northern Development Agreement. And 
in that agreement we have a five-year time frame in which we 
will spend $20 million towards economic development 
strategies. And of that $20 million, 10 million comes from the 
province and 10 million comes from the feds, and that’s roughly 
at a rate of $4 million per year. And those dollars are directed to 
five categories. 
 
And this is where I think, you know, to be . . . to draw a very 
clear picture is where we as a province have positioned northern 
Saskatchewan as an area where we want to create jobs and have 
the economy move forward. And that’s exactly what the 
Northern Development Agreement talks about. 
 
So again, to very quickly wrap up, we’ve signed an umbrella 
agreement called the accord. And under the accord we have a 
number of component agreements that we’re trying to arrive at. 
So far we’ve had success at one, and that’s the Northern 
Development Agreement, where we each contribute $10 million 
over five years, for a grand total of 20 million. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll keep moving 
along on the budget page here for Northern Affairs, on page 98. 
 
Now under resource and economic development, this area of the 
budget deals with, to some degree, policy development. And I 
see under resource and policy development there is a more than 
doubling — well virtually a doubling, Mr. Minister — of that 
budget. 
 
What is it that your department is trying to do here with a 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

virtual doubling of a budget at this time for policy development 
when we would have liked to think, Mr. Minister, that in the 
past there would have been significant policy development 
already done, and that we’re starting to move forward with 
implementation of strategies rather than the development of 
strategies after a seven-year time frame? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
No question about it that one of the things that we want to do is 
we want to move forward on implementing some 
northern-based solutions. 
 
We think that northerners have — for many, many years — 
have been asking and have been requesting and have been 
demanding a share of the opportunity when it comes to northern 
economy. The opportunity associated with resource 
development, whether it be oil and gas, whether it be forestry, 
tourism, and so on and so forth. 
 
So one of the questions that we have in terms of policy 
development is a lot of the policy should be developed and 
should be refined and should be in place in order for us to have 
a timely implementation. And what we’ve done there — 
because Northern Affairs has been reinvigorated and because 
Northern Affairs has been kind of the effort of trying to refocus 
how best we can use Northern Affairs’ dollars and to again 
complement some of the work of the former minister — we put 
together a cluster, if you will, of policy and program 
development to look at things like regional development; to 
look at the Northern Development Fund operation and to look 
at the abandoned mines work that needs to be done. 
 
So we’ve taken policy and program development under three or 
four different wings and put it in a cluster. So in essence there is 
no extra policy development people per se in the section here. 
But it is policy and it is program development that we’ve 
clustered all together to make for a more efficient Northern 
Affairs’ operation. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Minister, thank you. I understand that you 
want to do a lot of work in a lot of specific areas but I’m not 
sure, Mr. Minister, that you clearly defined why you need such 
a significant increase in budget if you’re not putting it into 
human resources. All these areas need to be looked at. You’re 
indicating you know there’s the abandoned mines, and tourism, 
forestry, oil and gas. Just pure economic development certainly 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
You’re going to need . . . I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you 
could be a little more clear in your definition of why an almost 
200 per cent increase in this budgetary item for Northern 
Affairs. If it’s not going to be used for human resources, why, 
why would you need such a significant increase? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again just to explain very quickly and 
briefly, as briefly as I can explain. The situation here is that 
there’s a number of sectors that we’ve identified as part of our 
mandate and part of our strategy to deal with northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we want to do is we want to see . . . not only have the 

staff work very hard, but have the staff work very smart. So we 
have the Northern Affairs portfolio looking at number of 
initiatives in forestry, a number of initiatives in northern mine 
monitoring. And as you know we also have the environmental 
quality committees that are very active in the North. And you 
take seven or eight of these components and seven or eight of 
these exercises that we’re undertaking, what we want to do is 
have all those activities under one kind of cluster of policy and 
program development personnel. 
 
Now what you see in that little spike in spending, it is not any 
new people; it is all the people that we have lumped together in 
a cluster. And it’s also we’ve added in the abandoned mines 
cleanup, work that has to be undertaken as part of our effort to 
try and get the federal government to look at the environmental 
moral obligation that they have when it comes to the northern 
abandoned mines. And that’s where we have a little bit of 
increase in program spending, not additional staff. 
 
So what we’re doing is we’re developing a cluster of not just 
policy development, but program staff to become more 
efficient. So the increase you’re seeing is not an increase in 
policy development, but rather a collaboration of some of the 
programs and policy development that we want to undertake in 
Northern Affairs. 
 
So to reiterate, it is not any new people; it is just lumping in the 
program dollars together. And the increase in dollars is clearly 
related to the northern mines cleanup project that we’re 
currently contemplating and negotiating with the federal 
government on. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Minister, if you’re talking about the work 
that’s going to have to be done by your department — meeting 
with federal officials, travel in the North, the work that’s going 
to have to be done around the northern mines cleanup and 
certainly that has . . . that’s going to be a big project and needs 
to be taken very seriously by everyone in Saskatchewan and 
certainly by the feds. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you have two lines here that cover off the 
supplier and other payments. We would assume that travel 
expenses associated . . . other expenses associated with travel 
would be covered under those lines. So I don’t think we’ve 
received a very clear answer for resource and policy 
development. 
 
Wouldn’t it not, Mr. Minister, be the type of a budget line that 
you would use to meet with people in northern Saskatchewan, 
officials in northern Saskatchewan, community leaders, 
interested groups in northern Saskatchewan to discuss policy 
development, the needs around economic development, the 
needs around social development in northern Saskatchewan? 
Wouldn’t that be the more appropriate line for resource and 
policy development, to actually meet with the people in 
northern Saskatchewan to understand clearly where they see 
northern Saskatchewan heading when it comes to areas of social 
and economic development, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
One of the things that I think is very important to note, when we 
looked at Northern Affairs itself for the first time this year, 
Northern Affairs is a separate department altogether. 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

 

As the member knows opposite, prior years were a subvote 
under the economic development strategy because Northern 
Affairs was primarily an economic development-focused 
department. 
 
So this year, you know I’m very proud to say that Northern 
Affairs is a stand-alone department. They are recognized in a 
separate vote. They’re not a subvote to any other department. 
 
And while that psychologically doesn’t change or physically 
doesn’t change the mandate of Northern Affairs nor does it 
really impact the work that’s going on, it’s more of a 
psychological achievement in the sense of saying yes, in this 
particular government, we recognize Northern Affairs as being 
a very important and vital part of our government. We’re going 
to continue building upon Northern Affairs. We’re going to 
look at the role and value of Northern Affairs’ staff and move 
forward from there. 
 
So a lot of the things in the reorganization of government — as 
you know, we’ve been undertaking that for the last several 
years — we want to make sure that we position Northern 
Affairs to be strong and independent, to be a small unit but very 
strong and independent and focused. 
 
And that’s why you see the jump in policy development and 
resource development, is that we’ve lumped all the staff 
together under that heading. We’ve got 35 staff that we have 
working in a number of other sectors, and we’ve lumped all the 
staff that looks at resource development and policy 
development and I believe the number there is 23. 
 
So we have 23 staff working on a wide variety of spectrums 
right across the North, working on policy development and 
program development. And a lot of the program development of 
course is resource development. So that’s why under the title 
you see resource and policy development; they do both aspects 
and there’s a lot of coordinating going on in that particular 
shop. 
 
So it’s not any new people; it’s really an amalgamation, if you 
will, under the resource development and policy development 
unit of Northern Affairs. As a result of Northern Affairs 
becoming a separate vote, that’s where administratively we’ve 
entered the folks to work as a unit. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Of course we 
understand and certainly we picked up very quickly on budget 
day that Northern Affairs had become a stand-alone department 
after many years as a subdepartment, so to speak, of the . . . of 
first Economic and Co-operative Development and then last 
year under Industry and Resources. 
 
So are you indicating to this House today, Mr. Minister, that 
this resource and policy development budget line at one time 
was somewhat under the purview of Industry and Resources 
and has been transferred in its entirety under the mandate of 
Northern Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just to be very clear here, what we’ve done was there was no 
new staff added to Northern Affairs. Northern Affairs had staff 
members before, and as I mentioned, we had the administrative 

requirement to enter these staff under one cluster of staff 
personnel that looks at resource development and policy 
development. And this is why you see that line there indicating 
that that’s where we clumped all the staff together. 
 
Because Northern Affairs became a separate department we 
wanted to make sure that administratively we done things 
proper so that the Treasury Board folks would know that when 
it comes down to the Treasury Board process that this is the 
process we put in place, and they could understand it, and some 
of that required administrative work. So what we’ve done, just 
for the member’s information, is we clustered all our resource 
development staff and our policy development staff under one 
unit — there was no new staff added; no staff were raided from 
other departments — and we put it under resource and policy 
development unit, and that’s the number you see here. 
 
Any additional dollars are program dollars and any additional 
program dollars are directly attributed to the abandoned mines 
work that Northern Affairs has been undertaking at the request, 
and hopefully with the collaboration, of the federal government. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So now it’s become 
quite clear then, the significant reduction for salaries under 
administration and this significant increase for resource and 
policy development is the actual tools that the department is 
using to show where the expenditures are going for your 
staffing complement in the department. And certainly on this 
side of the House we understand that now and we thank you for 
that, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Northern Development Fund, I see there’s a small increase 
in that. But, Mr. Minister, the Northern Development Fund loan 
loss provision — you have $629,000 for the Northern 
Development Fund and $500,000 for the loan loss provision. 
Now, Mr. Minister, is this rather a backdoor method that a 
department could use to indicate that these monies are actually 
being used in more of a grant form and that there’s no 
expectation of repayment, or how is that working, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
First of all I want to point out that in northern Saskatchewan the 
business community of course really wants to play a very 
important role. And certainly from our perspective, the private 
sector plays a huge role in northern Saskatchewan. We have 
northern people, some business people, that are very active, and 
they look to the Northern Development Fund to try and look at 
ways in which they can borrow money to go forth and create 
jobs and create your own business opportunity and so on and so 
forth. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So when we lend money out in northern Saskatchewan to the 
Northern Development Fund, there is the expectation, and there 
is the process that repayment of loans is very, very important to 
us. So we’re not looking at any kind of relaxing of any kind of 
rules. We have collateral on assets. We have collateral on 
equipment. We have collateral . . . personal collateral on a 
number of loans that people have undertaken with Northern 
Affairs. 
 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

So I want to reiterate and to emphasize with the member that in 
northern Saskatchewan and with the Northern Development 
Agreement, clearly I think our role is that there will always be 
the expectation of repayment of any loans that the province of 
Saskatchewan makes. 
 
Secondly, as each year moves forward, we lend out about 
approximately two and a half million dollars in loans. And there 
are some times when the small-business community does 
struggle, and there are, as any other case, there are businesses 
that don’t do well. And while we continually work with the 
business community — we continually push out loans, try and 
make sure things are moving — we do our due diligence. We 
explain the rules and regulations, as you understand that there 
are, like other sectors in other areas of the province, there’s 
always those that simply don’t make it. And this is where the 
loan loss provision applies. 
 
And this year while we have more money to lend, we anticipate 
that the loan loss would also increase, and this of course is 
being complemented by our Northern Development Agreement. 
So as you looked at how things worked out, there’s more 
money to be lent out and more money to be invested. So as a 
result of that, we do anticipate that the loan loss may increase as 
well. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And certainly on this 
side of the House we are pleased to hear that your department is 
going to be using due diligence. Certainly we have seen from 
the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation, the former 
minister of Industry and Resources, that due diligence hasn’t 
been used all the time. So we’re very pleased to see that your 
department is going to be exercising due diligence. Although I 
have to be honest, if you’re going to have two and a half million 
dollars out on the books and expecting loan losses of 500,000, it 
is rather high. Although we need to admit on both sides of the 
House that economic conditions are rather severe in northern 
Saskatchewan at this time. So I think we need to be honest with 
ourselves in this case. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to leave the mundaneness of the budgetary 
items now and move on to many of these other areas that you 
have mentioned. And I know that from year to year there are 
slight changes in strategies for different areas of northern 
Saskatchewan, and we’ve talked about some of the economic 
conditions that need to be addressed, some of the social 
conditions that are going to need to be addressed. 
 
But the biggest thing that really caught our eye this year, Mr. 
Minister, is that finally Northern Affairs is a stand-alone 
department. It is not a subvote of Industry and Resources as it 
was last year, or Economic Development . . . Economic and 
Co-operative Development as it was in its prior life. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could explain to the 
House what it is that has taken place in your government and in 
cabinet that the decision was made to move Northern Affairs 
under your leadership, to a stand-alone department as opposed 
to the way it was in the past under the previous minister, where 
there seemed to need to be someone watching over that 
department, as we had become accustomed to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 

Just to point out that one of the things that I think is very 
important is the former minister of Northern Affairs, the 
member from Cumberland, was very instrumental in the 
reorganization of government and forwarding the idea and 
supporting the idea and lobbying for the idea to have a 
stand-alone Northern Affairs Department. 
 
And I want to commend him for his work, and thank him for his 
work, because today now we’re a stand-alone, and we’re the 
benefactors of his effort. So really the credit goes to the former 
minister. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Minister, you can certainly give all the 
credit to the former minister if you want, but I wonder if you 
might be able to want to maybe have an addition to your 
comment as to why, after all this time, it was finally done. Why 
the cabinet finally decided to go to a stand-alone department at 
this time, rather than have it done in previous years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much. I would 
point out obviously every few years a government needs to look 
at reorganizing itself, reinventing itself. And as we now have 
the former Department of Social Services becoming the 
Department of Community Services; as we’ve had a separate 
portfolio with Energy and Mines and the Department of 
Industry, now it’s all combined for the Department of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
And this is clearly one of those cases where the former minister 
lobbied to have no change in the mandate, an increase in the 
amount of money we have, but to really recognize that this 
psychological separation, if you will, would do a lot of good for 
the efficiency of government. 
 
So clearly it coincided with every other department’s redesign, 
if you will, phase of government services and that’s all this is. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Of course it has 
always been a concern on this side of the House that Northern 
Affairs was not a stand-alone department. So you’re just going 
to have to pardon us through this next several months if we’re 
not a little bit cynical that as we get closer to an election and 
that — all of a sudden — Northern Affairs becomes a 
stand-alone department. 
 
But I want to switch to some of the nuts and bolts now, Mr. 
Minister, in regards to some of the issues that your department 
might have some influence in, Mr. Minister. And certainly we 
know that under the Department of Community Resources and 
Employment that the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is an 
agency, Mr. Minister, under that department. 
 
Could you explain to the House, Mr. Minister, does your 
Department of Northern Affairs have influence for 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in northern Saskatchewan? 
And if not, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And I’ll point out that I think we are not skeptical about the 
North. We believe that northern Saskatchewan will certainly be 
a tremendous part of the economy of the province. 
 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

 

And yes, we certainly have some challenges. And yes, Northern 
Affairs is targeted specifically to make sure that we take 
components and strategies of every department of this 
government to make sure that they have a northern focus. We 
are adamant, and we are going to fight every inch of the way. 
And this cabinet has recognized that. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why I think when you look at the 
role that the Northern Development Agreement came under, the 
cabinet came forward and said, yes, we’ll invest in the North, 
and we’ll do our part for the North. 
 
So the answer to the question about Saskatchewan Housing: 
absolutely. We — on a continual basis, on a continual basis — 
sit with the minister responsible for Sask Housing, the minister 
responsible for Community Resources and Employment. And 
yes, the minister responsible for Community Resources and 
Employment says to us, well northern Saskatchewan has 
housing needs. They’re part of our province, so yes, we’ll 
collaborate with Northern Affairs. 
 
So as minister to minister and staff to staff, there is very good 
collaboration, not only on housing but on health care; not only 
on health care but highways; not only on highways but 
infrastructure needs; and not only on infrastructure needs but 
employment strategies; and not only employment strategies but 
tourism. And the list goes on and on and on about the 
coordination and the influence that Northern Affairs has — 
because that’s their primary role — when it comes to the overall 
government objectives. 
 
We feel that we would not be sitting in a portfolio that did not 
have the effect . . . would be of any benefit to northern 
Saskatchewan. This is why this government has promoted 
Northern Affairs and has pushed Northern Affairs to the 
forefront on every discussion that we’ve had when it comes to 
housing, when it comes to training, when it comes to road 
construction, and the list goes on and on and on. 
 
This government is clearly serious about dealing with northern 
affairs. And we know that northern Saskatchewan has 
tremendous challenges: social, infrastructure, and economic 
challenges. And now is not the time to blame. Therefore, I 
would suggest today that as the Minister for Northern Affairs, 
the answer to your question is absolutely yes. We have a lot of 
collaboration and a lot of influence on how housing in northern 
Saskatchewan works, and we’ve been having those successful 
efforts. Whether it’s new construction of housing or the remote 
housing program or repair program, we have good collaboration 
and good consultation on those fronts. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wanted to discuss 
with, Mr. Minister, because of the influence your department 
has with the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation . . . I guess on 
this side of the House, we’re going to have a great deal of 
concern here, and you’re going to have to clearly outline for us 
how we’re going to be able to alleviate the fears in northern 
Saskatchewan . . . the commitment of your government to 
affordable housing. 
 
On page 37, under Community Resources and Employment, 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation budget has been reduced by 
$1.6 million, Mr. Minister. Now if your government is going to 

be reducing investment in low-cost, affordable housing in 
Saskatchewan, are you going to be able to assure to the people 
of northern Saskatchewan that they are not going to be paying 
part of the brunt of this reduction in investment in low-cost 
affordable housing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well first of all, I can’t speak to the 
Community Resources and Employment ministry. Of course the 
minister will answer those questions. But from the perspective 
of Northern Affairs we understand . . . We look at the 
disincentives out there for people to work, and we express to 
the cabinet some of the challenges that northern people have to 
go to work. 
 
And a lot of these strategies that the department — formerly the 
department of Social Services — a lot of the strategies that they 
have implemented is a result of the former minister of Northern 
Affairs. And certainly our role, as well as the current minister in 
explaining to the rest of Saskatchewan, to the cabinet, that in 
order for us to have the reduction of disincentives out there so 
people can go to work . . . is housing has got to be one of the 
areas that we looked at. 
 
So today I’m very proud to say that while Northern Affairs 
doesn’t control the housing budget, there are programs out there 
that talk about remote housing programs that really have a lot of 
people that can afford to buy a lot and build their own homes 
. . . that they have a program in place now that families could 
build their own homes without having the government build it 
for them. And in very short order, 12 to 15 years, they could 
own those homes, provided how much down payment they put 
on their homes. 
 
And some of the communities that have done a tremendous 
amount of good work in northern Saskatchewan — 
communities like Beauval, communities like Buffalo Narrows, 
La Loche— where you’re seeing, I think over the last two or 
three years, well over 100 families have taken this opportunity 
to participate in the remote housing program. 
 
And this is a way — the road to independence that we often 
speak about — instead of us proposing, as the Sask Party’s 
proposing, to cut $50 million from the Social Services budget 
come hell or high water, the dramatic effect they will have on 
disadvantaged families, low-income families, the disabled 
group, on this side of the House, we believe, we believe that if 
you work with people you foster independence, you train them, 
you take away disincentives in housing, and so on and so forth, 
that you can have these people become proud owners of their 
homes and thus become more and more in control of their own 
lives. And that’s the whole role and the whole notion that we’re 
trying to undertake when it comes to Northern Affairs 
impacting and influencing what happens in northern housing. 
 
So I can say today that northern Saskatchewan is well served 
when it comes to housing needs whether it is the early mortgage 
and discount program, or whether it’s a remote housing 
program, whether it’s a repair program. We want to make sure 
that people have that opportunity to own their own homes and 
build their own homes, that that opportunity is maximized right 
from day one. 
 
Secondly, that we also have to understand that once these 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

people own their own homes then of course the cost to the 
government housing budget is down dramatically. And I would 
suggest that some of those families that are now owning their 
own homes — which they are very proud of and we’re proud of 
as well — is having a positive effect on making sure that the 
Social Services budget doesn’t keep crawling up. 
 
And to us we believe that pragmatic way of providing 
independence to families that are on social assistance or can 
build their own homes, it’s probably the better way to go for the 
North and for the taxpayers of this province, as opposed to a 
blunt cut of $50 million as proposed by the Sask Party. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Well, Mr. Minister, that was quite an 
informative little speech on the election platform of the 
Saskatchewan Party. Unfortunately it had little relevance to do 
with the question that I’d asked. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if then . . . I guess we’re going to 
have to assume that you have no idea in your department as to 
what effect it’s going to have on northern Saskatchewan, this 
significant reduction for low-cost housing in northern 
Saskatchewan. And we’ll just have to leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other area of social development that, of 
course, that all of us are concerned about and in some degree it 
relates to economic development. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in the area of education young people are 
finding it very disconcerting to, in northern Saskatchewan — 
and you talked about the communities of Beauval and La 
Loche, and I believe it was Buffalo Narrows you mentioned 
also, that . . . and of course we can see it whether it’s in 
Pinehouse or Black Lake, Fond-du-Lac — we have 
communities where young people are staying in school to a 
certain age and then they start to reach that age of majority and 
they start to lose interest in school. Because the reality is, Mr. 
Minister, is that even though they are going to school, after they 
finish school, say they complete a high school education, 
there’s not a lot to look forward to. And this is a huge, huge 
area and it’s a huge social problem in northern Saskatchewan 
 
And I know, Mr. Minister, that you’re fully aware of this and 
certainly your government is opening up, what, 40 more seats 
for northerners to become involved in the nursing field. And 
certainly that’s needed to try to get those seats filled . . . those 
job openings filled in northern Saskatchewan. But the reality is, 
Mr. Minister, that there’s a lot more people than 40 dropping 
out of education in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I think this is really relevant when we talk about the northern 
strategy, is that your government since 1996 with the creation 
of the Department of Northern Affairs, is that the people of 
northern Saskatchewan are still waiting to find out what that 
strategy is. Because if you are going to go to school, you’ve got 
to have something beyond grade 12 to look forward to. And if 
all you’re going to be looking for . . . And I’ll use La Loche as 
the exact example, Mr. Minister — 90 per cent unemployment 
in the northern town of La Loche. 
 
What is it, what is it that your government is going to be doing, 

starting today, to ensure the people of northern Saskatchewan 
that if they’re going to further their education that there’s 
actually going to be an opportunity for them in northern 
Saskatchewan to be able to make use of that education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And one of the first things I’m going to say is, what is your 
government going to do today? One thing we’re going to do is 
we’re going to afford northern Saskatchewan people the amount 
of respect that this government has been giving them and will 
continue to give them. 
 
And number two is you look at the scenario, you look at the 
scenario, and I don’t want to be political here, I’m trying to be 
as calm as I can by telling the member opposite this: you made 
reference to the former minister and I’d like to make reference 
to the former minister as well. 
 
In the early ’90s when your cousin was in power, when your 
cousins were in power — the Sask Party cousins were in power 
— the employment rates at the northern mines went from 50 per 
cent down to 15 per cent. And now in the last 10 years with 
some of the work that the former member from Cumberland 
done, we went from 15 per cent back up to 50 per cent of 
northern people working. 
 
When your cousins were in power, your cousins went from $20 
million in contracts for northerners, for northern-based 
companies. And when the minister, former minister came into 
power, he went over the 200 million. Now that’s one example 
that we like to use — one example. Now we can go on and on 
and on, if you wish. 
 
But the bottom line here, I think, when you talk about what 
impact does Northern Affairs have. What is Northern Affairs 
going to do? And I would say this. When we began this role as 
Minister of Northern Affairs and the former minister began, 
they needed a brand new hospital in Lac La Ronge. Guess 
what? Lac La Ronge got a brand new hospital. They needed a 
brand new hospital in La Loche when we . . . when I became, 
you know, the minister. Guess what? La Loche got a brand new 
hospital. Black Lake needed a brand new hospital. Guess what? 
Black Lake got a brand new hospital. Pinehouse needed a new 
school. Guess what? Pinehouse got a new school. 
 
Beauval and Green Lake wanted saw mill opportunities. Guess 
what? Tomorrow marks a very special day in Green Lake. 
Beauval and Green Lake are working on a saw mill joint 
venture effort to share the wood allocated by this government 
towards creating an economy in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And guess what? The small communities of Bear Creek, the 
small community of Stony Rapids, they needed water and 
sewer. And guess what? They’re getting water and sewer. 
 
So I think clearly what we’re trying to do today to the people of 
northern Saskatchewan is this, is we’re trying to make sure we 
deal with the quality of life issue — at the same time work on 
social strategy, at the same time to develop an economic policy. 
And those things don’t happen overnight. It’s been seven or 
eight years of good, solid work by a number of folks. 
 
And the first few years that this government was in power was 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

 

really paying down a debt and getting our books in order to be 
able to do more for northern Saskatchewan. Now if we had 600 
or $700 million extra each year that we would use for northern 
Saskatchewan and other parts of the province as opposed to 
paying interest on the debt piled up by the Sask Party, then I 
think clearly we would be able to do much more at a quicker 
pace. 
 
And secondly, when your cousins were in power, they displaced 
a lot of northerners from economic opportunity, whether it was 
in forestry or whether it was in outfitting or whether it’s an 
attack on the commercial fishing industry. There was never no 
effort at all to recognize northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So as a result today, as a result today, you go along the forestry 
fringe, the forestry fringe, you will see not one FMA (forest 
management agreement), not one TSL (term supply licence) for 
forestry issued without an Aboriginal partner attached to it. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that goes a long ways to saying to the people 
of Saskatchewan, to the Aboriginal people and many northern 
community groups up there that we will position northern 
people to become very strong and very active when it comes to 
the resource development, to create opportunities for 
themselves. And we will invest using CIC, or we will support 
using the grant system, these regional development strategies. It 
is clear to us that we have a vision, and that vision talks a lot 
about making sure that northerners are positioned. 
 
Now when you get up and ask the questions, I say fair enough, 
ask the questions. 
 
But I’ll say this. When your leader, the Leader of the 
Opposition Sask Party, was asked in La Ronge, what do you 
think of the future of Northern Affairs? What was his 
comment? I’ll ask the member the question: what was the 
leader of the Sask Party’s comment? His comment said — on 
the future of Northern Affairs, would it still be there? — he 
said, likely not, likely not. And I would point out the northern 
people are very acutely aware of those statements. 
 
And the day that you begin to ignore half the province, or 
one-third of the Aboriginal population, is the day that you do 
not recognize the pan-provincial challenges that we have to 
make sure everybody’s part of this economic future. 
 
And that, I believe, is the most important thing that we have to 
tell folks out there. A lot of work has been done, much more 
needs to be done, but you’ve got to have the right party in place, 
working for the right people at the right time to have the most 
dramatic effect on turning around some of the social and 
economic challenges that the North has. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Minister, it’s quite a little campaign 
speech you made, but I’m going to have to point out to a few 
holes in your diatribe. 
 
To being with, you’ve had 11 years in government and things 
are not better in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. In fact if 
you talk to the people in northern Saskatchewan — like 
members on this side of the House do — then people will 
clearly understand on your side of the House, Mr. Minister, that 
things are not better in northern Saskatchewan. 
 

In fact, in fact what they’re telling us, Mr. Minister, and you 
said this deliberately, very clearly, Mr. Minister, that from now 
on under your government, if someone of First Nations ancestry 
wants to become involved in the forest industry, they must 
partner with an established forest operator in business now. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, no one has asked for that except your 
government. The existing forest operators didn’t ask for it. The 
First Nations forest . . . people who want to get involved in 
forestry didn’t ask for it. What they asked for, Mr. Minister, 
very clearly, was just an opportunity to go to work in the forest 
industry, which your government has denied them. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it is very clearly, it’s very clearly 
understood in northern Saskatchewan that when there was 
opportunity for economic forestry development that this . . . 
your NDP government prevented that from happening to the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. And you know very well, Mr. 
Minister, that there has been a multitude of proposals brought to 
your NDP government from people in northern Saskatchewan 
of First Nations ancestry who have come up with an idea for a 
small business in forestry and have been denied by your 
government. 
 
And we know that for a fact because we have oodles of 
document on that on this side of the House, Mr. Minister. And I 
would suspect that you have that also. And I would suspect that 
the former minister of Industry and Resources knows about 
those opportunities also that have been denied. And we’re sure, 
Mr. Minister, that in your dual role as the minister of 
Environment and Resource Management that you know also 
from two sides — you’re probably getting it from two sides — 
that there has been opportunities for forestry growth in northern 
Saskatchewan that have been denied, been denied by that NDP 
. . . your NDP government. 
 
So to say that the only way you can have forestry operating in 
this province is to force First Nations in the North to partner up 
with existing businesses in the South is something that no one 
has been asking for. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, we want the people of Saskatchewan to 
clearly understand that your NDP government has denied 
repeatedly the people of northern Saskatchewan opportunities to 
invest, to invest and create economic wealth and provide jobs in 
the forest industry. 
 
Now we know also too, Mr. Minister, and we know that your 
government has on a multitude of occasions blamed everything 
that’s gone wrong in this province, right from the time of the 
. . . blamed the Iraqi war on Grant Devine and everything else 
that you can think of. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is that you have been in government, 
Mr. Minister . . . There’s been an NDP government in this 
province since 1991 and economic conditions have not 
improved as promised by your NDP government. 
 
In fact, the former Premier Roy Romanow promised 30,000 
more jobs in the forestry sector alone — 30,000 he started out. 
Well then somebody reneged on that and it went down to 
10,000. The reality is if you go into Saskatchewan’s forestry 
sector in northern Saskatchewan, there’s probably 5,000 jobs 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

lost, there’s probably been 5,000 jobs lost. 
 
What needs to happen, Mr. Minister, is we need a government 
in this province that gets out of the way of economic 
development in the forestry sector in northern Saskatchewan. 
And we have heard nothing as you’ve talked about forestry 
earlier, Mr. Minister, that you’re going to get out of anybody’s 
way to allow forestry to happen. 
 
Now we know that there’s some issues in regards to trade tariffs 
in moving product into the United States of America, but that, 
Mr. Minister, that, Mr. Minister, is only on raw product. That 
does not apply to finished product. That will not apply . . . that 
injury duty was not going to apply to the OSB (oriented strand 
board) that’s going to be turned out in Meadow Lake. And I’m 
wondering if anybody in your government even knew that. 
 
So we also know, Mr. Minister, that some of the opportunities 
for economic development in northern Saskatchewan for 
finished product have been denied. In fact, your government, 
Mr. Minister, actually shut down a mill that was turning out a 
finished product that could just as easy have gone across the 
United States border, the Canada-United States border, Mr. 
Minister, without injury duty because it was a finished product, 
and your government shut them down. 
 
Your government shut them . . . a First Nations operator has 
been shut down for a finished product that he had been doing 
for years and years — a high-priced, finished product that was 
providing quality jobs and quality opportunity in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we also know, we also know that in the past 
that First Nation organizations on the west side have tried 
opportunities in the mining sector, in the mining sector, and 
specifically uranium. They actually come up with an idea to 
create jobs and opportunity in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And where was your government on that issue? Well I’ll tell 
you where they were, Mr. Minister. They were nowhere to be 
seen. In fact they did not back up . . . I would wager, Mr. 
Minister, they did not back up that First Nation organization 
when they tried to create economic opportunity in the uranium 
industry. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think we want to be very careful. We want 
to be very careful in this House when you talk about the 
opportunities that have been provided in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we also know that in tourism, in tourism, 
Mr. Minister, the only thing that has stopped First Nation 
people from having tourism opportunities in this province has 
been your government because you won’t even give them the 
permit to operate. You won’t even give them a permit to 
operate. 
 
The reality is they can simply set up business and go to work 
and attract, attract high-priced American dollars into this 
province to create jobs for the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
to create opportunities for people in northern Saskatchewan. 
They can’t even get a permit. They can’t get a permit to set up a 
business in northern Saskatchewan. And your government has 

been in power since 1991, and it has regressed in the area of 
tourism in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, in this whole area of economic development 
. . . and certainly we, you know, I was trying to get from you 
some sort of a commitment that the hopelessness that the young 
people of northern Saskatchewan feel as they finally decide to 
give up on education, so many of them, because it’s one of the 
highest dropout rates anywhere, anywhere in the world. It’s 
appalling. You know it. I know it. All the members on this side 
of the House know it, and I’m not sure whether very many of 
your members on that side of the House know it or understand 
it. And we are concerned whether they even care. All they’re 
talking about is, we’re putting more money in. We’re going to 
just hand money out. And you know, Mr. Minister, that’s not 
the answer. The reality is they need quality job opportunities to 
go to. 
 
So I’m wondering if you could take the time, Mr. Minister, to 
explain to us . . . in the northern strategy, is there an opportunity 
for people to feel hope, to want to stay in school because there 
is going to be opportunity, there is going to be opportunity, Mr. 
Minister, for a career in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
First of all, when the member says to me, you know, we’re tired 
of hearing you blame Grant Devine, well then tell a couple of 
your members behind you that served in Grant Devine’s 
government, that that’s not an issue for us today. 
 
And secondly I think one of the things we want to point out is 
that, yes, this government made a commitment of getting 
10,000 jobs. And yes, I can say today we did not meet the goal 
of 10,000 jobs. We’re at 8,000. And the reason why we’re not 
getting to 10,000, Mr. Speaker, is the member hit the nail on the 
head. There is a softwood dispute with the Americans where 
they’re charging our Canadian lumber extra tariffs and extra 
duty to be sold in the market of the US (United States), in the 
American states, at 29 per cent. Of course that’s going to have 
some effect on the job numbers out there. And it’s going to also 
have some effect on the investment of the forestry industry to 
make sure things are happening. 
 
But despite that, despite that, we still got to 80 per cent of our 
target, and there is still a lot of negotiation and discussions to 
remove those trade barriers so we can access the American 
market more and create more jobs. I think that member knows 
very well that it does . . . it’s not our doing or something that we 
did not do right that created that trade dispute. It is clear the 
American sawmill producers don’t want the Canadian products 
in their jurisdiction because it undercuts them and undervalues 
their industry. And this trade dispute is a result of that particular 
activity. 
 
So despite those efforts, we have looked at the notion of how 
forestry and Northern Affairs could help. We’ve put a lot of 
effort into the process, and as was indicated, there was 8,000 
jobs created in forestry. We have a long ways to go. 
 
And the second point or the third point you made in reference to 
training and education, absolutely we want to train as many 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

 

young people as possible, not just 40 new spots for nursing. 
That’s just one aspect of what this government is trying to do. 
 
In 1991 when we took over government from your cousins, the 
Tories, there was about 1,200 Aboriginal people in 
post-secondary. Today I can tell you there are 2,600 people in 
post-secondary. That’s well over double the amount of people 
in post-secondary as a result of this government’s initiative and 
this government’s recognition that the Aboriginal people are a 
very powerful, proud race, and all they need is the opportunity 
to train their young people and an opportunity for employment. 
 
We know, we know that a lot of people need to be trained, and 
we’ve got to find that trained, dedicated labour force for the 
business community. We understand that, and that’s why we 
went from 1,200 post-secondary positions to 2,600 in 10 years, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s every single year, we’re seeing those 
kinds of students turned out. And mark my words, that kind of 
investment in northern students will pay off. 
 
And I’m somewhat offended as well, Mr. Speaker, when we 
talk about the northern education, the quality of education. Yes, 
we have challenges in northern Saskatchewan, but I’m a bit 
offended when you mention the fact that the quality of 
education in the North is not good. You know, I think you are 
very, very wrong in stating that, saying the dropout rate is a 
direct result of some of the efforts we have in education. 
Absolutely not. I think that there are many teachers out there 
and parents and school board members that work very hard for 
the students. They work very hard for the students. And yes, 
there’s got to be a goal. There’s got to be hope. I agree with 
you. 
 
And when you talk about the project in Meadow Lake where we 
shut down the project in Meadow Lake . . . and I believe you’re 
making reference to the Clearwater mill. Well guess what? For 
the member opposite, Northern Affairs critic, guess what? We 
are now in a situation I’m hoping to move that mill, that 
Clearwater mill if possible through some government support 
program, move the Clearwater mill further north to perhaps La 
Loche or between La Loche and Buffalo Narrows, so we’re able 
to utilize it to create jobs. But before you create jobs, you’ve 
got to have investment into the industry. You’ve got to have 
training into the industry, and that’s exactly what we’re doing. 
 
And the fourth thing, you mentioned about the OSB project. 
Well a news flash for the member, there is a 20 per cent 
ownership for Métis and First Nations community in that area 
that have that stake in the ownership mill — 20 per cent. Why? 
Because this government invested into that opportunity, so the 
people of Beauval, the people of Green Lake, the people of 
Pinehouse and Patuanak— well guess what? — they’re part 
owners of the OSB. And those dollars and those training 
opportunities, guess who built, guess who built the OSB frame? 
That was built by the northwest communities who are part 
owners of this effort. 
 
So if you look at the agreement, not only have we positioned 
these communities well in forestry. We have looked at the 
training aspect. They are now owners of TSLs and FMAs. They 
are negotiating amongst themselves. They’re going to manage 
that forest very well. They’re going to work with the private 
sector. 

And I believe that if you’re patient with the northern people, 
that you invest with the northern people, and that you watch the 
northern people build a capacity to take over these industries, 
that in due time — in due time — that’s a recipe for success in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now your response when I looked at some of the notes of your 
questions, when you said well if you want to try the sawmill 
and the sawmill doesn’t work, well at least they tried. Well I’m 
sorry; that kind of attitude just doesn’t cut it in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan’s got to be there, step by step 
with the northern people, to make sure they take full advantage 
of the resources around their community. And La Loche is one 
good example. We talk about the road to Fort McMurray. We 
don’t have to have another 10 meetings in La Loche or another 
20 meetings in Buffalo Narrows trying to make sure we get that 
road. We don’t got to convince ourselves. We’re all convinced, 
all that area, that that is a good solution. The road to the border 
has been built. Who has the final decision on whether the road 
to Fort McMurray gets built or not is the Alberta government, 
number one, and, number two, the federal government. If they 
don’t come through, then that road doesn’t come through at all. 
 
So today we’re talking about economic strategies. I say to the 
northern people, forestry, tourism, oil and gas, mining, 
accessing huge industries like oil and gas especially in the Fort 
Mac area . . . and looking at some coal managing groups and 
some of the roles that they have in forestry or fishing and 
trapping. And all the opportunities we have in northern 
Saskatchewan are there. They’re right there, and nobody’s 
stopping them. On this side of the House, we’re helping them a 
tremendous amount. On that side of the House, your history 
clearly shows, it shows in spades, that your support for the 
North was never there. It was never there. 
 
You gave away our forestry rights. You gave away our 
outfitting opportunity. You tried to kill our commercial fishing. 
And today now you stand up and say what are you going to do 
for the North? Well the northern people know. The northern 
people aren’t silly. They weren’t born yesterday. They didn’t 
fall off a fish truck a couple of days ago. Mr. Speaker, they 
know exactly what they got to do, and they know what 
government has produced results and which government will 
continue producing results for the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Minister, that was rather . . . some 
interesting comments. We find it highly amusing on this side of 
the House that you would allude to the fact that I — that I 
personally — mentioned low-quality education in northern 
Saskatchewan. Well imagine the surprise of the people in 
northern Saskatchewan tomorrow when they read Hansard and 
find out that the people of northern Saskatchewan have been 
misled by the Minister of Northern Affairs. That’s what they’re 
going to find out tomorrow, Mr. Minister. 
 
There has never been an opportunity for more in northern 
Saskatchewan than there is right now. And what did we hear? 
We have heard that you are going to put every roadblock in 
front of them that you can. If someone comes up with an idea 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

for economic development, you’re going to be there, one, 
putting up roadblock and stopping it if you can. You’re telling 
them that unless they can guarantee 100 per cent absolute 
success, which is not guaranteed anywhere else in the world, 
Mr. Minister, that they’re not going to be allowed to set up a 
business opportunity. 
 
Well the people of northern Saskatchewan are certainly not 
asking for that, and you know that full well, Mr. Minister. We 
on this side of the House are quite aware that it’s your 
government that’s fallen off the fish truck. And all we had to do 
was read The StarPhoenix, the front page of The StarPhoenix 
on Saturday morning to find out that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have pointed out again . . . You have pointed 
out again the lack of tourism opportunities in northern 
Saskatchewan. Which government is in power since 1991 . . . 
has not allowed any more further tourism opportunities in 
northern Saskatchewan? You keep saying that it’s all been 
given away. We hear someone else on your side of the House, 
Mr. Minister, saying it’s all been given away up north. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, last year, we had a written question from 
this side of the House to the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) asking specifically 
how much land in northern Saskatchewan is under lease — is 
under lease, Mr. Minister. And the response came back 0.01 per 
cent. There . . . Means then that 99.99 per cent of the land in 
northern Saskatchewan should be available for opportunity. It 
should be available for opportunity. 
 
So since 1991, the only government that has denied opportunity 
on that land has been your NDP government, Mr. Minister. It 
has been nobody else in the past that’s had anything to do with 
that. You’ve had lots of opportunity in the last 12 years. 
 
Now you say that you had budgetary restraints. Now you know 
what you could have done, Mr. Minister, is you could have 
opened up northern Saskatchewan for development. Then there 
would have been lots . . . There would have been lots of 
finances available to help out your sorry budgets that you’ve 
had in the last few years, specifically these last three deficit 
budgets. 
 
If there had been economic opportunity going in northern 
Saskatchewan, they could have almost single-handedly saved 
the Saskatchewan budget rather than to be going backwards 
$1.1 billion in the last three years. That’s what could have been 
happening, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we have a significant increase now. Several 
months ago, we had the same massive opportunity . . . oil and 
gas prices, very high. There could have been lots of opportunity 
going on in Saskatchewan. We know that the present Industry 
and Resource minister has been talking about how that has 
benefited the budget. We have heard the Minister of Finance 
talk about how that has benefited the budget. In fact what it’s 
allowed, Mr. Minister, is that because of that increase in oil and 
gas revenue that’s been coming into the province, that the 
government has not had to borrow money to balance the budget 
for last year, although the Crowns had to borrow money. We 
certainly understand that, and it was very clear in the budget 
that they had to borrow money last year to pay their dividend; 

we understand that. 
 
Now why, Mr. Minister, as the Minister for Northern Affairs, 
what has your department done, what has your department done 
to encourage to the cabinet, to your government, to the caucus, 
to the people of northern Saskatchewan to assure that the oil 
and gas fields in northern Saskatchewan could be opened up for 
economic development to provide highly skilled, quality job 
and career opportunities for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much for the 
question. I can also advise the people of Saskatchewan and the 
Assembly that we went from one very capable Minister of 
Industry and Resources to a very capable, brand new Minister 
of Industry and Resources, that have one fundamental point, 
one fundamental point. And they say that as far as we’re 
concerned, northern Saskatchewan and Northern Affairs, we 
want to make sure we incorporate every Aboriginal group that’s 
possible to be partners in oil and gas development that’s going 
to happen. 
 
And whether it’s the potential for diamonds around the P.A. 
(Prince Albert) area or whether it’s oil and gas in the 
Southwest, we know that the Aboriginal people are eyeing these 
particular sectors. They’re going to start moving forward. And 
as in the North, there’s a number of organizations that are also 
looking not just at oil and gas. For a case in point look at the 
Pinehouse, the community of Pinehouse. They’re looking at a 
limestone project. They’re hoping to develop this limestone 
project to make sure that they’re able to provide that particular 
lime to the mining industry. And they’re doing tests on that, and 
the analysis on that particular lime to see if it’s good, if the 
project is feasible. And some of that work continues. 
 
And guess what? The Department of Industry and Resources 
provided a grant to Pinehouse to look at that potential 
opportunity for the entire community. And things are moving 
along quite well. Now what we have to do is convince the 
mining sector that if this lime is good from Pinehouse, that they 
can produce the quality and the amount that they need. That’s 
what we have to do. That’s how business operates. And in order 
to get that done, we also have to make sure . . . if we meet that 
hurdle, then we’ve got to make sure that we look at investment 
into a facility to make sure that the lime production starts up. 
 
So it’s clearly not just identifying your resource and saying yes, 
okay, let’s move. You’ve got to have trained personnel. You’ve 
got to do your business case. You’ve got to do your 
identification of your markets. You have to have investment. 
The list goes on and on. I’m sure the member understands how 
you get these projects moving. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Now when I say we talk about what specific efforts are being 
undertaken in oil and gas, well let’s not just look at oil and gas. 
Of course we’re want to incorporate the Aboriginal community 
in all sectors of minerals and in oil and gas. 
 
We also want to make sure they’re involved with forestry. We 
want to make sure they’re involved with tourism. We want to 
make sure they’re involved with outfitting. We want to make 



April 14, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

 

sure that they’re talking about a fish processing plant in the 
province, bringing that from Winnipeg to somewhere in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So we want to make sure that we do that. We instill in people a 
sense of ownership and independence when it comes to their 
own particular industry. So it doesn’t matter if it’s oil or gas. It 
doesn’t matter if it’s forestry or tourism. We’re going to move 
forward when it comes to northern Saskatchewan people and 
incorporate them into making sure that this is something that 
the province of Saskatchewan and this government wants to do 
— over the Sask Party — is we want to make sure that we 
position the North quite well. 
 
Now when we talk about the percentage, the percentage of 
ownership of some of the northern lands in the North, don’t 
forget your Open For Business slogan under your former boss, 
the former premier, Grant Devine. Open For Business, and 
guess what? Northern Saskatchewan outfitting opportunities 
were open, except they were closed to northerners. 
 
A lot of northerners didn’t know this was going on. A lot of 
northerners weren’t aware this whole sell-off of some of the 
Crown land and some of this willy-nilly approach to 
development, some of the tourism opportunity. They weren’t 
included. They weren’t aware of some of these opportunities, 
and that was your Open For Business slogan. 
 
And even if they were aware, they didn’t have the opportunity 
to seek the investment to make sure this thing was . . . that some 
of these hospitality efforts, whether it be in hunting and fishing 
or whether it be in northern tourism opportunity . . . The 
investment dollar was something that they had to seek. And 
how do you find 20 or $30,000 in some of the people who 
wanted to start up? They would have to invite an outside partner 
to move forward. And that’s kind of putting them behind the 
eight ball as well. 
 
So what we’re trying to do here is we’re trying to make sure 
people know that if they work together collectively and they 
look at opportunity and they look at all the sectors of 
opportunity, that on this side of the House we believe that the 
northern Aboriginal people in general will have opportunity if 
we’re patient with them, and we stand beside them and we 
invest with them. 
 
We don’t just have the slogan, Open For Business, and then 
everybody come in and these people are swamped. We want to 
sit down and make sure they see the merits and the benefits and 
that they position themselves, and we help position them better 
to make sure they maximize the benefits to themselves, their 
families, and their communities. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Minister, you certainly outlined clearly the 
differences in philosophy between those who believe in the 
people of Saskatchewan and your government who does not 
believe in the people of Saskatchewan. In fact you outlined very 
clearly a position of where we have to distrust the people of 
Saskatchewan, and specifically distrust the people of northern 
Saskatchewan who do not have the ability to put together 
business plans, who do not have the ability to attract financing, 
and who do not have the people to explore markets for their 
opportunities. 

Now, Mr. Minister, certainly . . . And you brought up the . . . a 
couple of things here that I want to respond to real quick. One, 
you talked about the change in leadership for the Department of 
Industry and Resources. And certainly there was one thing that 
we have noticed very clearly on this side of the House, Mr. 
Minister, is that, is that the present Minister of Industry and 
Resources has never had to get up and apologize to this House 
for misleading it. That has never happened. And so then, Mr. 
Minister, I just wanted to point out that little glitch in your 
response. 
 
I also want to just briefly talk about the limestone deposit at 
Pinehouse. Did you know, Mr. Minister, did you know that the 
people themselves of Pinehouse — that the business community 
in Saskatchewan, the financial community out there —already 
knows how to know whether that’s a developable opportunity, 
whether there’s a market for it, whether they can do a business 
plan without the government having to sit there like a babysitter 
and watching every step of the process? The fact of the matter is 
the people of Pinehouse, whom I have met, Mr. Minister, know 
full well and are educated enough to be able to understand the 
process of being able to develop an opportunity that sits at their 
doorstep. They don’t need this government, your government, 
getting in their way again. 
 
And that’s all we’ve heard time and time again, Mr. Minister, is 
that your government keeps getting in the way of economic 
opportunity in northern Saskatchewan. Your NDP government, 
Mr. Minister, wants to control the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, that is a term that they use very clearly up there. In fact 
the term they use . . . they have a very specific term that they 
use. They call it colonialism. They feel like a colonialists inside 
the province of Saskatchewan, that they are not first-class 
citizens. That’s how they feel, and they feel that today in the 
year 2003, and it has nothing to do with the 1980s. In the year 
2003, they still feel that, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I would suggest that your government has not been as 
successful as you’ve tried to paint, as you’ve tried to paint in 
this House this afternoon, Mr. Minister. You have talked at 
length about the forest industry, some oil and gas, and certainly 
there’s ample . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. Why is the member 
from Kindersley on his feet? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — To leave the Chamber, sir. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. We’ll have 
to remember in the future that if we want to leave the Chamber 
we have to ask permission. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister, I think you have failed to clearly 
present to the House the opportunities that exists in northern 
Saskatchewan and the positive steps that have been taken by 
community leaders, by business leaders in northern 
Saskatchewan to be able to establish partnership in the energy 
sector. 
 
These are community leaders, business leaders, Mr. Minister, 
who have a very clear vision, a very clear vision, Mr. Minister, 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2003 

 

on what it’s going to take to provide the people of northern 
Saskatchewan with the job opportunities, with the career 
opportunities that they are so sadly lacking right now. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could explain to the House 
the extent of your knowledge as Minister of Northern Affairs, 
how much the oil and gas sector could be developed? And what 
existing partnerships are in place to date, Mr. Minister, to 
ensure that the people of northern Saskatchewan will be 
actively participating in an oil and gas development in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much for the 
question, Mr. Chairman. I’d leave too, but these are my 
estimates, so I have to listen to some of the speeches. 
 
I wanted to point out that I think one of the things we’re going 
to mention when you talk about Pinehouse is that the 
community itself, as the member knows, is a very vibrant 
community. They are part owners of the northwest 
communities. They have a brand-new school. They have water 
and sewer extension. They’ve got remote housing. They’re 
benefactors of many of the programs that the province puts in 
place in concert with some of the things that they’re doing. 
 
And they also, on the limestone project, they actually 
approached the government saying, could you help us find 
some money to look at the investigation, the feasibility of this, 
to which we said sure. And this is our project, to which we said 
sure. We’ve identified this as our opportunity, and we said sure. 
And if you don’t want the government involvement, well that’s 
fine; you can find your private partner, or do things on your 
own. There’s not a problem with that. We’ve never, ever said 
there was a problem with that. We are going to support them all 
the way. 
 
So whether it’s commercial fishing, tourism, forestry, or 
limestone development, we will stand beside the people of 
Pinehouse. They have a lot of hopes and dreams and 
aspirations, ambitions for themselves. And secondly, I think the 
people of Pinehouse clearly know, people . . . (inaudible) . . . 
know that there is no vision in the Sask Party-Tory government 
for the North. You guys have never cared about the North. 
Every northerner knows that. Every opportunity you guys had 
when you were in power in 1991, you proved it. You proved it. 
 
Whether it’s reducing your work to the mining companies from 
going down to $20 million, and now we’re up to 200 million, 
you didn’t hire northerners at these mine sites. At one time 
there was 18 per cent; now we have over 50 per cent. The 
training programs in the province went from 1,200 students in 
1991 when Grant Devine was in power and now it’s over 2,600. 
 
So the people in the North are saying, well my goodness, you 
let these guys ever come to the North and decide the northern 
strategy, if they try something that doesn’t work, then you’re 
responsible. Well at least they tried. And you can rest assured 
that the rest of the North will be so loud and giving it to some of 
your friends. 
 
And you can forget about the northerners that want to have part 
of the resource base for their development. You can forget 
about their aspiration and their visions and their hopes because 

on that side of the Assembly you say, no. You’re not part of the 
solution. You never have been, and you never will be. On this 
side of the House, we’re saying northerners are the solution. 
They will be part of the economy, and they will determine the 
future of the North. 
 
So as long as this side’s in power, Mr. Speaker — or Mr. 
Chairman — we are going to make sure that the North is well 
served. And come election, come election, northern people are 
saying one thing, Mr. Speaker. In northern Saskatchewan we 
know you guys pretty good. We know you guys pretty good. 
Been there, done that. Been there, done that. We ain’t going 
there no more. And I promise you, come next election as I 
mentioned before, we are going to rock you in the North, in the 
South, in the East, and in the West, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:44. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................551 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................552 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................552 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................552 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Hermanson ........................................................................................................................................................................552, 560 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................552 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Goulet.........................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................553 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................561 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Resource Sector 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................553 
 Royal Canadian Mounted Police Charity Ball  
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 British Columbia Government’s Approach to Collective Bargaining 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Mike Weir Wins Masters Golf Tournament 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................554 
 Seventh Annual Festival of Words in Moose Jaw 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................555 
 South East Regional 4-H Public Speak-Off 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................555 
 Living with Diabetes 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................555 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Out-of-Province Investments 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................555 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................556 
 Information Services Corporation 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................557 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................557 
 Comments by Former Finance Minister 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................559 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................559 
POINT OF ORDER 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................560 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................560 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................560 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
 



 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................561 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................561 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................561 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................562 
 Bill No. 11 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................562 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................562 
 Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................563 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................564 
 Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................564 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................565 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................565 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................565 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Northern Affairs — Vote 75 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................566 
  Wiberg .......................................................................................................................................................................................566 
 
 


