















































Hansard: May 30, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1325 
 May 30, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of people who are very concerned 
about the shape of Highway No. 49. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in our area. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Nut Mountain, Lintlaw, and Wadena. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents and individuals from 
just outside my constituency concerning crop insurance 
premiums. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatories to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Frontier and Climax. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 43 in my constituency. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Palmer, Loreburn, Assiniboia, Gravelbourg, 
Lafleche, and Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who have grave concerns over the condition of 
Highway 47 South. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Lampman and 
Estevan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned that Moose Jaw is currently without a satellite 
dialysis unit and the residents of that area are forced to drive to 
Regina for life-saving medical treatment at their own cost. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Lafleche, Glentworth, 
and Edmonton, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise again with a petition from citizens of rural Saskatchewan 
who are very concerned about the contemplated changes to the 
policy for leasing Crown land. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Kyle 
and White Bear. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens from city of Moose Jaw, concerned with dialysis. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw 
and district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signed by the good citizens from Moose Jaw, and also I see 
one from Tuxford. 
 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increased premiums to crop 
insurance. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 12, 13, 36, 41, 100, 114, and 119. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: for the year 1996 how many 
Provincial Court judges were in Saskatchewan; who were 
they and where was each assigned; and in that year, who 
was or were the Provincial Court judges assigned to 
Weyburn? 

 
And I’d like the same question for the years 1997, 1998, 1999, 
2000, 2001, 2002, and to the present date. 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to 
you and through you to the Assembly, in the west gallery, 75 
students from Father Vachon School in Saskatoon. And I’d also 
like to introduce their teachers, Shawn Lorenz, Rob Brossart, 
Paul Sanche, Shirley Mang, and they have four chaperones with 
them as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the teachers and chaperones who 
have taken their time to bring the students here to study the 
proceedings and to see this wonderful building and its heritage. 
And to the students I say, have an awesome day and I look 
forward to meeting with you after your tour. And I ask all 
members of the Assembly to welcome these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery are four guests whom I would like to 
introduce at this time. These are parents and siblings of one of 
our pages, that is of Curtis Dow, and they are — and I would 

ask them to give a little wave as I introduce them — mother, 
Judy Dow; father, Cameron Dow; brother, Tyler; and sister, 
Andrea. 
 
They have come here to visit our legislature all the way from 
Invermere, British Columbia, which is also Curtis’s home. 
Curtis reached in a hat; he picked Regina to go to school in and 
we’re glad he did. And let’s show our appreciation for the visit 
from the Dows. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to join with you 
in welcoming the Dows to the legislature. I went to school with 
Curtis’s father, Cameron, and his brother, Colin, and sister, 
Sheena, both at Estey School and Mount Royal Collegiate in 
Saskatoon. And I remember their late father and I remember 
them from school. 
 
And I’d like to welcome them also to the Legislative Assembly. 
It’s good to see them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

World War II Veteran Honoured 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the 
Assembly to say that Solomon Goulet, a proud Métis from 
Cumberland, is today receiving a special medal of recognition 
from the people of Belgium for his role as a soldier in the 
liberation of that country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of our people fought for their country and 
for the liberation of Europe. Many of them never made it home. 
It is indeed an honour to pay due respect to Solomon Goulet 
and his comrades for their courage, bravery, and sacrifice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we thank the people of Belgium for honouring our 
veterans and hope that before all our veterans pass on, a way 
will be found for a full and lasting legacy to all of them, 
including Métis and First Nations veterans. 
 
As the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Cumberland House it is indeed a special pride that I honour my 
uncle, Solomon Goulet, as one of the many veterans who put 
their life on the line for our country and for lasting peace. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grand Opening of Saskatchewan Landing Golf Course 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Wednesday I had the pleasure of attending the grand opening of 
Saskatchewan’s newest 18-hole golf course located in the 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency. 
 
The Saskatchewan Landing Golf and Country Club is located 
along the north shore of Lake Diefenbaker in the Saskatchewan 
Landing Provincial Park on Highway No. 4, just south of Kyle 
and just north of Swift Current. 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

 

The club pro, Jeff Gross, brags about the scenic 6,930-yard, par 
72, link-style course. Much of the money to build the $2.2 
million course was raised by the local board, according to 
president, Don Evans. 
 
The Saskatchewan Landing Golf and Country Club also boasts 
a beautiful, spacious clubhouse with a great view of the lake 
and the South Saskatchewan Landing bridge. It contains a pro 
shop, rentals; it offers lessons and a driving range, and dining 
services to customers. 
 
Also, just a golf ball’s throw from the clubhouse, down at the 
marina, a superb minigolf course was also officially opened on 
May 28. Marina Mini Golf is owned and operated by Dale 
Hope and Lynn Fox. It has a beautifully landscaped marine and 
nature theme with a tee-to-hole links from 26 to 57 feet. Many 
shots are either uphill or downhill on the exciting course. 
 
Congratulations to the Marina Mini Golf and the Saskatchewan 
Landing Golf and Country Club on their big day and a very 
good future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

50th Anniversary of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ College  
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 50 
years and some few weeks ago the Saskatchewan legislature 
passed a Bill which changed the name of the old Saskatoon 
Normal School to Saskatchewan Teachers’ College. 
 
More than the name was changed, Mr. Speaker. As a teacher 
yourself, you will know that the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
College, which eventually became the university’s department 
of Education, was instrumental in training teachers of the 
post-war generation who in turn prepared our parents and 
perhaps many of us for the challenging, complex modern life of 
the second half of the 20th century. 
 
Woodrow Lloyd, then the minister of Education, urged the first 
graduates of the Teachers’ College to lead their students by 
example because, as he said: 
 

Example is stronger than precept, and imitation is the most 
immediate form of learning. 
 

Sound advice that still applies to teachers and individual 
citizens alike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first graduating class of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ College is holding a 50th anniversary reunion next 
week in Saskatoon. These students began their studies in the 
Normal School in 1952 and graduated from the Teachers’ 
College on the old Avenue A campus in 1953. In fact the 
reunion will begin at the same building, now the E. A. Davis 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d love to be a fly on the wall at this gathering to 
hear the stories of former profs, student romances, first jobs, 
and so on. Fortunately I do have a source. My father, Angus 
Addley, was one of those students. And I know all the members 
will wish him and his fellow graduates of the first class of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ College a happy reunion. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Forces Day 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise in the Assembly to ask all members of the House to 
formally recognize this Sunday, June 1, as the second annual 
Canadian Forces Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this day was proclaimed to reflect Canada’s deep 
and heartfelt gratitude for those members of our country’s 
army, navy, and air force. Every day at home and abroad 
thousands of men and women risk their own lives for our 
freedom, our peace, and our security. They do so without a 
second thought to their safety and we owe them a great deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for this year’s Canadian Forces Day is, 
Protecting Canadian Values at Home and Abroad. Current 
world events like Iraq, Afghanistan, Rwanda, and the Balkans 
have increased attention on bringing some measure of peace 
and security to shattered communities and, at the same time, do 
all that is possible to combat terrorism. And with our world in 
so much upheaval, Mr. Speaker, Canada’s well-trained and 
courageous forces are in greater demand than ever before. 
 
To those who think of the Canadian forces only serving 
overseas, we remind them that when our country’s communities 
suffer great natural disasters, our Canadian forces are called 
upon for assistance. Whether it be floods, tornado, or an ice 
storm, their courageous and tireless efforts continue to reunite 
families and restore order to communities, and that cannot be 
dismissed lightly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as one who served in Canada’s military and has 
seen first-hand the devastation that can be brought following 
disasters of war, I’m honoured to have been able to serve my 
country in this manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to recognize 
the second annual Canadian Forces Day this Sunday and to say 
a heartfelt thanks to those men and women who have done so 
much for our country. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Summer Programs for Saskatoon Community Groups 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, today on behalf of the 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation, I will be presenting 
$4,000 from the Communities Initiatives Fund to the 
Saskatchewan Cerebral Palsy Association for its Camp Critter 
program. 
 
Camp Critter is a wheelchair-accessible day camp specifically 
designed for children four to six who have cerebral palsy or 
other neuro-motor disabilities. Some of the daily programming 
will include sharing circles, stories, and field trips. The camp is 
fun for the kids and provides their parents some welcome 
respite. 
 
(10:15) 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, on May 19, the Sturby Place Tenant 
Association of Saskatoon was also presented with $4,000 from 
the CIF (Community Initiatives Fund) to help with its summer 
programs. These programs will be offered to children under the 
age of eight from Sturby Place. Activities will include arts and 
crafts, trips to libraries, and outdoor sports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the summer programs offered by these community 
organizations provide opportunities for children that they might 
not otherwise have. And as part of our commitment to healthy 
families in vibrant communities, the government is happy to 
support their efforts. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prairie West Regional College Graduation 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 
privilege of attending the graduation at the Prairie West 
Regional College in Warman, Saskatchewan. And it was 
exciting because the number of graduates has probably doubled 
or tripled what it’s been in the past years. 
 
And I’d just like to give a couple of numbers of what happened 
there. In adult education for grade 12, there were seven 
graduates; grade 10, there was one; one took office education. A 
rather interesting one, teacher assistants, Mr. Speaker, there 
were 41 graduates for that particular area, and that’s because the 
Saskatchewan Valley School Division has done an outstanding 
job in special education; also some extra pressure put on them 
because Social Services puts a lot of students into that school 
division for the extra help that’s given. Truck driving training 
was seven and youth care worker was fourteen. 
 
So it was a large event and it was an exciting event. And I think 
special recognition goes to the staff that’s been involved in the 
instruction, the educational partners that are involved in that, 
and also the families. 
 
Last night was exciting because all of the graduates had quite a 
number of family people there who had to provide a lot of 
support for those individuals to get their particular classes and 
also to the graduates who have worked very hard in some very 
difficult circumstances to go ahead and get their certificates. So 
congratulations to those grads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Students Win Awards At 
National Science Fair 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
a couple of weeks ago I made a statement about some bright 
and talented students from this province who were going to 
Calgary to compete in the Canada-Wide Science Fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no small feat to get to the national level. 
These students had already competed against more than 1,500 
others in regional science fairs across the province to win the 
right to move on and compete against students from all across 
the country. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that two students 

from Saskatchewan won national awards. Mr. Speaker, Brittany 
Faye of Foam Lake won a bronze medal in the engineering 
category for a project titled Canola, a Choice for Light, in 
which Ms. Faye used canola oil to produce efficient, 
environmentally friendly candles. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Jonathon Berthiaume of Regina won a 
bronze medal in the life sciences category for a project called 
Dogs versus Humans, that compared the bacteria found in a 
dog’s mouth to that of its owner — interesting, maybe 
somewhat unappetizing, as an idea. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Ms. Faye and Mr. Berthiaume on their 
accomplishment. It is thanks to inquisitive and innovative 
young people like them and their fellow contestants that 
Saskatchewan’s future is truly wide open. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
absolutely incensed with the comments coming out of the 
Ontario government. Ontario is now threatening to close their 
border to Western Canadian beef. It’s an appalling statement. 
 
But what’s even more appalling is our NDP (New Democratic 
Party) minister’s inaction. He said that he won’t even pick up 
the phone and call the Ontario Minister of Agriculture until 
Monday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day that passes costs Saskatchewan millions 
of dollars and threatens the livelihood of Saskatchewan cattle 
producers. Now the Ontario government is threatening to make 
things worse, and what’s our minister doing about it? 
Absolutely nothing. 
 
To the Minister of Agriculture: Saskatchewan people say, do 
your job. Will the minister pick up the phone immediately, call 
Ontario, and tell her that she’s dead wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to hear 
what the Leader of the Opposition has heard from Ontario 
because I expect that he has not heard this, Mr. Speaker. This is 
what he has not heard. 
 
We had a conversation, Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday of last 
week — of this week, of this week. We had a conversation on 
Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, with all the ministers, of which we all 
agreed that this would be a national issue, that we all would be 
compensating on a national basis, Mr. Speaker, and that in fact 
we would be participating in any kind of adjustments that we 
would need to make on compensation for Canadian farmers 
across the piece, Mr. Speaker. And I have that from the minister 
from Ontario as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

 

Yesterday at noon we had a conversation with the minister’s 
office who reconfirmed again that there was no press release, 
Mr. Speaker, out of Ontario, as the member from Watrous said. 
No press release from the Ontario government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that my office had a call this morning 
from Ontario again. And Ontario said again this morning they 
are going to participate on this package as a national program 
— not one-of as the Leader of the Opposition suggests they are. 
Do your job and get the information . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our Minister of 
Agriculture has his head in the sand. When the Saskatchewan 
Party Agriculture critic raised this issue yesterday, the Minister 
of Agriculture said we were making it up. He said the Ontario 
minister never made these comments and he’s saying the same 
thing today. 
 
Well she was making these comments on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Newsworld again this morning, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, immediately the Premier of Alberta 
replied. He said that they were outraged. But what did the NDP 
government do? What do they even know, Mr. Speaker? This 
minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, members. Order. Order. 
I’m able to hear about six or seven conversations but I would 
like to be able to hear one and to hear it properly. I ask 
members to keep that in mind and I ask the Leader of the 
Opposition to continue. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier of 
Alberta responded immediately with his outrage on behalf of 
Western Canadian beef producers. And this minister doesn’t 
even know what’s going on. 
 
Every day that passes means millions and millions of more 
dollars lost here in the province of Saskatchewan. Why won’t 
the minister do his job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I said to the Leader of the 
Opposition and I said to the media yesterday that I am confident 
and of full appreciation of the Ontario situation, Mr. Speaker, 
which is that they are absolutely onside with the national 
package, the national program in developing strategies. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because I have here a letter. I have 
here a letter, Mr. Speaker, which is from the Minister of 
Agriculture from Ontario, Mr. Speaker, which was delivered to 
me today, Mr. Speaker. And this is what the Minister of 
Agriculture from Ontario says. And I quote from her letter, Mr. 
Speaker. She says: 
 

Immediate federal-provincial co-operation at the highest 
levels of our governments is needed to address . . . (the 
very real issue, co-operation collectively). 
 

These concerns include all of these issues, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . financial viability of the beef production and processing 
sectors, requirements for . . . (enhancement and) 
surveillance, potential for easing (the) trade restrictions . . . 
(potential of easing the trade restrictions and) low risk 
products, and (finally) national standards for (the) 
movement of downer animals, (and) meat inspection . . . 
(across the country, Mr. Speaker). 

 
That’s from the Minister of Agriculture this morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is absolutely in 
the dark. What Ontario is calling for, Mr. Speaker, is to receive 
no more beef from Western Canada so that they can export their 
beef to the United States. That’s the kind of co-operation that 
Ontario is asking for. And our Minister of Agriculture doesn’t 
even know it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we think about what the Ontario 
government is saying, we’re absolutely livid. This is coming 
from a province that is currently quarantining people due to the 
SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) outbreak. But has 
Saskatchewan told our residents to stop travelling to Toronto? 
Absolutely not. But when it comes to BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy), the Ontario Minister of Agriculture is saying 
we don’t want any Western Canadian beef, Mr. Speaker, and it 
threatens to close its borders. 
 
That is no way to build a country. It is wrong-headed and if this 
government had any courage, it would be telling Ontario so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Would the 
member put his question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question, if the Minister 
of Agriculture is not going to do his job, will the Premier of 
Saskatchewan pick up the phone, call Ontario, and get things 
straightened out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have the letter from the 
Minister of Agriculture from Ontario. And I say, Mr. Speaker, 
this is the letter this morning. And the Ontario minister clearly 
states, Mr. Speaker, in her letter, and I’ll read again, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll table the letter for the House, Mr. Speaker. It 
says that the . . . And I quote again, Mr. Speaker, what she says: 
 

. . . (the) national standards for movement of downer 
animals, meat inspection and handling of . . . (these 
specific) risk materials (Mr. Speaker, are of a national 
issue). 

 
And I want to know, Mr. Speaker, why it is that the Leader of 
the Opposition today stands on his feet, from the Saskatchewan 
Party, and says you know what, we should be beating up on 
Ontario, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve made the statement that 
they have. Well not more than two weeks ago, his Agriculture 
critic from Watrous stood on her feet and saying, you need to 
join Ontario and not sign the implementation agreement for 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So a few weeks ago the minister . . . the Leader of the 
Opposition’s critic stands up in the House and says, you should 
not be . . . you should be joining Ontario, you should be 
hugging them and embracing them, to sign the . . . not to sign 
the agreement. 
 
Today the Leader of the Opposition says, you should get up and 
you should punch the bag as much as you could in Ontario to 
make sure that they in fact comply. And they’re complying, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our minister is 
caught short, doesn’t know what’s going on, and so he’s 
changing the subject, talking about an entirely different issue 
where our Agriculture critic is absolutely correct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the Ontario government. The Premier 
of Quebec, the PEI (Prince Edward Island) Premier, the NDP 
Agriculture critic in Nova Scotia, all of them are talking about 
setting up regional zones for beef exports. Mr. Speaker, this is 
an absolutely ludicrous idea. It won’t work. But just the fact 
that they’re talking about it hurts Saskatchewan. It hurts our 
efforts to reopen the US (United States) border. 
 
What’s so appalling, Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP are part, 
through their inaction, of a move that’s going on to hurt 
Saskatchewan cattle producers. Mr. Speaker, these comments 
hurt everyone and they must stop now. Is the Premier going to 
call the other premiers who are part of this regionalization idea 
and tell them to stop hurting Western Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I said to the media yesterday 
and I said to the House yesterday and I say to the House again 
today that I have utmost confidence and value in all of the Ag 
ministers who I work with across the country, Mr. Speaker. And 
when one of my colleagues across the country says to me that 
they are supporting the national strategy, Mr. Speaker, you 
know what? I support the wisdom and the decision that that 
minister makes to me. And I have correspondence that says 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we’ve done, just as the Leader of the Opposition from 
the Saskatchewan Party has been asking me the questions, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we actually called Ontario because I heard the 
Leader of the Opposition say, from the Saskatchewan Party, 
that Helen Johns, the minister from Ontario, was on Newsworld 
this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well this is what . . . My staff passed me this note. Helen Johns 
was not on Newsworld this morning or anything else, Mr. 
Speaker, and nor are they, Mr. Speaker, not going to be 
involved on the national strategy. That comes from Ontario 
right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe . . . 

(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
members. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe that our 
Agriculture minister is standing up in this Assembly and 
defending other Agriculture ministers across Canada when he’s 
hurting livestock producers, meat processing workers, within 
the province of Saskatchewan. Where are his priorities, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — It’s extremely frustrating when we see the 
cattle industry . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re making 
a lot of noise but they’re not making noise on behalf of the beef 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — When the cattle industry and our 
regulatory agencies were working to solve this problem, only to 
see their efforts torpedoed by comments from Prime Minister 
Jean Chrétien and the Ontario government, none of these 
comments, Mr. Speaker, are helping us to get the US border 
reopened. In fact we know they’re making matters worse. 
 
When this problem first began, Lyle Vanclief, federal 
Agriculture minister, said that he hoped the borders would be 
reopened in two weeks. Now Lyle Vanclief says it’s going to be 
a while yet. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Now, members, it’s a sad thing, members, that members 
. . . Order. It’s a sad thing, members, that members must be 
reminded this is a forum for debate and not a forum for 
hollering one down. And I speak to both . . . to members on 
both sides of the House and I ask for the leadership on this side 
of the House and for the leadership on that side of the House to 
keep that in mind and allow the debate to go forward. 
 
And I ask the Leader of the Opposition to start again so that we 
can hear the question and have the question properly put. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Both the federal 
Minister of Agriculture, Lyle Vanclief, and our own NDP 
Minister of Agriculture said they hope the border would reopen 
in two weeks time. Well, Mr. Speaker, the clock is ticking. And 
now Lyle Vanclief is saying it’s going to be a little while yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister have any indication as to how 
much longer the US border will be closed to Canadian beef? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In our conversations with Mr. Vanclief 
and the Agriculture ministers, Mr. Vanclief advises me that he’s 
in constant contact with the secretary from the US, Ms. 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

 

Veneman, that we will not see the borders open this week. The 
Minister of Agriculture’s hope is that the borders will be 
opened in the new week, some time in the new week. He’s not 
giving a timeline for us on that. 
 
Clearly what needs to happen is that the work that’s currently 
being undertaken by CFIA (Canadian Food Inspection Agency) 
to bring this matter to resolution, to try and find where in fact 
. . . whether or not there are any other animals that have in fact 
been infected, that’s the issue, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 
working on today. 
 
My hope is that early in the new week that we’ll get some better 
intelligence out of the United States. But in the meantime our 
industry here in Saskatchewan is working collectively with the 
government at the national level, their committee, to look at 
what can be done for producers and those affected by this 
particular issue for all of the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a NewsWatch bulletin here from CBC Newsworld, May 
30, 2003, 7 hours 10 minutes. Headline says, “Ontario 
agriculture minister Helen Johns threatening to ban the import 
of beef from the west.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jennifer Gates was the host and she says in her 
story: 
 

However Ontario’s Agriculture Minister says banning 
Alberta beef from . . . entering Ontario is drastic, but it 
might be necessary. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in the conclusion of the story, Mr. Speaker, 
Jennifer Gates says that: 
 

. . . Helen Johns (is) again saying that zone designation 
would show that each provincial market is run 
independently. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I again challenge our Minister of Agriculture to 
get into the game, protect Saskatchewan beef producers, phone 
Ontario, tell that minister that her position — even if she’s 
musing about it on Newsworld — is absolutely unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have outlined for the House 
and the media yesterday and again will today, if I’m asked, 
exactly what’s happened here in terms of our involvement and 
contact with Ontario, Mr. Speaker. And I have the 
correspondence from Ontario. 
 
And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that we have a tremendous 
amount of respect for each other as Agriculture ministers across 
the country because we’ve been working together on some very 
difficult issues in Canada . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have a tremendous amount 
of respect for my colleagues across the country, Mr. Speaker. 
And if there were ever to be, Mr. Speaker, a notion that a 
province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, would in fact be making a 
decision to ban our Canadian beef, Mr. Speaker, if there were 
ever to be that, this Premier and this ministry and this 
government would be saying that we do not support that 
position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I can tell you unequivocally today, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 
you unequivocally that Mrs. Johns was not on . . . Mrs. Johns 
was not on Newsworld this morning, Mr. Speaker, as the 
Leader of the Opposition says she was, in the Saskatchewan 
Party, and that the member is supporting a national process . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has lapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
Minister of Agriculture here in Saskatchewan may have respect 
for the other Agriculture ministers across Canada, but they are 
showing absolutely no respect or interest in our Minister of 
Agriculture. They didn’t for Mr. Upshall, they didn’t for Mr. 
Lingenfelter, and for the member from Yorkton, they don’t 
even put him in the loop and let him know what they’re doing 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Agriculture minister’s ineffectiveness is 
hurting the beef industry in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 
he can wait until Monday before he does anything. That is far 
too long. He should have been acting yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
when the Saskatchewan Party first raised this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, immediately after question period the 
Saskatchewan Party will move an emergency motion expressing 
our extreme displeasure with the Government of Ontario for 
making these comments. Will the Ag minister get on board and 
support this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate, I can 
appreciate what the Saskatchewan Party Leader of the 
Opposition said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I apologize to the member but I just want to 
ask members for order here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate what the 
Saskatchewan Party Leader of the Opposition just said a minute 
ago. He said that yesterday they waded into the issue on this . . . 
on the BSE, and that’s right. Yesterday they waded into it. 
 
We’ve been working on this issue, Mr. Speaker, since last 
Monday, last Monday at the national table with all of the 
governments across the province, or across the country, Mr. 
Speaker, with the federal government. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because this is a national issue. We’re all engaged on this 
national issue. We’re all on the same page, Mr. Speaker, to sort 
this out, Mr. Speaker, is what we are. 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

And I can understand why the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party is concerned about his presence on agricultural policy, 
Mr. Speaker. And today he’s trying to find yet another place 
that he can inject himself because we know where they stand on 
crop insurance, which is to sell crop insurance, as the member 
from Wilkie says. We know what they’d do to crop insurance, 
Mr. Speaker. They’d extend the time line from 15 years; they’d 
reduce it to eight or nine. They’d take the $600 million, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’d want it shared as trade injury, is what the 
late member from Watrous said. They sell out agriculture and 
Canadian farmers every chance they got. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Agriculture is caught short, made another big mistake, so now 
he wants to talk about crop insurance, not about the BSE 
problem in Canada. That will not work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just yesterday — and I bet you the minister doesn’t know this 
either — just yesterday the USDA (United States Department of 
Agriculture) regulations were amended to add Canada to the list 
of countries from which beef exports are banned due to BSE. 
The USDA is now inviting comment on this decision until July 
28. The posting on the USDA Web site then states the 
following: 
 

We will consider any comments we receive during the 
comment period . . . After the comment period closes, we 
will publish another document in the Federal Register. The 
document will include a discussion of any comments we 
receive and any amendments we are making to the rule. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what does that mean? I ask the Minister of 
Agriculture: does it mean that the current ban will remain in 
effect until at least July 28? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — If the Leader of the Opposition would do a 
bit more research on the way in which the Houses in the US 
operate, he will know that when in fact, Mr. Speaker, a decision 
is made by a secretary or a governance person in the US, what 
happens is that information then gets tabled in the Legislative 
Assembly or in a House like ours does, and it then needs to 
follow the processes that give the kinds of notices to all of the 
residencies within the country. That’s exactly what’s happened 
here. 
 
This is a legislative process or a parliamentary process 
requirement that needs to occur, as they’ve done. Does that 
mean, Mr. Speaker, that there will be a ban on Canadian beef 
for the middle of July, the end of July? Not at all. It means that 
that process is being followed today within the US Congress in 
the way in which the legislative and parliamentary processes in 
the US work. 
 
It is our view, Mr. Speaker, as best I know from Mr. Vanclief, 
the federal minister, he is on the phone on a daily basis with the 
secretary from the US. They are talking to them about lifting 
the ban. They’re trying to show them that our Canadian process 
works in terms of identification and tracing and food safety. 
And it’s our view, Mr. Speaker, that from a national 
perspective, as provincial ministers and the federal government, 
we’ll find a resolve to this for Canadians. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re unhappy with a lot of the things that the federal minister, 
Lyle Vanclief, has done over the years, but at least Mr. Vanclief 
is on the phone. That’s a whole lot better than our Minister of 
Agriculture here in Saskatchewan, who’s sitting at home and 
twiddling his thumbs while the Saskatchewan beef industry 
suffers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister is so knowledgeable about the 
procedures in the United States, can he tell this House, can he 
tell the people of Saskatchewan who are dependent upon jobs 
and livelihood from the beef industry, just how that time period 
can be shortened up so that the ban will be lifted prior to July 
28? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, there has been no 
information from our federal minister that the ban on the US 
beef will be held until July 23. There has not been any. 
 
And then the member opposite, the member opposite from 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency, should not be saying to 
Canadian farmers, and to Saskatchewan producers, that our beef 
will not be moving yet until July 23. You should not be 
fearmongering, Mr. Member. You should not be fearmongering. 
You have today a national group of men and women, including 
the industry, Mr. Speaker, who every day are out there trying to 
show that we have a safe system in Canada and that we have a 
process that’s working, Mr. Speaker, to get our borders open. 
 
And when we have the member, the Leader of the Opposition 
from the Saskatchewan Party standing up and saying to 
Canadian producers, to Saskatchewan producers, that in fact the 
borders are not going to be open until July 23 because it’s some 
kind of a notion that’s been stated by the US, it’s absolutely 
false, Mr. Speaker. And it’s political fearmongering at its 
greatest height, Mr. Speaker. And it should stop because the 
industry, Mr. Speaker, needs our support — needs our support, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question no. 568. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 568 has been tabled. 
 
Why is the Leader of the Opposition on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, to move a motion of urgent 
and pressing necessity under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state the nature of the 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

 

motion and perhaps read the motion into the record? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Marketing of Western Canadian Beef 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, as you are aware from 
question period, there is discussion by the Minister of 
Agriculture in Ontario about banning Western Canadian beef 
from entering the province of Ontario. We feel that is of an 
emergent nature in the province of Saskatchewan. And so I 
have a motion that reads: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its extreme displeasure over 
the outrageous suggestion by the Government of Ontario 
that Western Canadians’ beef be banned in this province in 
light of the single case of BSE, a move that would harm 
efforts to reopen the United States border to Canadian beef 
and would worsen regional tensions in this country. 

 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. Order. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/Loi de 2003 
modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think we’re 
starting to see why we need to take a lot of time on some of 
these Bills. It’s because this NDP government is totally out of 
touch and that out of touch runs across from Bill to Bill to Bill. 
 
This morning you saw, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would bring to the member’s 
attention that the item before the Assembly is Bill 31, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act. And as a 
matter of relevance, would the member address the comments 
to the Act, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The relevance to 
this Act is that we have a government who’s just placed before 
us Bill No. 31 — a government that is totally out touch, a 
government we can’t trust, a government that’s not taking care 
of the people of its province. And we’ve seen that today. That is 
the example, Mr. Speaker, that underlines the necessity to look 
at Bill No. 31. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Bill No. 31. We just had a minister get up, 
Mr. Speaker, get up and say that it didn’t exist. Then we 
presented . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I will give the member 
one more opportunity to get to the topic. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s incompetence 
that makes us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The motion before the 
Assembly is adjourned debate, Bill 31, The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill No. 31 is about the liquor and gaming Act, Mr. 
Speaker, an Act that this government is placing before the 
people in how to develop the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, gaming and alcohol is one segment of society, one 
segment of the economy, Mr. Speaker, which we hope will 
generate revenues for Saskatchewan. 
 
But we see examples, Mr. Speaker, of how this government 
deals with the economy. We see the examples, Mr. Speaker, of 
this BSE situation in Saskatchewan and how the government 
deals with the economy in that particular area. 
 
When we come to dealing with liquor and gaming, Mr. Speaker, 
we have to look at other segments of society as well, as to how 
the government is dealing with the economy in those areas, to 
understand how the government deals with the economy of 
Saskatchewan and developing the liquor and gaming industry, 
Mr. Speaker, and how they’re dealing with that. 
 
We see their absolute disregard and disrespect for the cattle 
industry and those workers in that area, Mr. Speaker. So how 
can we believe that the government is going to have respect and 
understanding in the liquor and gaming industry, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — We see a minister, Mr. Speaker, who is 
so out of touch that he cannot even pick up the phone to talk to 
a fellow Agriculture minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. There will be 
time for a debate on all of these questions, I’m sure. But if the 
member would like to debate some other thing, perhaps he can 
ask for leave to go . . . (inaudible) . . . other item. But I would 
bring to the member’s attention that his remarks should be 
predominantly on The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re talking about respect and understanding for an industry. 
This Act talks about defining First Nations gaming authority. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the First Nations you have to 
deal with them with respect and understanding. You look to the 
government for examples in other areas and how they have 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

dealt with people. Mr. Speaker, they’re not dealing with the 
cattle industry with respect or understanding. So why would 
you think that this government and that minister, Mr. Speaker, 
any of executive government ministers, would deal with respect 
and understanding in any segment of society when one of the 
primary industries of Saskatchewan, the cattle industry, is being 
neglected by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look to a government you hope that that 
government would have understanding of the issues involved in 
your industry. The First Nations in dealing with gambling, with 
the gaming industry, look to this government and hope that 
there’s understanding and respect. But they look at how that 
government treats other segments of society as well. 
 
And this Minister of Agriculture, along with his colleague, the 
minister of Gaming, are ignoring the needs and the issues in 
Saskatchewan. They’re ignoring what’s happening in the rest of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. Gaming is a national industry, controlled 
in every province by the provincial government. 
 
Agriculture is as well a national industry, Mr. Speaker, where 
the provincial governments have a great deal to say about it. 
When you ignore the needs of the people, Mr. Speaker, whether 
it be in gaming, First Nations gaming, or in any other segment 
such as the cattle industry — that this minister is doing — the 
governments have failed the people. 
 
We see this Minister of Agriculture and the minister of Gaming 
and the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Corrections and 
the minister of community services all failing the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. Why would the people believe that 
these ministers would not fail them as well under this 
amendment, Mr. Speaker? They have no confidence; they have 
no trust. 
 
We have seen the past minister of Economic Development, Mr. 
Speaker, six years of deception, Mr. Speaker — six years of 
deception — on SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company). So why would the people involved in 
the liquor and gaming regulations, Mr. Speaker, the First 
Nations gaming authority, want to trust this government? How 
can they trust this government? They can’t. It’s that simple; 
they cannot. 
 
Ministers of the Crown stand in their place and say, it didn’t 
happen; it didn’t exist because there was no news release, Mr. 
Speaker. Why would anyone sitting down from the First 
Nations to negotiate a gaming agreement with these . . . this 
government, Mr. Speaker — they even sully the word with their 
attitude and their actions, Mr. Speaker — why would anyone sit 
down with this government and negotiate an agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, we see the actions across 
Canada that are impacting on Saskatchewan. We potentially see 
the impact across Canada that might impact on our gaming 
industry. 
 
And we see the ministers glued to their chairs, unable to pick up 
the phone — on a phone company they own, Mr. Speaker. They 
can’t find the phone numbers for the Minister of Agriculture in 

Ontario. They can’t find the phone number for the Prime 
Minister. They can’t find the phone number for the Premier of 
Quebec. And they certainly can’t find the phone number for 
their colleague, the Agriculture critic in Nova Scotia, John 
MacDonell, the NDP critic. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to alcohol and gaming in this 
province, when it comes to making arrangements and contracts 
with anyone — including the First Nations, Mr. Speaker — this 
government is not to be trusted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — This government, Mr. Speaker, does not 
understand the impact of any of the economic segments of 
society. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in this House, we were talking 
about the need of understanding and sensitivity for workers in 
this province who may be laid off because of BSE. And what 
does the Minister of Labour stand up and say — well how can 
the opposition possibly make a comment about workers when 
you don’t support the minimum wage that we put in? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we believe that the workers of this province 
deserve more than the minimum wage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — They deserve jobs, Mr. Speaker, that 
pay more than the minimum wage. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
alcohol and gaming industries in this province are one of those 
industries that provide better than minimum wages, Mr. 
Speaker, just as the cattle industry, the livestock industry, the 
feedlot industry, the trucking industry, Mr. Speaker, provide 
better than minimum wage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, there is a lot about this 
particular piece of legislation that is of concern, but there’s also 
some good points to it, Mr. Speaker. The Bill puts out an appeal 
process which the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Commission can hear appeals of on-reserve gaming decisions 
made by the Saskatchewan gaming . . . Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Licensing provisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a need for an appeal process. There is a 
need to be able to appeal governments’ decisions. There is a 
need, Mr. Speaker, as well, to be able to appeal governments’ 
inactions — just as they are doing in the BSE situation, Mr. 
Speaker, to say, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Agriculture 
said yesterday, I talked to the minister from Ontario on 
Wednesday and I don’t have to talk to her again until Monday. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you’re talking about appeals in the 
liquor and gaming Act, why aren’t there appeal segments in 
other areas of government? Why can’t you appeal this 
government’s inaction, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has signed a 25-year gaming 
agreement with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations). Mr. Speaker, we believe that that gaming agreement 
was signed for too long of a term. However, it is signed, Mr. 
Speaker, and we believe that FSIN, while it had a great deal of 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

 

difficulty earlier in handling this particular file in the Indian 
gaming industry, has certainly improved its circumstances and 
is moving forward on this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:00) 
 
We would have liked to have seen those improvements in place 
before the agreement was signed, Mr. Speaker, rather than after. 
And not all of the recommendations that have come forward 
have been dealt with, Mr. Speaker. However in signing a 
25-year agreement this government seems to be recognizing 
that the industry needs some stability and needs some support 
from government. 
 
But why is that understanding and lack of support not being 
demonstrated across the economy? Why is it not being 
demonstrated in the cattle industry today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The members opposite supported a motion yesterday calling for 
the federal government to recognize that there was a need for 
the reduction of EI (Employment Insurance) from the two-week 
waiting period. Mr. Speaker, that’s a recognition of the need for 
long-term stability, just as signing a long-term agreement with 
FSIN to provide on-reserve gaming, that’s a recognition, Mr. 
Speaker, of long-term stability in the province, of the economy. 
Just as there needs to be a recognition of stability in the cattle 
industry in this province, Mr. Speaker, and this government is 
failing to provide that leadership. 
 
The minister of Gaming provided leadership in this. We may 
not necessarily agree with all of his leadership and all of the 
ways it was done, but he did step forward and do it, which is 
not what the Minister of Agriculture is doing today when it 
comes to dealing with the situation in Ontario, where the 
Minister of Agriculture in Ontario has called for a ban of 
Western Canadian beef. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ministers of the Crown need to show 
leadership in gaming, in the alcohol industry. They need to 
show leadership across the economy and in this time of crisis 
they need to show leadership in the agriculture industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier stepped forward and supported the 
25-year agreement in liquor and gaming, the signing of the deal 
with FSIN. And yet the Premier seems to be allowing his 
Minister of Agriculture to wander in the wilderness with his 
head in the sand, Mr. Speaker, and ignore the statements that 
are being made by other ministers across Canada. It’s time, Mr. 
Speaker, for the Minister of Agriculture to pick up that phone 
that he owns with SaskTel and phone the Minister of 
Agriculture in Ontario. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. There are a couple of members, 
one on each side here, that appear to want to get into a debate of 
their own. I would ask them to respect the person who’s got the 
floor. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
I would also mention to the member for Cannington that in his 
remarks, there’s this . . . slang word for it I guess would be 
bootlegging. He’s bootlegging a lot of extraneous information 
into the debate, which is quite enjoyable in a sense, but I would 
ask him to make the majority of his remarks on the topic at 
hand. 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this agreement, this Act is very important to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And at times, Mr. Speaker, to understand the 
context of an Act you need to be able to use analogies and 
examples, Mr. Speaker. And the people across Saskatchewan 
sometimes understand one analogy, sometimes they understand 
another but Saskatchewan in general is . . . We’re still very 
much a rural mindset even though we may live in Regina or 
Saskatoon. We still are very much connected with the land, Mr. 
Speaker. And so the analogies that most people understand are 
indeed those that relate to the land. 
 
I remember the Minister of Environment quite often using the 
example of Grandmother’s Bay in any of his discussions, 
regardless of what the particular item he wished to discuss was. 
Because that was an example that his constituents, Mr. Speaker, 
could feel and could understand. And that’s why at times, Mr. 
Speaker, we use various analogies that may not directly relate to 
liquor and gaming. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the items that is happening in this 
particular Bill is a change from the First Nations trust to the 
First Nations Fund. And, Mr. Speaker, while it’s not a very 
large change, it is a change in the attitude of the use of that 
particular fund, Mr. Speaker. A change in the attitude can have 
a large impact on how the issue is dealt with and how people 
feel about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s very much like the case about BSE. It’s a matter of 
trust and feeling and how you . . . the issue is dealt with. When 
someone across Canada says that we have a concern, perhaps 
there should be a ban put in place on Western Canadian beef, 
then it becomes a matter of attitude and trust on how the issue is 
dealt with. 
 
Just as, Mr. Speaker, the change of the word from First Nations 
trust to First Nations Fund has an impact on how people react to 
that issue, how they have an understanding of that issue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When a minister of the Crown says, I don’t have to be involved 
in that issue, I don’t have to pick up the phone — dealing let’s 
say with the First Nations trust fund or the First Nations Fund, 
Mr. Speaker — there is an attitude there that indicates lack of 
interest and lack of respect in that particular item, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Same as when the Minister of Agriculture says, I don’t have to 
pick up the phone to phone the Minister of Agriculture in 
Ontario because she’s talking about banning Western Canadian 
beef, it shows a lack of respect, a lack of interest, and a lack of 
understanding. 
 
In either case, Mr. Speaker, that kind of an attitude is 
unacceptable — whether it’s dealing with the First Nations trust 
fund, whether it’s dealing with the cattle industry in 
Saskatchewan — it’s unacceptable from a government minister, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Liquor and gaming industry, the First Nations gaming, Mr. 
Speaker, is very much about employment. It’s about people 
working in the industry. I know when White Bear first 
established their casino, they had a great deal of pride, Mr. 
Speaker. Those employees working in there had a great deal of 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

pride that they were doing it. It wasn’t somebody else doing it; 
they had a great deal of pride that they were doing it. They were 
establishing that casino. They were working there. They were 
making it succeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is no different than the feeling that the people have such as 
the McCrea family about their cattle farm. They made it. They 
established that herd over 40, 50, 60 years. It was theirs, Mr. 
Speaker. They developed it; they built it. They were the ones 
that were making it successful. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about alcohol and gaming 
industry, when we talk about the First Nations trust fund — or 
fund, it’s going to be called now — when we talk about the 
FSIN agreement with government, it’s about employment. It’s 
about giving people pride. It’s about giving people the 
opportunity to establish and work for themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know you take a look at the people working in the Minister 
of Labour’s riding, at the packing plant in Moose Jaw. Those 
people were proud of their jobs. They were making a good 
livelihood. Now that livelihood is threatened, Mr. Speaker, 
because of one single incidence of BSE, because of the closure 
of the border by the US. Now it’s being threatened, Mr. 
Speaker, by statements from the minister from Ontario that our 
Minister of Agriculture seems to be either ignorant of or 
sticking his head in the sand and trying to ignore, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the same sort of thing happens, Mr. Speaker, in many 
industries. I guess we should take a look and see what happened 
to the White Bear casino and how those people felt. Because it 
was, I believe, in 1994 the casino was up and operating and this 
government, led by the then minister of Justice at the time, Bob 
Mitchell, raided that casino. 
 
Men in black suits and machine guns, Mr. Speaker, descended 
on that casino and arrested a number of people — everybody’s 
laid out on the floor — hauled away their slot machines, Mr. 
Speaker. And I know in talking to the chief of the day, Mr. 
Bernie Shepherd, Mr. Speaker, he was inviting the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) to come up to that casino and 
lay a charge. He said, I want the sergeant to come up here in his 
red serge uniform and we will give him a slot machine. We will 
accept his charges because we want to go to court to establish 
the jurisdictional issues. 
 
But that’s not what happened. The minister of Justice and the 
RCMP descended at 2 o’clock in the morning on the casino in a 
raid, with machine guns and men in SWAT (special weapons 
and tactics) uniforms, to apprehend everyone. That was the 
respect that this government showed, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
the respect that they’re showing today to the cattle industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has lost its moral compass. It’s 
lost its direction. It has no idea where it wants to go or how it’s 
going to get there. The only purpose that this government has 
today is to try to hold on to power, only for power’s sake. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, they are failing in that measure. If the Premier 
should be able to screw up the courage to call an election, they 
will find that they have most severely lost the trust of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time we’re prepared to allow this particular 

Bill to move forward to Committee of the Whole where we do 
have a large number of questions to ask the minister of Gaming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 35 — The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 35 is The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act and it’s an amendment 
or an Act to amend that. And we’re going to need to look at that 
because there are some directions that have been set. Now how 
these directions are going to be carried out, that, Mr. Speaker, 
that is the question. 
 
The minister has said that this is going to improve the issue of 
accountability — the issue of accountability — and we 
welcome that. But when we see where the statement comes 
from and we look at the record of this government talking about 
accountability and what’s supposed to be happening, we realize 
that there is much to be questioned, much to be doubted, 
because the chances of this actually developing the way it’s 
been set out, Mr. Speaker, are very, very slim. 
 
We’ve seen that over the last number of days, Mr. Speaker, in 
different sorts of issues where this government has gone ahead 
and set up a direction and then lost its way totally. As the 
previous speaker just mentioned, this is a government that has 
truly lost their way — they have truly lost their way. 
 
Accountability. We’re going to want to see exactly how that 
accountability is going to occur before this Bill will be able to 
proceed and to move on. 
 
For several years, Mr. Speaker, the First Nations Fund has come 
under criticism by the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker — I’m 
not talking about a particular political party on this issue; it’s 
the Provincial Auditor — and because, as he said, it just simply 
was not open to scrutiny. 
 
Now what has been done in the meantime? What has been done 
in the meantime? Not very much. Not an adequate amount. The 
government’s handling of this file over the years, Mr. Speaker, 
has been totally disgraceful. And I guess the most frustrating 
thing and the most hurtful thing about this all is when we go 
back to the whole concept of gaming, what is its purpose? What 
is its purpose? 
 
It’s not particularly to provide entertainment, because we could 
play liars’ dice or bridge or something else. 
 
(11:15) 
 
One of the key things that underlines the whole concept of 
gaming was to raise monies through the First Nations gaming 
and then that this money is supposed to go out to help First 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

 

Nations. And that, Mr. Speaker — that, Mr. Speaker — is 
where this concept has failed. The money that should be going 
there is not going there to the same extent that it should. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the auditor, very specifically, had 
concerns about accountability, because the money that was 
supposed to be going to the people that needed the help in our 
First Nations community was not going there. 
 
What is really frustrating about this, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s 
been this NDP government that has flown a few flags 
throughout the province. They used to say they represented 
agriculture. That’s where Tommy Douglas came from, little 
rural community. So they started the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation). Well that’s failed, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s failed. 
 
How many people do they have sitting on that side that are truly 
from a rural constituency? One. One truly rural constituency. 
And we have some city people waving. You can recognize a 
city person from an NDP, but I will not put it on record how we 
do it, because it shows in the two whose hands were up. 
 
And so anyways, the one minister that they have from a rural 
one won’t be there any longer. But here, you have the NDP 
government who used to have that rural component. That has 
evaporated. 
 
They became the NDP, tried to go ahead and pick up on all 
sorts of other issues. That has failed. They just failed that very 
recently, Mr. Speaker, in the last week because we’ve had 
people laid off in the meat industry — people laid off in the 
meat industry. And that has just about been aggravated when 
we’ve had the Americans close their boundaries. 
 
And now, we have Eastern Canada is talking about doing the 
same thing. And the Agriculture minister gets up and says well, 
it wasn’t an official news release. Well I didn’t know that 
Agriculture ministers got little sheets of paper in the morning 
that says this is what somebody has said but if it doesn’t have a 
heading on the top, official news release . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I have been listening very carefully 
and deliberately in trying to, in my mind, draw a relationship 
between the member’s comments and the Bill and I have been 
unable to do it. So I would ask the member to clarify and stick 
with Bill 35. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 35, 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act, an amendment to that, 
is there to address the concerns that the auditor had about 
accountability in how this NDP government’s been handling the 
finances of monies that was supposed to go to help the people 
in the First Nations community — that’s the key thing. 
 
This NDP with its pretend social conscious has failed there, Mr. 
Speaker — has failed there. Therefore we have to look at this 
particular Bill and wonder if they’re failing again. Is this 
concept that they want to fly around the province that they have 
a social conscious, is there any validity left to it? I suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, it isn’t. 
 
Because when a bean counter, the Provincial Auditor, looks at it 
and says there are failures in this, there are failures in this, we 

couldn’t have a more credible person, Mr. Speaker, address the 
fact — address the fact — that this NDP has lost its way. It has 
lost its way, Mr. Speaker, even if we use their own compass, by 
their own compass they are lost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I note with interest — and 
unfortunately like you, Mr. Speaker, I have been listening as 
well — but I note with interest, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. 
member referred to the Provincial Auditor as a bean counter. 
 
I don’t think he said it in a way that he intended to reflect the 
respect for an independent officer of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, and I am sure that the hon. member would want to 
withdraw that remark and rephrase it so as to properly respect 
the . . . or to represent the respect that is required by this 
Assembly for the officers of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his point of order. I 
was listening intently and I did hear the remark. And I chose not 
to raise it at the time because I felt that the tone in which it was 
expressed was not derogatory. 
 
So I thank the member for his point of order. I believe his point 
of order is not totally well taken, but if the member does want 
to clarify, I invite him to do so. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will rest on your 
judgment on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 35, the concept of accountability is what 
this Bill is all about. And as we’ve just been discussing, the 
whole concept around Bill 35 is to ensure that the monies that 
are being raised through the gaming industry go where they’re 
supposed to go. That, Mr. Speaker, this government has done an 
abysmal job of, and we have in the last numbers of years raised 
questions on that on numerous occasions in this House. 
 
The extent to which those questions were validated were 
indicated when the Premier actually had to move people out of 
his cabinet because they were doing such a poor job in that 
particular area and replace them with other ones. So we know 
that this government knows that they’ve done a poor job on 
that. 
 
We hear the minister state that if the terms and conditions for 
accountability are not met, the department can step in, that the 
department can step in. Well, Mr. Speaker, it must be 
frightening from the perspective of the First Nations to look at 
this and say, well we’ve had this government that has had all 
these fiascos going on in this area for the last three, four years, 
that they are prepared to say, well if this particular Bill, Bill No. 
35, The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act, doesn’t work 
quite right in our effort to go ahead and improve accountability, 
the department can step in. That’s what the minister has said. 
 
Well I wouldn’t want this government to step in and try to 
straighten out anything. I think we’ve got probably thousands of 
people, family farms, employees in the meat industry, that right 
now says, the last thing we need is an NDP government to step 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

in. 
 
We’ve watched the NDP dragging its feet and ignoring the 
SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) matter for the 
last couple of years and we do have many questions, Mr. 
Speaker, about Bill No. 35. But I believe that we can probably 
deal with those questions best if we let this at this particular 
point go to Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Information Technology Office 

Vote 74 
 
Subvote (IT01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m joined today by two officials from the Information 
Technology Office. The chief information and services officer 
for the province, John Law, is seated to my left. And directly 
behind me is Richard Murray, who’s the chief technology 
officer. 
 
Given the way the debate has been going, I was tempted to 
bring Agriculture officials this morning. Hopefully I won’t need 
them as we proceed through the discussion. 
 
The Chair: — And to clarify, it’s not department; it’s office. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I guess we could ask questions about how the 
Information Technology is handling the information out of 
Agriculture. And we may actually get there at some point in 
time, whether or not the Internet connections between 
Saskatchewan and Ontario actually work or whether they work 
to the Prime Minister’s office or whether they work to the 
Premier of Quebec or whether they work to the NDP caucus 
office in Nova Scotia. 
 
But right now, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right. Or whether or not the government has access 
through the Internet to NewsWatch’s Web page to confirm or 
deny whether or not NewsWatch actually exists and whether 
people actually do interviews on it and whether or not the 
Minister of Agriculture from Ontario was on NewsWatch this 
morning at exactly 7:10. So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, we 
won’t ask those immediately. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You said an interview on NewsWatch. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Excuse me, on Newsworld. NewsWatch 
was the ones that record that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess the first question would be, since this is a 

new office that was established and reported in the budget book 
I believe for the first time this year — I don’t recollect it being 
reported as an office previously — exactly what the purpose of 
this office is and what the policy direction is for this particular 
office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this is the first time that 
the Information Technology Office has appeared as a separate 
vote in the Estimates book. It’s previously . . . The office has 
existed for some time under the auspices of Industry and 
Resources, or Economic Development as it used to be known. 
 
The mandate of this office is largely twofold. First of all it has a 
responsibility to provide simple coordination of approach to 
dealing with internal information technology issues within the 
government. 
 
The second is to help work with Industry and Resources 
department on sectoral development issues in the IT 
(information technology) sector. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you have a staff, an FTE (full-time equivalents) staff of 18. Was 
this number simply transferred from other areas into this office, 
or are these new people that have been hired and the people 
who were dealing with IT in other segments of government 
have remained in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, these are in fact a 
straight transfer of both PYs (person-years) and the personnel 
who fill them, from Industry and Resources. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
areas that I think is of great deal of interest to all IT people 
across this province — whether or not they’re in private 
industry, whether they’re in government — is the policies that 
this government is about to pursue, is pursuing and about to 
pursue when it comes to the strategic plans for IT. 
 
(11:30) 
 
What are the government’s plans in that area? How is IT going 
to be dealt with within government internally? How it’s going 
to be dealt with externally with the rest of society; with 
industry; with third party groups like hospitals, schools, various 
segments of society across the province. 
 
So how is . . . What’s the strategic policy and plan internally 
within government and externally across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
There are in fact two parts to this question. Let me start with the 
internal issues that the member has raised. 
 
The decision-making process within government around IT 
systems is largely decentralized and housed in each individual 
department. Individual departments have IT officers, they have 
their own IT support branches. In some, I think in most 
departments there are outsourcing arrangements in place where 
we deal with private sector suppliers, CGI, EDS (Electronic 
Data Systems), ISM (Information Systems Management 
Corporation), a number of other small ones. 
 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

 

There is, at this point, largely a coordinating role that is played 
by the ITO (Information Technology Office) in terms of 
working with departments to make sure that we’ve got an 
ability for departments to work together. 
 
One of the changes in approach that we’ve had is, as a result of 
the reorganization last March that the Premier embarked on, 
was to create a separate ministry of Information Technology. 
And this . . . The departmental structure attached to that is the 
ITO. But a lot of this discussion and focus that we are putting to 
this is, how do we find a way to move the government systems 
from a largely decentralized disparate set of systems to a more 
integrated network type approach throughout government? How 
do we start to address the efficiency issues? How do we address 
increased productivity? How do we address moving with new 
ideas in terms of government on-line? 
 
That is the challenge that we face internally. And there are a 
number of structural issues that we can certainly talk about 
today or in the future as to options available to us. But at this 
point we have largely a decision-making process that is 
decentralized into each of the departments and we’ve got a very 
broad set of partners that we deal with throughout the 
community. 
 
On the external issues that the member raises, certainly the 
pre-eminent piece of the ITO’s responsibility focuses around 
CommunityNet, which is a program that has been several years 
underway now. In fact, we believe we’ll finish the rollout this 
year. CommunityNet, as the members know, is a program to 
bring wired broadband to Saskatchewan communities. We 
anticipate this year that we’ll complete the rollout to the 366 
communities we had initially identified. 
 
The benefit of this, of course, is that we are able to hook up 
schools, libraries, the health facilities, government offices on 
one common set of hardware. And the obvious benefit to rural 
communities has been . . . an associated benefit has been the 
ability to bring in, behind that, high-speed Internet connections 
through SaskTel for individual businesses and consumers. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, you mentioned CommunityNet. Does internal 
government utilize CommunityNet or the CommunityNet 
structure for its communications, for its IT services throughout 
the province? 
 
I’m thinking of, say, the Department of Environment which 
would have offices spread around the province. Are they tied in 
through CommunityNet or do they utilize their own system? 
Because you mentioned that the departments, up until now, 
have been relatively separate from each other. Are they utilizing 
CommunityNet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the short answer to the 
member’s question is yes. All departments do use 
CommunityNet for their linkages, both within the city of 
Regina and throughout the province. This is the system we use. 
 
We’re not aware of any anomalies where departments would 
use a different system. But this is the standard that we use and 
has been for two years now. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
one of the concerns that government should have, the public 
does have, is dealing with security and control of access and 
information gathering through the Internet. 
 
How does that security work? And I don’t mean by the exact 
detail but rather the management control of security within 
CommunityNet. Is it every department would look after their 
own security, their own control systems? Or does 
CommunityNet provide that and impose their security over 
every department? How is it all isolated one from the other so 
that, say, SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), someone in SERM is accessing information in 
the Department of Health? Who looks after that management 
control and how is that done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I can tell you 
that with these kind of questions where you think it’s always 
easy to give a nice simple, quick answer and say, yes, in fact 
there is a great deal of detail to this. 
 
Without getting into too much of the technicality around it, 
which I have been enjoying listening to, I think the easiest 
answer to this is that, yes, CommunityNet does have across it a 
standard in terms of its security features. These are dealt with, 
managed by SaskTel. There are firewalls within 
CommunityNet. Each individual department has firewalls. 
 
There are common standards that we apply in terms of filters 
across CommunityNet for Internet access. And there are within 
individual departments, usage policies around everything from 
e-mail to different security levels in terms of which employees 
can access which information. 
 
The ability though, as the member alludes to in his question, for 
an official in the Department of Environment to access 
information say in the Department of Health would not be 
possible without appropriate authority being given by the 
department that houses the information. 
 
If that’s the — in terms of the overall Internet and 
CommunityNet type of access — the question, I think that’s a 
sufficient answer. If the member is wanting to ask about 
information gathering and policies for securing privacy, that is a 
different set of issues that we can get into. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, no. The minister’s still 
heading down the road I’m intending. 
 
Each department then has its own firewall. Who establishes the 
criteria for access through that firewall? Is it CommunityNet? Is 
it SaskTel? Is it the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Firewall access is determined by the 
department that is responsible for the data. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you very much. Within the 
department, now let’s say SERM which has offices spread out 
all over the province, is it possible for SERM to establish 
firewalls within their piece of CommunityNet, not just at the 
gate where CommunityNet accesses SERM, but SERM within 
its structure could firewall office A from office B and establish 
their criteria and establish it in such a manner that different 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

offices might have different criteria? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes. In fact this is common practice 
within departments. There will be different levels of security 
employed within individual departments, largely based around 
the types of information that are being dealt with in terms of 
who needs access to them, who should have access to them. 
These tend to be held discreetly within the departments. 
 
Obviously HR (human resources) records, information 
containing citizen-collected data is handled differently than we 
might handle more general aggregated information that the 
government might collect. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does the same 
system and criteria then work for that area outside of 
government, so the external CommunityNet connections — be 
that third party groups, be that various communities — is the 
same security and management control in place for those 
segments? 
 
So let’s say SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), the municipalities wish to access 
CommunityNet. They wish to establish their own server system 
so that the various municipalities can interact with their central 
SARM headquarters plus connect to the various RMs (rural 
municipality) and municipalities across the province. Can they 
establish their own firewall system? Can each one of those 
municipalities establish their own firewall with their own 
criteria as to who has access into that system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In terms of firewall access, the 
member would be accurate to say that organizations that are 
involved with the CommunityNet program are allowed to set 
their own firewall standards. CommunityNet though does have 
a certain set of protocols that have to be adhered to within it, so 
you cannot dumb down the system. It is a question that you can 
add it in additional enhancements but you cannot violate the 
privacy and protocol pieces that are built into CommunityNet as 
it exists. 
 
Nothing prevents any users on the system from establishing a 
higher standard or restricting additional access. This is one of 
the pieces which we believe is working fairly successfully 
within the system now. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m surprised 
you say that it’s working successfully because I have received 
some complaints about that very issue dealing within the 
education system; the ability to firewall individual divisions to a 
certain criteria, not dumbing down but raising the standards or 
raising the standards of individual schools over that set by the 
division. The school in question is being told that you have to 
adhere to the standard being put forward by the Department of 
Education — not raising the bar, but you’re not physically able 
to change that. 
 
I wonder if the minister’s officials will be able to address that 
issue through the minister and indicate whether or not it’s . . . 
they are physically able to raise that bar on their firewalls 
within that school. 
 
(11:45) 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — As we start to deal with departments’ 
relationships with outside agencies that they may have under 
their purview, whether it’s — or that they have a relationship 
with — whether it is municipal governments’ dealings with 
RMs or whether it is Department of Education’s dealing with 
school divisions and then subsequently down to individual 
schools, we start to move in to a set of decisions and policies 
that are perhaps better addressed by individual ministers. 
 
This question that the member raises is one that is being dealt 
with through the Department of Education. As I had indicated at 
the start of my comments, one of the difficulties that we have as 
we’re trying to move forward with IT technology and the policy 
issues around it is that a lot of the decision making is housed in 
the individual departments. So the issue that the member raises, 
I am not directly familiar with and may in fact be better 
addressed to the Minister of Learning under her estimates. 
 
Suffice it to say though that the standards that are imposed by 
CommunityNet apply across the departments. The departments 
then can deal with additional security provisions as they see fit. 
But it is them rather than CommunityNet that deal directly with 
the divisional partners. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I can certainly understand the need to 
talk to, say, the Minister of Education about the policy. 
 
But I’m wondering more about the management control that the 
. . . Well I use the word physically able; it’s in a virtual world. 
Are the individual schools, the individual RM offices, the 
individual SERM offices able to firewall individually and still 
be part of the greater department connection, their intranet? Is it 
possible for a programmer to program in a higher standard into 
the firewall for an individual location, assuming the policy 
allows for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The question the member asks has 
again, I think, two different sets of issues within it. First of all 
within the government departments there are standards that are 
applied within government. So the way that we would deal with 
the regional office of any government department is different 
than the relationship that we have with a school division, which 
is of course an autonomous body, or an RM. 
 
CommunityNet does not have on it a server-type system, so 
when a school participates in CommunityNet they don’t then 
turn over their information systems to the provincial 
government. They would still be responsible for having their 
own hosting system in their division. And on that system they 
can establish the firewalls as they see appropriate for their 
division. The CommunityNet in that particular case serves 
largely as a, for lack of a better term, really as a set of pipes that 
hook up them to the larger Internet. 
 
Within the government departments though there are different 
policies that different departments will have, although standards 
are applied the same in the main department as they would be in 
regional offices. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So you’re saying on a physical side, on 
a server side, Mr. Minister, that in the case of the school that I 
described, the school server with the firewall on it would be 
perhaps at a central location within the division and they’re all 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

 

connecting to that. Or the school could establish its own server 
if they wish to firewall at that location, and then connect in to 
the unit server, and thence on to the grander world of the 
connection to the entire province. 
 
So it would be up to the school then to provide that kind of a 
server and that kind of a firewall. Physically for the system, a 
server and firewall at the school location then henceforth at the 
unit location henceforth connected to CommunityNet, would 
not physically cause any problems to the CommunityNet 
service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think the short answer to the 
member’s question is in fact yes, that this is the case. 
 
In fact yesterday I had an opportunity to meet with Regina 
Catholic School Division here, and that’s very much the set up 
that they have, individual servers for Web servers, e-mail 
servers. They’ve got a different system for the student 
management. You could have a different server within a school 
that then hooks up to the divisional one or the unit one and then 
would connect in through CommunityNet. 
 
CommunityNet has across it a set of standards in terms of the 
type of access that’s provided. And in fact there is, as I 
understand, certain Web-blocking pieces on there; that we make 
sure that there’s a standard in terms of access to the Internet. 
 
My officials caution me of course in these technological matters 
there’s always a possibility that there is something there that 
may cause us to need to impose that . . . a change in the 
standard as we move back down the chain. But we’re not aware 
of anything at this point as we’ve done the rollout to just over or 
just about 800 schools, that has come to our attention on this. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another one 
of the issues that has been raised over the last few months 
dealing with government IT has been this procurement policy. 
And I’m just wondering if the minister would explain the 
current procurement policy for ITO for the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The ITO does not have a unique or a 
discreet purchasing policy separate and apart from SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), so in that 
regard we follow the government’s standard in terms of the 
both the thresholds and the type of mechanisms we would use 
in purchasing and procuring IT services. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
your office or the government was looking at going into an 
arrangement with EDS last fall to handle a significant amount 
of the government’s IT services. 
 
That obviously raised some concerns throughout industry in 
Saskatchewan that the smaller players were about to be frozen 
out. They do provide a significant amount of service today to 
the government and wish to continue to provide or at least to 
have an opportunity to provide that service. 
 
And their concern was that if the government entered into a 
long-term contract for IT services with EDS that they might 
potentially be froze out. They certainly I know talked to the 
minister about that. They talked to us about that. They talked to 

the media about it. 
 
Not only were the software and hardware industry, IT industries 
in Saskatchewan concerned, so were the current workers within 
government. The IT people within the various departments were 
concerned that their livelihoods would be jeopardized as well. 
 
I wonder if the minister can outline the reasons why 
government was looking at that proposal; what the government 
hoped to accomplish by making those changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Of course this has been a topic of significant debate over the 
last, well longer than six months it seems. 
 
But the issue is in terms of why we were interested. It very 
much goes back to in fact what I had first mentioned within the 
mandate and some of the challenges this department faces. 
Namely, how do we move from a decentralized 
decision-making process with a number of, a variety of 
different applications being run — often with the case, the fact 
they are unable to communicate with each other — how do we 
move over to a more integrated networked approach to dealing 
with government on-line, both from a 
government-to-government basis to improve our government 
business services and to move into the newer area of 
government-to-citizen contact? 
 
The EDS proposal that came to us was not in fact a 
procurement initiative. This was very much one where we were 
taking a look at a strategic partnership that would allow us to 
leverage additional economic development out of existing 
spending. 
 
The second objective that we had within looking at this 
approach was, so we’ve got first of all the integration we’re 
looking at; the second question is how do we . . . can we 
leverage additional economic activity with using existing 
spending. 
 
And the third is can we find efficiency, financial efficiencies 
within the system that can then help for a renewed build out? 
 
Those were three of the key drivers to us taking a look at the 
proposal by EDS. 
 
The discussions as they moved forward were interesting as we 
got into the discussion with the industry because there is a very 
. . . It is a highly competitive industry. And there are two main 
segments of that industry we have to deal with beyond the 
hardware/software division, which are obvious I think. There 
are the large information supplier companies like EDS, IBM 
(International Business Machines Corporation), ISM, CGI. 
 
And then you get the smaller group of companies who are more 
niche marketed within government. These may deal with 
independent applications that are in the legacy systems of 
departments like Environment. They may deal with the overall 
government e-mail system like we have in place. So there’s that 
discussion as to what the balance is between the large suppliers 
and the smaller suppliers. 
 
There is, as the member pointed out, also a very significant 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

dynamic around the whole question of outsourcing. Obviously 
all the private sector companies want the government to move 
to a much more aggressive outsourcing approach. On the other 
hand, we have a large number of unionized workers within the 
industry who are worried about that. You can add onto that an 
additional dynamic where, interestingly enough, some of the 
suppliers accuse the government of in-sourcing too much. 
 
And in fact, as a result, moving away from the view that the 
government should . . . had initially set up, or the previous 
government had set up, is they had outsourced the 
government’s IT systems through . . . from SaskComp to 
Westbridge, Westbridge to ISM in its current existence. So this 
was a bit of a . . . The issue becomes a bit of a Gordian knot. 
It’s very hard to figure out how to untangle this and to move it 
forward. 
 
I think it is fair to say that the EDS discussions were . . . well 
obviously were not concluded. But there were a number of 
reasons for that and none of which, I would say, are related to 
procurement issues; more related to finding the right balance 
and to finding a proposal that met the government’s initial 
objectives. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. While it 
may not have dealt with directly the idea of procuring a new 
computer for someone’s desktop or a new piece of software to 
operate on that computer, it certainly did involve though the 
procurement of IT services in general for government — as to 
who would be managing that system, who would be managing 
the procurement, who would be managing the decisions as to 
what kind of a system was being operated, what general 
software was being utilized throughout the entire government 
structure — by integrating those items, by bringing together the 
departments under one roof. 
 
Certainly there are efficiencies to be gained because you have 
bulk buying, you have a common software throughout the entire 
government structure so that everyone, say, is using one 
particular word processor, everyone’s using one particular 
database collection system, everybody’s using one particular 
spreadsheet. And so it’s easy to transfer information from the 
Department of Health to the Department of Education if that 
need arises. 
 
And there’s certainly value in doing that. When communication 
systems can’t talk to each other, no one’s communicating. And 
it’s the same in IT. If one IT service can’t communicate to the 
other, then that’s a problem in government. Information is not 
reaching the points that it needs to. 
 
(12:00) 
 
So the overall structure that was being contemplated by the 
government as brought forward by EDS, while it may not 
initially have dealt with who’s going to buy that computer or 
who’s going to supply that computer, the overall process of 
having EDS manage IT services would have directly impacted 
on that process of procurement. 
 
And that’s . . . A large number of the businesses across the 
province were concerned about that whole process. Once one of 
the major players — EDS, ISM, CGI, whomever it might be — 

gained the management control, who else was going to be 
allowed to participate in the system was a concern to them. 
How was access to the system going to be allowed? Were the 
other large players going to be froze out because one had the 
contract to manage the system? Were the small players going to 
be froze out because one large operator had that management 
control? 
 
There was also a great deal of concern that if the bidding 
process to either provide software, to provide software in the 
sense of management controls or procurement in the sense of 
hardware, if the small players had to provide the major player 
with their tendering process and their information, would that 
affect them some other place? Now that a major player knew 
and understood how the small player was making their bids for 
government, would it affect their relationship when it came to 
making a bid in another sector outside of government? And 
there was a great deal of concern about that. 
 
So I think we need to take a look at the process that originally 
generated these concerns. How did government enter into 
negotiations with EDS for the proposals to handle government’s 
IT? Was this a request from government, that we want to 
integrate our entire service, we want to bring all of government 
IT enterprise under one roof to run it more efficiently, to better 
manage it? Or did EDS approach government and say we have 
a proposal for you to do those things, to bring it all under one 
roof, to better manage it, to be more efficient? How did that 
process occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, let me start back at 
this question as to what some of the objectives were. First of all 
I want to be very clear that at no point was the government 
going to outsource its management responsibility. The control 
over the management of information, management of the 
systems, was going to be retained by government in this 
particular scenario. Indeed I would argue it needs to . . . I know 
it’s a little hard to follow in here, but one of the things that, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I think we need to remember is that government 
intended to keep the management here. And in fact I would 
argue government needs to maintain the management of the 
systems, both in terms of managing contracts but also having 
overall ability to manage the policy directions. 
 
In terms of the discussion that we were getting into with EDS, 
we were not in fact looking at establishing a common set of 
applications across government. What we were looking at was 
how do you integrate the applications? As you move from a 
system of largely decentralized, departmentalized, stovepiped 
operations where individual departments may have within it a 
number of different applications and databases, how do you 
start to move forward to better integrate that? 
 
EDS’s discussions were largely focused around systems 
integration — not only standardization, not only around 
consolidation of decision making, but largely around systems 
integration. What does that mean? Well simply enough put, 
what it means is that if you have . . . Say in the Department of 
Health which has 200 different databases, how do you help to 
make sure that the applications can work among them? 
 
We may have within that on a simple piece of data — like 
collecting citizens’ data — you may have something as simple 



May 30, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

 

as last name categorized in three or four different ways. It could 
be classified on one database as surname, could be in another as 
last name, could be in another as family name, could be in one 
as a code number. The question is how do you make . . . apply 
certain standards, or how do you integrate across that so that 
those databases can communicate, so that we can make sure that 
we move over to more of a management type of a system? 
 
This was a big part of the discussion that we were into with 
EDS. And how do you do that without disrupting the 
partnerships that are already in place, either internally within 
government for information that’s developed by government 
systems programmers, or externally dealt with through 
individual companies? It’s a big challenge, not simply one that 
the Government of Saskatchewan has but one that’s faced by 
larger corporations around the globe. 
 
We believed that by entering into the discussions with EDS that 
we could find a workable systems integrations approach to 
moving forward. 
 
I think where this fear started to arise within the . . . some of the 
smaller players, and may I say I think it was fed by some of the 
larger players who obviously wanted to be into the discussions 
with us, was around this view that this particular supplier was 
not only going to deal with systems integration but in fact was 
going to take over applications development. 
 
There are a large number of companies who do apps 
development for government and in fact we continue to work 
with them. This proposal had always had built into it the view 
that there would be an offset within it for existing suppliers and 
vendors on their specific project to continue in that direction 
until they came back up to tender, at which point obviously we 
would go through a normal process for purchasing those 
applications. And the systems integration piece was one that we 
were looking at with EDS. 
 
To address the second question the member raises, in terms of 
how did we get into the discussion with EDS. After I was 
appointed minister in March of last year, we embarked on a 
series of discussions with large and smaller companies across 
the province about how to enter into reform of our IT systems 
within government. Now one of the issues that obviously came 
up was, as we started to identify how we were going to move 
forward with IT reform, this was something we’d identified 
with each of the big players. 
 
Now I appreciate the fact the member is right, that it does with 
this long answer appear that time has stood still, and hopefully 
we won’t go on this for too much longer. But let me conclude 
by saying this. Individual companies, I think, were aware of 
what we were interested in doing within the IT system. 
 
EDS took it on their own initiative to bring us a proposal that 
outlined and dealt with the major initiatives that we had 
identified and added a very significant piece that no other 
supplier to date has come forward with. That was the ability for 
us to use the existing expenditure to leverage industry 
development in a very significant way to create a very core 
competency area in Regina around systems development. 
 
The EDS proposal had a lot of potential; it had a lot of promise. 

It had a huge number of jobs attached to it, both in terms of call 
centre jobs attached but also in terms of other opportunities that 
were attached for systems development. The end result of it 
was, as we looked at this, setting aside industry issues, there 
were a number of reasons that we decided not to pursue the 
EDS proposal, not the least of which was that because of the 
disparate nature of government systems, it was hard to identify 
what the savings were going to be. 
 
In many ways the management model became complicated as 
we had reached the agreement in order to maintain the 
unionized workforce, not only in terms of the body but in terms 
of the bargaining unit. And as we started to take a look at how 
that was going to work, we obviously traded off some in 
savings for that, this became a complicated initiative. And as 
we looked at how to meet our overall objectives, we decided 
that rather than moving on to the second phase, the more 
detailed negotiations with EDS, that it was better to set this 
aside. 
 
The obvious question is, what are the next steps? How do you 
move back towards a systems integration approach? How do we 
deal with the equipment renewal that’s necessary within 
government? How do you establish the integrated architecture? 
What do we do to make sure the platforms are established with 
some commonality across? How do we consolidate decision 
making so that we don’t have department X operating on a 
completely different approach than department Y? 
 
How do you put over top of that a privacy framework that 
works for all of government and takes into account sensitive 
information that may be collected by the Department of Health, 
the Department of Finance, but also takes a look at the need for 
us to have aggregated . . . statistical information available on a 
broader basis? 
 
How do we make sure that we’ve got a system in place where 
we can move forward on government on-line, both internally so 
that simple things like increased productivity that we could 
derive through that, from something as simple as having an 
on-line expense form, is able to be generated rather than going 
through a paper that has to be stamped by four officials along 
the way? How do you build that into the system? 
 
That set of questions remains. It was a set of questions we 
thought could be addressed by the EDS proposal. And in fact, I 
think, would have been addressed by the EDS proposal except 
that these other issues, we believed, at the end of the day 
outweighed the benefit that we were going to see out of it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — A very short question, and I’ll want to 
pursue this at a later date, but a very short question on this, and 
you may have answered and I might have missed it but I’m not 
sure. 
 
Did government approach EDS or did EDS approach 
government on this proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we have talked with 
each of the large vendors and many of the small vendors about 
issues within the government IT system. 
 
EDS came forward to us with an unsolicited proposal to pursue 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2003 

 

this and it contained these other elements which were of interest 
to us. I can say that of all of the vendors I have met with, this 
was a truly unique, and to this day remains a unique proposal. I 
don’t know that we’ll see anything like it again. 
 
With that I’d like to thank the member for his questions today, 
appreciate my officials coming out, and I would move that the 
committee rise and report progress. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I’d just like to thank the minister and his 
officials for coming today and answering questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Everybody have a good weekend. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Have a pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:15. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1325 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1326 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1326 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World War II Veteran Honoured 
  Goulet.......................................................................................................................................................................................1326 
 Grand Opening of Saskatchewan Landing Golf Course 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1326 
 50th Anniversary of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ College  
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
 Canadian Forces Day 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1327 
 Summer Programs for Saskatoon Community Groups 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1327 
 Prairie West Regional College Graduation 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
 Saskatchewan Students Win Awards at National Science Fair 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Consequences of Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1328 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1328 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1332 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1332 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Marketing of Western Canadian Beef 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1333 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 31 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2003/ 
 Loi de 2003 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1333 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1333 
 Bill No. 35 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1336 
  Hagel (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................................1337 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................1337 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Information Technology Office — Vote 74 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1338 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1338 
 


