















































Hansard: April 17, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 641 
 April 17, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition signed by the citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
regarding Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation’s 
announced premium increases by as much as 52 per cent and 
more. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Lucky 
Lake and Birsay, and I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise today on behalf of constituents who are concerned about 
the highway, Highway 49 from Kelvington to Highway No. 35. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Where your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 49 in order to address safety concern 
and to facilitate economic growth in the area. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, and Invermay. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 
present some unsolicited petitions I have received on the issue 
of the scenic old bridges over the North Saskatchewan River 
between Battleford and North Battleford, the prayer of which 
reads: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister of 
Highways preserve the old bridges between Battleford and 
North Battleford. 
 

Your petitioners today come from Saskatoon, Battleford, and 
North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
alarming lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Regina, Caronport, Moose Jaw, Wolseley, and 
Holdfast, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of people of my 
constituency. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Estevan and 
Torquay. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are concerned about the deplorable 
state of the highways in our constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highways 13, 35, 18, 28, 6, 34, 
334, and 36 in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency in 
order to prevent injury or loss of life and to prevent the loss 
of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of the towns of 
Weyburn, Lake Alma, and the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the 
condition of Highway 22, particularly that section between 
Junction 6 and Junction 20. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey and Bethune. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2003 

 

have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the preservation of the historic 
original twin bridges between North Battleford and 
Battleford; 
 
A petition concerning repair to Highway 49; and 
 
Addendums to previously tables petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 12, 13, 18, 19, 27, and 36. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 28 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Revitalization: 
what is the total amount of money that the provincial 
government has spent on the ACRE Committee since its 
inception? 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Easter Greetings 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
weekend people from across this province will be enjoying a 
long weekend. For most people it will mean an extra day off 
work. For students, no school. However, for many 
Saskatchewan residents it will be a time to gather together with 
family and friends to celebrate the Easter season. 
 
More specifically, Mr. Speaker, this weekend will also be a 
time when many Saskatchewan residents gather together with 
their church family to celebrate the life of Christ and at this 
time remember his death and rejoice in his resurrection. In view 
of the current turmoil in our world and the ongoing prayer for 
peace, I trust that many people will experience the peace the 
Prince of Peace offers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of our caucus I would like to extend to 
all members and staff of this Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan our wishes for a Happy Easter weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with 
great pleasure that I wish all people a joyous and Happy Easter 
season. 
 
The season began last night with the celebration of Jewish 
Passover. For people of all walks of life, the desire for 
homeland expressed in ancient Passover ceremony is something 
that still stirs emotion in us all. For Christians, the desolation of 
death leading to the promise of rebirth and rejuvenation 
embodied in the central Easter story reminds us that no defeat is 
final and that hope springs eternal. 
 
While many people will be spending the holiday with their 
family and loved ones, whether it be in a religious or secular 
fashion, Easter provides us with an opportunity to reflect upon a 
number of themes which are relevant to all people. Suffering, 

wisdom, sorrow, joy, death, rejuvenation are strangers to none 
of us. They are a part of life, of every person’s life. No matter 
one’s faith, we can take comfort in the lessons of Easter — out 
of death comes life, out of anguish and suffering comes 
wisdom, out of sorrow springs joy. But the essential message, 
Mr. Speaker, is that of hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is on this note that I would like to wish members 
of this Assembly, the staff of the legislature, and all citizens of 
Saskatchewan a very relaxing weekend filled with feelings of 
hope and renewal. But above all, let us take this opportunity to 
consider how fortunate we are to live in such a wonderful, 
plentiful, and most importantly, peaceful province where we are 
free to enjoy a holiday with our loved ones in relative safety 
and security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Happy Easter to you and all members of this 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Historical Events 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, tomorrow, 
April 18, is a date that marks some truly memorable historical 
events in the history of our province and our world that I would 
like to draw to the attention of the members of the Assembly. 
 
On April 18, 1838 Wilkes expedition to the South Pole set sail. 
And on April 18, 1846 the telegraph ticker was patented. On 
April 18, 1868 the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
was formed. On April 18, 1909 15th century French heroine, 
Joan of Arc was beatified at a ceremony at the Vatican. On 
April 18, 1910 Walter R. Brookins made the first airplane flight 
at night. On April 18, 1924 Simon & Schuster published the 
first crossword puzzle book. On April 18, 1934 the first 
laundromat opened in Forth Worth, Texas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on April 18, 1948 another historical event 
took place. Heaven and earth celebrated in joyous harmony as 
our Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw, was born. 
 
Patrick, we want to wish you the very happiest of birthdays, and 
may your day be joy filled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Contractor Safety Awards 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SaskPower 
recognizes and values the role contractors play in helping to 
provide safe and reliable power to customers across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased to tell the members of this House that SaskPower 
recently recognized some of its finest contractors at the 13th 
annual SaskPower Contractor Safety Awards. 
 
These safety awards, developed by a joint 
SaskPower/Contractors Committee, are given out annually as 
part of SaskPower’s safety action plan. The plan outlines how 
the corporation and its contractors work together to improve 
and maintain the highest possible level of workplace safety. 



April 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

 

Acknowledging the safety achievements of its contractors with 
these awards is one way to highlight the importance that 
SaskPower and their contractors place on safety. 
 
Recipients of this year’s Safety Excellence awards were: Achen 
Construction of Regina, PMP Powerline Construction Ltd. of 
Assiniboia, Asplundh Canada Inc. of Regina. 
 
Recipients of the High Performance Safety Achievement 
awards were: PMP Powerline Construction Ltd. of Assiniboia, 
Galbraith Powerline Contracting of Kindersley, K-Line 
Maintenance and Construction Ltd. of White City. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this Assembly to please join 
me in congratulating the 2002 SaskPower Contractor Safety 
Award recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Women of the Year Awards 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the Quota Club International and SaskPower sponsored 
the Women of the Year awards in the city of Weyburn. Mr. 
Speaker, four very deserving Weyburn women were honoured 
by their community. 
 
The SaskPower Workplace Excellence Award is an award 
presented to a female employee or employer who has exceeded 
their expectation in the workplace by displaying a superior 
effort and a true desire to significantly improve their work 
environment and workplace. This year’s award went to Donnita 
Maas who is a key person at the Family Place and is 
instrumental in creating a loving, caring environment for both 
children and their parents. 
 
The Quota International of Weyburn Community Service 
Award is an award to recognize a woman, who on a volunteer 
or salary basis, has demonstrated a commitment to enrich her 
community. Mr. Speaker, this award went to Josie Klein who is 
involved with many volunteer organizations in the community, 
and through her gift of her time makes Weyburn a better place. 
 
Access Communications Exceptional Entrepreneur Award is 
presented to a woman who shows exceptional leadership 
innovation in starting and operating or owning a business. This 
year’s award went to Gail Bartlett and Monique Huebner who 
own and operate Snup’N Mo’s children’s clothing. 
 
Investors Group Young Women of Distinction Award went to 
Miranda Spencer, a young woman in Weyburn, who works with 
violence intervention and safe houses for Women. 
 
I’d like all members of the Assembly to join me in honouring 
these women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Business Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, last evening I had the pleasure of attending the Samuel 
McLeod Business Awards in Prince Albert and I was pleased as 

well to join the Speaker, who was also in attendance. 
 
This event is a way for Prince Albert, the business community, 
to measure the success and it’s also a way to showcase the 
future of business in our city. These awards come at a time 
when we are seeing 11 straight months of job growth in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, there were many categories 
and many winners last night. I’d like to congratulate them all. 
But today in particular I want to mention the winner of the 
Business of the Year Award, Carleton Trail Railway. 
 
The event also presented the Legacy Award to honour 
individuals or businesses that have made significant 
contribution to the Prince Albert business community. This 
year’s winner was the Lemieux family of Econo Lumber. 
 
Vic Lemieux started Econo Lumber in 1970 and later his son, 
Curtis, joined the company to add to their growth. They’re now 
operating in La Ronge. Vic has been very active in the 
community involved in many volunteer organizations. I want to 
congratulate the Lemieux family and all of the other nominees 
and all of the other award winners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is on the move. It’s a vibrant and a 
growing community and it’s pretty obvious, Mr. Speaker, that 
in Prince Albert the future is wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Disposal of Potatoes 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP (New 
Democratic Party) has already admitted to misleading the 
people of Saskatchewan concerning the SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) 
investment. The government says that all the bad news has 
come out. I don’t think so. 
 
The question remains, what became of all those high-priced 
rotten potatoes? According to some news reports, they were 
spread out on the fields. I don’t think so. As I was crossing 
Wascana bridge this morning, I noticed the air rising from 
Wascana Lake. Mr. Speaker, the geese are getting drunk. We 
could start an ethanol plant right there on the bridge. So what is 
causing the fumes in Wascana Lake? Twenty-eight million 
bucks worth of rotten spuds that make black French fries can 
cause quite a stink. 
 
My theory is that the NDP tried to dump all those potatoes in 
Wascana Lake, and they thought we wouldn’t notice. Mr. 
Speaker, we need to clean up the environment. 
 
There’ll be an election soon. And when there is, when there is, 
the letters NDP will be emblazoned across this province — no 
dumping potatoes. This will be the environmental slogan of the 
21st century. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, let’s clean up Saskatchewan — dump the 
government, not the spuds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2003 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskEnergy Natural Gas Rates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately the smell of rotten eggs this morning has nothing 
to do with the Easter bunny; rather it has more to do with a 33 
per cent increase in the natural gas rates for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. But part of the problem in our 
province traces back to NDP handling of this whole issue, back 
to last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the NDP’s own government budget 
documents, the average market cost of natural gas — this is the 
government’s figures — in 2003 would be just . . . last year 
would be $3.78 per gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the average cost for natural gas was 3.78 a 
gigajoule, why did the Government of Saskatchewan force 
SaskEnergy customers to pay $5.44? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first of 
all, SaskEnergy has provided for some of the coldest months in 
the year, amongst the lowest rates in all of Canada. If that 
member, Mr. Speaker, says that SaskEnergy was charging that, 
if those were the rates — three dollars and some cents — I ask 
this question: why was Vancouver . . . in Vancouver charging 
$8.30; why were, in Edmonton, they charging 8.49; why in 
Calgary are they charging 9.01; why in Winnipeg were they 
charging 6.34; why in Hamilton 6.15; and why in Toronto, 
8.01? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is SaskEnergy has provided stability and 
amongst the lowest rates in all of Canada, through the coldest 
months of this past winter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 
NDP’s own budget documents say natural gas cost an average 
of $3.78 a gigajoule last year, $3.78 last year, but they sold the 
natural gas to taxpayers at $5.44, a much higher price, will the 
minister explain how the NDP managed to rack up a $30 
million loss on those sales last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I say, 
SaskEnergy has provided amongst the lowest rates in all of 
Canada, through the coldest months of the year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make this point. The only thing lower, Mr. 
Speaker, than SaskEnergy’s gas rates was . . . consistently 
lower, Mr. Speaker, is the popularity of the Leader of the Sask 
Party, Mr. Speaker. That’s been the only thing that’s been 
lower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And you know what, Mr. Speaker? You 
know what, Mr. Speaker? Even SaskEnergy can’t operate on 
those margins. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the question again. And the 
minister needs to answer this question for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year, according to its own figures, the Government of 
Saskatchewan said the average cost for natural gas, $3.78 a 
gigajoule. But what price did the NDP charge Saskatchewan 
people? What price did Saskatchewan pay — $5.44 a gigajoule. 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, they managed to rack up a $30 million loss 
on those sales, a $30 million deficit in the gas cost variance 
account. And that is a lot of the reason why today taxpayers and 
customers face a 33 per cent increase. 
 
Will the minister just answer the question. How is it that the 
cost for gas was 3.78, the government was charging 5.44 a 
gigajoule, and they still lost 30 million on the sale? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well here we 
go again, getting advice from the expert from Swift Current, the 
member . . . the Sask Party member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, you know how popular 
that was last year when he provided that advice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is . . . The point is that SaskEnergy has 
provided the lowest rates in Canada; in fact, if you look across 
North America, amongst the lowest rates in North America over 
the last six years for the people of Saskatchewan. The people of 
Saskatchewan want and appreciate stability in price, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s what they get from SaskEnergy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan 
want is a competent government, a government they’re not 
getting from the NDP, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the people of 
the province want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: —Mr. Speaker, this morning the NDP announced 
that they were going to be increasing Saskatchewan . . . 
SaskEnergy commodity rates by 33 per cent. Now SaskEnergy 
customers will be paying $7.25 a gigajoule for natural gas, even 
though — even though — the NDP’s own budget documents 
say that the average price of natural gas this year will be $4.29 a 
gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP Minister of Finance thinks natural gas 
is only going to cost $4.29 a gigajoule, why would the NDP 
Crown corporation . . . Why would this minister authorize 
SaskEnergy to charge Saskatchewan families $7.25 a gigajoule? 
 



April 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I say to that 
member and I say to the Saskatchewan Party, if they are 
advocating a model that exists in Alberta and many other 
jurisdictions in Canada, Mr. Speaker, they should just come 
straight out and they should say it because last year, Mr. 
Speaker, in the coldest months of the year, Mr. Speaker, the rate 
spiked as high as $15 a gigajoule. The average high price was 
10 to $12, Mr. Speaker. Here in Saskatchewan, they paid $5.44. 
 
I’ve pointed out that in jurisdictions like Alberta and Ontario, 
right now, they’re still paying 9 to $10, Mr. Speaker. Here in 
Saskatchewan, we’re asking for a 22 per cent increase to bring 
us more in line, but we’ll still be amongst the lowest rates in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning at the press conference we found out that the NDP 
managed to lose $30 million last year selling natural gas, even 
though SaskEnergy, even though SaskEnergy was charging its 
customers almost 44 per cent more than what the government’s 
own budget document said the gas cost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this year, the NDP has decided to increase natural gas rates 
by 33 per cent, up to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And this year they’ve 
decided to raise rates by 33 per cent to a price of $7.25 a 
gigajoule even though the Minister of Finance told . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’m finding it very difficult to 
hear the questions being posed by the members and I would ask 
members just to . . . Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP are going to charge 
Saskatchewan families $7.25 a gigajoule even though the 
Minister of Finance hopefully would have whispered in the ear 
of the minister of SaskEnergy that he is predicting the price to 
be $4.29 a gigajoule. 
 
Will the minister please tell Saskatchewan families why he’s 
going to be charging them 7.25 but only paying the Minister of 
Finance $4.29? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well welcome 
to the Sask Party’s wacky world of deregulation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, let me . . . let me say this. I 
refer to the Leader-Post article of May 27 . . . or March 27 of 
this year, Mr. Speaker, where it says, Sask Party Crown 
Investments Corporation critic, I quote: 
 

. . . Brad Wall said (that the) regular rate adjustments seem 

like a good idea. 
 
He figures that the idea that Alberta has where the rates jump 
up and down on a monthly basis from 3 or $4 to 15 or $20, Mr. 
Speaker, is a good idea. 
 
We think not, and I think the people of Saskatchewan think that 
rate stability is a good idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is amazing. 
The quote the minister just read was myself commenting on the 
opinion of, the opinion of the president of SaskEnergy, the 
hand-picked president of SaskEnergy that works for the 
minister. So I wonder if the minister might want to tell the 
House if he’s lost confidence in his president over there at 
SaskEnergy, because that was his opinion. 
 
And while he’s on his feet, Mr. Speaker, while he’s on his feet, 
he ought to answer this basic question. This government racked 
up a $30 million loss in the sale of natural gas last year even 
though their own average cost for the gas was 3.78 and the price 
they charged to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — We’ll give the minister a chance to clarify 
whether he still supports his president of SaskEnergy and also 
why, why the gas cost variance account, the loss on the sale of 
gas last year, topped $30 million. All the while they were 
paying $3.78 or at least that was the average cost per gigajoule, 
but charging Saskatchewan people $5.44. How in the world did 
that happen? Will the minister explain that to the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the 
question was being asked by the member, the Minister of 
Industry and Resources leaned over and asked me to advise the 
member from Swift Current not to blow a gasket, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is, the point is that through all of the cold 
weather that we’ve had, SaskEnergy has provided the lowest 
rates, stable rates for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And all they’re requesting today is to bring their rates more in 
line with what’s been charged across Canada, which are still in 
the middle of the pack, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope you’re taking 
very, very special note of the fact that the minister refuses to 
answer this question — this question that goes to the heart of 
the matter of whether or not Saskatchewan families paid too 
much for their natural gas last year, and whether or not that 
NDP mismanagement has exacerbated the situation this year. 
 
So I’ll ask the question one more time, Mr. Speaker, for the 
minister. The average cost for natural gas last year according to 
the government’s own documents: $3.78 a gigajoule. The price 
that the NDP charged the Saskatchewan people: $5.44 a 
gigajoule. And in the bargain — in the bargain — they 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2003 

 

managed to rack up a loss of $30 million on those sales. Will 
the minister please explain to the House how in the world that 
happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if the 
people . . . if the members of this legislature would listen, Mr. 
Speaker, if the members opposite, if the members of the Sask 
Party would listen to the answer, Mr. Speaker, and understand 
the irrationality of the argument that that member is making. 
That member says that we should adopt the Alberta models 
which regularly change the rates, Mr. Speaker, regularly change 
the rates. 
 
And I look at the rate comparisons across Canada. I see 
Vancouver, Edmonton, and Calgary in the 8 to $9 range, Mr. 
Speaker. I see Ontario over $8. Here in Saskatchewan, we’ve 
charged consistently through the cold weather $5.44. And now 
we’re asking for an increase up to 7.25 — still below those 
rates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He says that they want to privatize is all they want to do. They 
want deregulation, they want privatization, they want sale of 
our Crowns. That’s right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well I’m sure people listening to the minister 
don’t know whether to laugh or cry, frankly, Mr. Speaker. He’s 
got no answers so all he can do is fearmonger. That’s what he 
can do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing the minister does is make a 
mistake. He talks about deregulation when, Mr. Speaker, it is 
that minister as the minister for SaskPower, as the minister for 
SaskPower, that has actually deregulated the electrical market 
in the province of Saskatchewan. That minister is actually the 
minister that’s been doing the deregulating here in the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
More to the point, this morning the NDP announced that rates 
are going up by 33 per cent for Saskatchewan families. 
Customers will now pay $7.25 a gigajoule even though the 
NDP’s own budget document forecast the cost of that gas at 
$4.29 a gigajoule. Mr. Speaker, if the NDP’s Finance minister 
thinks the price of gas is going to be $4.29 why, why, is 
SaskEnergy about to charge Saskatchewan families now $7.25 a 
gigajoule? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that 
member from Swift Current, from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, 
says I’m fearmongering. Well am I, Mr. Speaker? I look back to 
the 1980s when that member of the Sask Party from Swift 
Current worked for the minister of privatization, Mr. Speaker. 
He was a key policy adviser during those years. 
 
What did they do, Mr. Speaker? What did they do? They sold 
off gas reserves. They sold off gas reserves. If we still owned 
those, you know what? We could have even lower rates, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve had amongst the lowest rates in all of North 

America. We could have even lower rates. He says I’m 
fearmongering. I think not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consultation on Land Use in the Great Sand Hills 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the Minister of 
the Environment. Last night a meeting of the Great Sand Hills 
Land Use Strategy Committee held a meeting in Swift Current 
and, unlike earlier meetings, this meeting was open and 
accessible to members of the public interested in hearing the 
proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at last night’s meeting people were told that the 
committee is considering holding more public meetings where 
the issue of land use in the Great Sand Hills region would be 
further discussed. Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm today 
that the land use committee will hold more public meetings on 
the issue of land use in the Great Sand Hills, and will he tell this 
Assembly where and when these meetings may be held? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to know where and when 
these meetings will be held. Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous 
interest by people of the province in what kind of land use the 
NDP is considering for the Great Sand Hills, and they want to 
be assured that their concerns and input are not only heard but 
also considered and reflected in the recommendations the 
committee will present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the concern of people now is that although there 
may be more public meetings held by the committee, those 
meetings will not seek input from the public but instead will 
only have the committee present its recommendations to the 
meetings for feedback. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell the Assembly if the Great 
Sand Hills committee will continue to seek original input from 
the public, or if they will only present recommendations at these 
future meetings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to that 
member of the Saskatchewan Party that we have been waiting 
for a Saskatchewan Party position. We’ve been waiting to hear 
any of their position on the Great Sand Hills. And, Mr. Speaker 
— zero — there has been zero position on what they feel is 
necessary for the Great Sand Hills and the future of the Great 
Sand Hills and the environmental importance of the Great Sand 
Hills to the area and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I will point out from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, on this side 
of the House we have a position that we will sit down; we’re 
going to review what happened in the last 10 years; we’ve 
invited 350-plus people to give us more information on what 
they feel the aspirations of the Great Sand Hills should be, Mr. 



April 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

 

Speaker. We’re on line in terms of the information from well 
over 40 groups that have made presentations to the committee, 
and, Mr. Speaker, we have agreed with the committee’s work, 
that we should have additional public meetings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In all this time, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan Party and that 
member have never put one position forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d like to 
remind the minister, if it wasn’t for my colleague, the member 
from Cypress Hills, all of the meetings would have been held 
behind closed doors; the public wouldn’t even have known 
what was going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — So, Mr. Speaker, I think the government has a 
lot of work to do. Mr. Speaker, there is definitely concern from 
people interested in the future of the Great Sand Hills that the 
committee take the time to seek as much public and scientific 
input as possible before finalizing the recommendations and 
report. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please. The 
members will come to order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But they are very 
uncertain as to the direction and the time frame placed on the 
committee by the NDP government. Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister: when is the final report of the Great Sand Hills Land 
Use Committee due to be presented to the minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what we have found from 
that Saskatchewan Party is that when they’re in Calgary they’ll 
say something to the oil patch and then when they’re back in 
their riding they’ll say something different to the cattle 
producers. 
 
And what I’m going to ask those members is . . . We have 
agreed to have several public meetings. Those dates will be 
forwarded and the locations will be forwarded to that member 
and that Saskatchewan Party. And I want to them to participate, 
Mr. Speaker — to come clean to the people of Saskatchewan, 
what is their position on the future of the Great Sand Hills, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
We believe, we believe we have to take the pragmatic steps of 
making sure we sit down with both groups and involve as many 
people to protect this environmentally sensitive area, and if they 
respect technology and science and opportunity to further 
develop the province, well then let’s look at that as well, Mr. 
Speaker. Those Saskatchewan people cannot — Saskatchewan 
Party people — cannot continue to skirt the issue. What is your 
position, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is responsible for the 
environment. The opposition, with the great work done by the 

member from Cypress Hills, has gone out into those 
communities and talked to the people involved in that. The 
government has not done that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the government has done is hid behind 
closed-door meetings. If it wasn’t for the work done by our 
member from Cypress Hills, no one in the public would know 
what’s going on in the Great Sand Hills area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would like to know from the minister when 
these additional meetings will be held and where will they be 
held. Because I believe they don’t have to be held necessarily in 
Regina. They should be held out in the area where the people 
live and are concerned about these very important issues. 
 
And I’d like to ask the minister again, when will the 
recommendations be presented to the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out in terms of 
the question, that we had anticipated by the end of June that we 
would receive a report, or a report card if you will, of some of 
the findings of the committee. 
 
Now as a result of some of the additional public meetings that 
the committee has agreed to do . . . And we will advise the dates 
and location of those public meetings, and we will anticipate 
that they will be there putting forward their positions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I would say that since we have additional public meetings 
that perhaps we can expect a later date than June in terms of 
receiving a final recommendation, or a report card if you will, 
of some of the findings and the review of the Great Sand Hills 
issue. 
 
But I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, this — we’ll advise the member 
of the dates and the locations and the times if that member and 
that Saskatchewan Party will come forward and give us a 
presentation and a position on the matter as opposed to going to 
Calgary and saying one thing to the oil patch and then going to 
ranchers in the affected area and saying another thing, Mr. 
Speaker. Tell the truth — what is your position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Responsible Gambling Features in 
Video Lottery Terminals 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last session I spoke 
about the new VLT (video lottery terminal) machines in Nova 
Scotia with the responsible gambling features which include a 
permanent clock, cash displays rather than credits, and a 
mandatory cash out after two hours. Now the provinces of 
Quebec and Alberta have joined Nova Scotia in adopting the 
new machines to curb problem gambling. 
 
I again ask the minister: our VLT machines are now 10 years 
old; will he commit that, as they are replaced, he will install the 
new ones with responsible gaming features? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I really 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2003 

 

appreciate the advice from the Saskatchewan Party, but the 
people are recognizing that they don’t have any good advice for 
anyone. 
 
In answer to the question from the member from North 
Battleford, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to advise that member that 
our VLT distribution is presently on a rollout, and they do have 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I just want 
to confirm that those responsible gambling features are in fact 
included in the rollout of the VLTs as they are presently in 
progress throughout the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s answer is 
disingenuous at best. The new technologies being introduced 
into Saskatchewan are about protecting the house, not problem 
gamblers. There are new technologies being introduced here, 
but that is to identify people who are a problem for the house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that any social democrat, even a newly 
minted one, would be embarrassed — would be embarrassed — 
to admit that Ralph Klein has more social conscience and is 
more socially progressive than the Saskatchewan NDP. 
 
If Alberta can introduce machines designed to curb problem 
gambling, how can Saskatchewan just sit back and rake in the 
dough without a thought for social consequences? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our VLTs bring in enough revenue to finance the 
departments of Justice and Environment all on their own. Will 
the minister think back to some of his statements when he was 
opposition Gaming critic, and commit that the machines now 
being used in Alberta, Nova Scotia, and Quebec will be 
introduced in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not certain 
. . . Obviously the member from North Battleford doesn’t get 
out much at all. If he did, he would know that we have engaged 
in the new video lottery terminals all the gambling features, all 
the responsible gaming features that have been included in 
Nova Scotia. That’s where we got the ideas. Those were the 
people that initiated it. We looked at those ideas. 
 
Let me just . . . In case he sees a machine, he will recognize it 
shows wagers in dollars. There’s a real time clock. There’s a 
pop-up reminder responsible gaming message banner, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have been committed to responsible gaming. I believe 
we’ve met those commitments, Mr. Speaker. And we are 
probably ahead of the member from North Battleford’s friends 
in Alberta. That’s who he should be joining. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize . . . Order. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government in a very open and 
accountable way to table response . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll start again. I’d just 
like to tell the members of the House that I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the open and accountable government to 
table responses to written questions 134 through 139, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 134, 135, 136, 137, 
138, and 139 have been submitted. 
 
(10:45) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 9 — The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
just going to take a few minutes to speak on this Bill today 
because I think it’s a number of changes that are made in this 
Bill that have been long overdue, but there is some questions. 
 
The Bill, Mr. Speaker, talks about the changes to the 
requirements of the agriculture dealers in Saskatchewan, and 
the definition of dealer and distributor are expanded to include 
those who provide leases. And I think that’s much overdue, Mr. 
Speaker, because many machinery dealers right now are dealing 
more probably in leases than they are in the actual sale of a 
piece of equipment. 
 
The new Bill, the changes give the Ag Implement Board the 
ability to review these leases and strengthen the notice of 
revision in the cases of compensation claims. It also gives the 
board the discretion to determine the penalty fee for flagrant 
and repeated violations of this Act by certain dealers, and the 
maximum award level is raised from 5,000 to $10,000 which 
possibly, Mr. Speaker, could have even gone higher. 
 
One of the questionable parts of the amendments in the Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, are fines that are now levied and collected will 
flow into the General Revenue Fund and not to the board, 



April 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

 

which, Mr. Speaker, I guess is something we’ve seen this 
government do more and more and more, where they pass any 
kind of fines or levies or collections into the General Revenue 
Fund instead of into parcels where they can be collected and 
used later by the board themselves. So I think the government 
has to explain why that provision is in there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also gives the board members liability protection and 
increases the fine for operating without a dealer’s licence to 
$10,000 from the current 2,500. 
 
And part of the amendment in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, gives the 
minister unlimited power to impose any additional condition on 
dealer’s licence that he or she sees fit. That’s concerning, Mr. 
Speaker, because once again we’re giving the minister the 
power to make changes without coming to the floor of the 
legislature and amending the legislation itself, and change by 
. . . through regulation or just at the whim of the minister. And 
that’s scary, Mr. Speaker, because we know how the members 
on that side of the House actually act. 
 
It also removes the requirement for dealers to charge according 
to prices set out in the price list. And I think this is a plus, Mr. 
Speaker, because what this can do is actually create competition 
between dealers and be a very positive for the farmers that are 
actually purchasing these parts. 
 
The 72-hour time limit to deliver repair parts to farmers now 
includes Saturday, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s a positive. It 
gives the dealers the right to add additional charges for 
emergency services, makes the dealers and manufacturers 
jointly responsible for late-delivered emergency repairs. And I 
think that’s important, Mr. Speaker, because many of the cases 
where parts are late is not the fault of the dealer, but is the fault 
of the manufacturer so they should also be held responsible. 
 
It also gives dealers the first option to provide replacement 
equipment, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s a positive, rather 
than having the farmer go to an opposing dealer without giving 
the first dealer the actual chance to replace that equipment. 
 
It also makes inspections of dealerships optional rather than 
mandatory. 
 
And the warranty clock — and this is important, Mr. Speaker 
— the warranty clock starts ticking on the first day of use rather 
than the first day that a machine is purchased. And in many 
cases, Mr. Speaker, farmers purchase a piece of equipment — 
say, like a combine — in December and at the way it was 
before, that warranty would start at that point. Now it won’t 
start till . . . if he doesn’t use that machine for the first time till 
September, that’s the day the warranty starts. And that’s a very 
positive thing for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
It also takes away the onus on dealers to provide contracts and 
customers in the first language if they don’t speak English, and 
I think that’s a positive. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are still checking with farmers and dealers 
all across the province, and at this point we would like to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Bill No. 15 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 15 — The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The same with 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We were checking with a number of 
members of the public and what we are doing is waiting for 
their feedback, so at this point we would like to adjourn debate 
on that Bill also. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 16 — The 
Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to discuss The Coroners Amendment Act. 
 
This is really a housekeeping Bill that seeks to streamline things 
for coroners. It makes their jobs more efficient and effective, 
and any time the government shows that type of initiative, we 
are really very encouraged by it. 
 
One of the more prominent amendments in this proposed 
legislation is that in cases where it’s known that an individual 
inside a provincial facility has died from natural causes, there 
will be no longer a requirement to hold an inquest or an 
investigation since it’s known what the cause of death is. 
 
This was a result of the jury’s recommendations following a 
coroner’s inquest in July 2002. And we’re very pleased that the 
NDP has seen fit to implement this recommendation. This 
really negates the need to hold undue inquests and thereby tying 
up resources and manpower that could be targeted for use in 
other areas. It’s really imperative however, Mr. Speaker, that in 
those cases where an investigation must be conducted, the 
legislation remain in place to guarantee such activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was encouraged when I heard the Minister of 
Justice outline the framework for a coroner’s system. He said 
the system was designed to ensure that unnatural deaths would 
be investigated to determine the facts surrounding this and to 
make recommendations to avoid preventable deaths in the 
future and to maintain public confidence that deaths that occur 
in unusual circumstances are examined. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
pleased that this amendment is allowing those procedures to 
stay in place. 
 
One of the other amendments that will allow . . . will allow 
coroners to obtain bodily fluids taken from individuals prior to 
his or her death, particularly in those instances where the 
samples can be crucial to an investigation. In the past, health 
facilities have been reluctant to release that type of information 
because they didn’t have specific authority to do so. And this 
legislation will allow them to do so. The proposed legislation is 
really going to clarify this issue. 
 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2003 

 

Of course we wonder why it took the NDP so long to finally get 
around to doing this but we are encouraged that they’re moving 
in the right direction. Anything that makes somebody’s job 
more efficient or effective is something that we’re really 
encouraged by. 
 
One of the other minor amendments deal with the issue of 
making photocopy records and confirmations that when 
referencing evidence given through oral testimony in an 
inquest, it can be done through a telephone conference call 
which was not previously possible. Again, Mr. Speaker, this is 
going to facilitate the task that people who are going to be 
giving testimonies have. They won’t have to make long 
journeys to attend an inquest and it’s going to definitely 
simplify their lives. 
 
Again, both these amendments should facilitate the processes 
and procedures involved in the inquest. 
 
We are very pleased that this Bill will accommodate people 
living great distances from the place where the inquest will take 
place. Again, since anyone who’s been involved in a coroner’s 
inquest is already under a tremendous amount of stress, 
anything that will make things a little bit easier for him or her 
will certainly be appreciated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Overall we’re very encouraged with the intent and the nature of 
this Bill, and we still feel that more consultation and review is 
necessary. So at this time I move to adjourn the debate on this 
Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 17 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
speak to Bill 17, An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
This Bill purports to provide certainty within the definition of 
the expression, legal description; to provide flexibility in 
requiring a surveyor to conduct a field inspection on a survey 
that is more than two years old; and to enhance the provincial 
survey system by requiring surveyors to re-establish lost 
monuments in some situations. 
 
Defining the legal description may help shed some light on who 
actually owns the land. As many Saskatchewan citizens have 
reported, the new $107 million ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) land titles system certainly could 
use some help in that area, as it apparently has difficulty in 
determining who actually owns the land and who doesn’t. 
 
Well defining the term, legal description, may be an indication 
that this NDP government has begun to understand the 
defective nature of the land registration system in 
Saskatchewan. It’s quite clear that they have a long way to go 
before actually making the system work properly. The Bill will 
finally allow for flexibility in requiring surveyors to conduct a 
field inspection on a survey that is more than two years old. It is 
clear that the two-year period is not long enough and common 

sense dictates that this type of duplication is both unnecessary 
and costly to the user. 
 
It is refreshing to see, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 
finally recognizing the folly of the land registration system and 
the great expense of unnecessary duplication and allowing for 
the use of some common sense. But as the $107 million land 
titles debacle shows, they have a great deal of work to do before 
the system works properly. 
 
The Bill also proposes to deal with the replacement of lost 
monuments at section corners. Well, Mr. Speaker, like the other 
common sense provisions of this Bill, it is too long overdue. 
Many of the monuments marking the section corners have been 
damaged or removed over the past 100 years and it hasn’t been 
a requirement that surveyors replace these markers. It would 
seem that for the shoddy land titles system to begin to work 
properly, it would probably be a good start to have these 
monuments in place in order to have an accurate determination 
of the boundaries of the land in question. 
 
This government has fumbled the ball when it comes to 
enhancing the land titles system, at an astronomical cost to the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer. Hopefully the new provisions of this 
Bill will begin to slow down the ever-increasing financial toll of 
this government’s mismanagement of the land registry system. 
The failings of the New Democrats’ ISC program are many, 
Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately they are too many. 
 
What started out as a laudable idea that was to cost less than 
$20 million to computerize the system is now costing the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan $107 million. That’s a 500 per cent 
cost overrun, Mr. Speaker. And surely that is high, Mr. Speaker, 
even by this government’s very loose standards. 
 
It’s not surprising to see cost overruns and taxpayer monies 
being mismanaged by this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
There are far too many examples. You will recall an infamous 
cost overrun project that the NDP was involved in — that was 
the closure of the Plains hospital in Regina. The final tab on that 
was around $50 million over budget. Who was overseeing that 
for a time? The current Justice minister, who is also now 
overseeing the ISC debacle. I see a pattern, Mr. Speaker, of cost 
overruns on the projects that fall within the responsibilities of 
that minister, Mr. Speaker, and also a pattern of denial 
regarding cost overruns, Mr. Speaker, that flies in the face of 
the facts. 
 
The NDP also said that ISC would be something that would be 
in demand around the world. The people involved globe-trotted, 
trying in vain to make at least one sale. They went everywhere 
from Albania to Orlando. How many sales did they make of this 
much anticipated system, Mr. Speaker? Not one — not one. Not 
surprising when almost every jurisdiction in the developed 
world was ahead of us in computerizing their land registry 
systems and they had systems in place that actually worked. 
 
And that’s what makes us even sadder, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
system does not even work properly. Only the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, can spend $107 million on a project that will not 
differentiate between two people with the same last name . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . $107 million, I’m reminded by the 
member from Swift Current. 



April 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

 

Our offices are deluged with calls, e-mails, faxes, and letters 
from people province-wide complaining about ISC. The 
members opposite know about that. They know because they 
must get the same calls that we do. 
 
So what’s in the NDP solution? Well let’s get the taxpayers to 
bail us out again. Let’s raise fees; let’s make the people of the 
province pay for our errors. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people have 
long memories and they will remember this mistake come 
election day. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people and groups are currently studying 
this Bill because, like so many other projects, when you get on 
the phone and say the NDP is doing something with land titles 
or ISC, people either break into laughter or tears. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, as this Bill 17, an amendment to The 
Land Surveys Act continues to be under further study, I move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina South on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
My ever-diligent caucus colleagues point out that in fact it is a 
guest, not guests that I am introducing so I trust that members 
will forgive me for that. 
 
I’m very pleased to introduce the grandmother of one of our 
pages who has joined us in the gallery. Luke McWilliams’ 
grandmother has come to make sure that her grandson is at 
work today and her name is Mildred Young. I’m very happy to 
welcome her here and to advise her and assure her that he is 
doing a very fine job for us here in this legislature. So you can 
make a spot for him at the Easter table this weekend and he’ll 
be there. So I’d invite all members to join me in welcoming her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 18 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak on a labour Bill since I’ve changed my critic area. It gives 

me an opportunity to continue to speak out on labour and WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) and all the areas that are 
concerning those very important Bills that we have in front of 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 18 basically changes the legislation to 
make the assumption that firemen who eventually develop five 
different forms of cancer — that would be brain, bladder, 
kidney, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and leukemia — got these 
diseases due to their place of work and will be compensated for 
their illness. And it changes it; the reverse onus is now, instead 
of the firefighters having to prove that they’ve developed these 
cancers because of the work, now WCB will have to prove that 
they did not develop these cancers at their job site, which as we 
know is a very dangerous profession and they work under very 
hazardous conditions. And now we know that there are other 
illnesses that they develop that many other people in industry 
and on the job, jobs around the province, do not get. 
 
The firefighters have been fighting for this change since 1991. 
And the Saskatchewan Party caucus has met with the 
firefighters on numerous occasions and they’ve constantly 
brought this problem up and we take it very seriously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the most recent presentation to the WCB review 
board, firefighters were turned down again, as they have been 
many times in the past, and basically this Bill, as I understand 
it, will override that decision. And as we know, the government 
has relatively few Bills on the order paper today and the 
majority of those are not very important but this is one that I 
think is a substantial piece of legislation. 
 
This Bill is a important piece of legislation not only for the 
brave firefighters who have fought for it for so long but is also 
important because of the long-term ramifications for WCB that 
we should discuss in this legislature and get the full picture of 
where the minister and the current government believe WCB is 
heading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as for the changes we are seeing for firefighters, 
especially we see similar changes being made in other 
provinces as well, and obviously, Mr. Speaker, the science 
involved in making this type of decision has come far enough 
that the government, not only in Saskatchewan but other 
jurisdictions, feel comfortable that this is a responsible decision 
and we as the opposition recognize this. 
 
We do, however, believe that there should be more time to 
study this Bill thoroughly and compare it to what is going on in 
other provinces and other jurisdictions. And as we know that 
Alberta has introduced similar legislation and we want to check 
and see what their legislation is all about before we finish with 
our work as a responsible opposition should do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for instance we notice that in some cases 
colon cancer is added to the list of cancers that are thought to be 
caused by firefighters working in their dangerous environment, 
and it’s not included in this list, so we’d like to get some 
clarification on that matter as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course on the other side of the coin, we think it’s 
responsible to take into account some of the opinions of the 
people in this province and see what they . . . if they have any 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2003 

 

concerns about the legislation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we know, when we include more items 
under WCB or allow more cases to go in favour of a claimant, 
there’s also . . . that opens the door. And in this particular case 
it opens the door to claims from other professions that may feel 
that they have similar health concerns in their industry and in 
their workplace. And we need to take a good look what the 
implication of opening WCB up to these other illnesses and 
make a calculation of what the costs would be to WCB, and 
ultimately to the employers of this province. 
 
And so it certainly . . . we certainly feel it’s very necessary to 
protect the firefighters and other workers in our society that 
have been or may be working in hazardous conditions in the 
future. And we have to offset that with the cost to the employer 
or cost to society. As we know, firefighters are paid by the 
municipalities and so ultimately the taxpayer of the province 
will be paying for these higher premiums. So there’s a balance 
there. 
 
We definitely recognize the importance of this legislation to the 
firefighters. And since we’ve only had this Bill for a week, we 
need more time to consult with all the stakeholders — talk to 
firefighters, talk to other people in society about the 
implications of . . . these changes to WCB, not only specifically 
with the firefighters but also to other industries and employees 
and employers across the province. So at this time I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 13 — The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to get 
up to discuss this Bill, on Bill 13. It’s a very varied Bill. It deals 
with a couple of different subjects which I find the NDP has . . . 
they do this seems quite often. They’ll . . . with one Bill they’ll 
put two or three things on it that basically doesn’t pertain to 
each other, instead of splitting them up. And I wish they would 
kind of split the Bills up a little more. 
 
They seem to put a few good things in but then you never know 
what they’re going to be sliding in underneath. So we do have 
some questions with this Bill. 
 
There’s very many, various aspects of this Bill, so I’d like to 
kind of start on touching about the fact that they’re changing the 
grazing permits is one of the things . . . first things that this Bill 
deals with. And on the surface, I think that seems like a very 
good idea, Mr. Speaker, changing the grazing permits on it. 
 
I understand right now before it was only a one-year lease 
which I find, which I find was very hard, that they would even 
have that in because it . . . ranchers dealing that, because I take 
these are grazing strictly permits. It’s very hard to only plan for 
a one-year grazing permit. And I find it very hard that they 
would not have changed this years and years ago when they 
first brought this in. You’d think that they would have expanded 

it then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think they’re changing it, I believe, under it to five years, 
which is good. It gives a rancher some time to plan because in 
the cattle industry, it’s not an industry, Mr. Speaker, that you 
get in and out of very easily. It’s something that details a lot of 
planning. If you have a one-year lease, you buy some . . . you 
expand your cattle herd, you also have to worry about 
expanding your fence. Some of the . . . I imagine a lot of these 
grazing permits, these areas aren’t fenced, or maybe the water 
isn’t developed there. So it . . . over a five-year period, it would 
give you some time to develop your water on it, to dig a dugout, 
to put some expenses into it, and then to be able to recover them 
back over the . . . over a number of years on that, Mr. Speaker, 
and also, give you a little, little more chance when you’re 
planning your cattle herd. You’re expanding it — it’s very hard 
to . . . if you get in and out of cattle very quickly, you can lose 
money. 
 
You happen to buy, if you get a permit, the one year, on the 
one-year permit, you buy, you buy some extra cows. Let’s say 
they’re allowing you to maybe put 30, 40 extra cows grazing on 
that. You buy them in the spring when bred cows and calves are 
usually up and then in the . . . you find out next fall that you 
don’t have that permit and you don’t have the pasture for them 
next spring. So then you have to unload them and sometimes if 
the price is down, you will take a loss on it. 
 
So this Bill apparently deals with extending the lease on it to 
five years on it straight across, which on the surface seems very, 
very well. We’ve sent this Bill out to various cattlemen 
association and stakeholders in the area. We still haven’t seen 
that response on it. The initial response, I think, has been good. 
Some of it . . . feedback comes back would be, you know, why 
not 10-year, 20-year leases on the government through PFRA, 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) through 
government leases on other pasture are expanded to 10, 15, 
20-year leases. I’m wondering if this Bill, they plan to expand a 
little further than that. That’s something they could look at 
expanding past the five-year permit. 
 
I was wondering on all . . . and another question I’d like to ask 
the Environment, which I will be in time to come, does this 
apply to all their permits — grazing permits on the one-year 
lease — or does it only apply to some of them that were 
mentioned here in the Bill? Does this apply straight across the 
board which are some of the questions later on we’ll be asking. 
We hope to get some answers on that. 
 
The last two years, out . . . especially in the Northwest, which I 
think this . . . with this Bill particularly deals with a lot of the 
parks in the area, they’ve had a drought up there in the last two, 
maybe even three years and not a lot of snowfall, I understand, 
in some of the areas there. So this Bill hopefully will be able to 
address . . . that they’ll be able to address water concerns 
because over maybe five, six, seven, eight years ago there was a 
lot of water, a lot of snow runoff in the North. They’ve always 
been noted for having a lot of snow, a lot of water. 
 
I know the last two years in our area, we’ve had more snow — 
and we haven’t had a lot in our area — and we’ve had more 
than the northern part. They’ve really gone through snow 
depletion, and water depletion of dugouts. 



April 17, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

 

So I know some of the ranchers we’ve met in the area and 
we’ve had some complaints. Some of the MLAs (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) from the northern part have 
mentioned that some of the people that have these leases over a 
number of years have a . . . the last two or three years that had 
water on these leases, were dry. 
 
So you’re looking at a one-year lease beforehand, and now 
you’ve got to . . . you’re faced to either digging a dugout at a 
cost of . . . and they’re fairly expensive, or trucking in water, 
and the expense of it. So you hate to develop a water system 
over this and only knowing that next year somebody could 
come in and take that lease and what you’ve developed under it, 
from underneath you in . . . on your development. 
 
So I know that was a huge concern, and I think it was raised the 
last two years, especially up north because of the drought 
conditions there. One of the main concerns was they wanted to 
develop some water, some extra water resources, dig some 
deeper dugouts, maybe dig a well, find out some . . . to enhance 
the property — which it does, for leasing further on. 
 
So this, from initially, I think this is a very good Bill and what 
we’ve heard . . . not of . . . of that part of the Bill discussing 
again why they bring in other things. And I don’t know why 
they just can’t bring in one separate piece of legislation that 
would deal with that, and then the other legislation that deals 
with actually removing some polices, some . . . excuse me, 
pieces of the park to . . . either to the private sector, also to 
some native bands, also some movement in adding some. 
 
And I wish they would kind of, in the future, would separate 
them Bills instead of putting everything together. And a lot of 
them don’t really deal . . . the Bill doesn’t really deal with . . . 
some of the things that were done here don’t actually affect one 
another. So in the future, as a comment to the minister, that I 
wish he would kind of bring maybe two pieces of legislation on 
this end of it. 
 
Also going into another aspect of the Bill — and I may come 
back to the first part of it — going . . . reading through it, deals 
with the removal of some land from some of the parks in the 
area. That information, we still haven’t received any 
information from the stakeholders on it. We’ve sent the Bill out 
to the stakeholders that are dealing it. 
 
(11:15) 
 
I know one piece of land is around the Meadow Lake area. In 
the Bill I think it mentions it as agricultural land, but it doesn’t 
say how that land will be dispersed, whether it will be dispersed 
through a tendering project or will it be dispersed to the 
adjacent landholder or even is the land going to farmers or is it 
going . . . it doesn’t really specify where that land is going. 
 
We hope that if it is agricultural land, that it is put up for tender, 
that the surrounding farmers or ranchers have the right to bid on 
it. We hope that that’s what that part of the Bill deals with and 
we’ll be asking the minister further on, on that. 
 
And then another part of the Bill going on, some of the other 
land it deals with also deals with moving the land to a . . . 
moving some of the land to Native reserve, which is fine if they 

can use it. We’ve sent them out a copy of the Bill and we’d like 
a little feedback from them to see if they’ve requested it. But if 
they’re going to be paying for this land, Mr. Speaker, or is it 
being given, at that end of it, that’s something that needs to be 
looked at. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, with that . . . And there is a few other things 
we’ve gone through with this Bill. The permit process is some 
of the questions I would like to ask. When the five-year lease 
. . . is it changing on that, on the permit, and what they pay? 
 
I know one of the concerns that was raised with us when I did 
meet with some people up there and talked to them on the 
phone was the way the permit process was that they had to pay 
taxes on this land. And they felt that that was unfair, that they 
had to pay the taxes plus the permit, and they said a lot of it was 
putting it out of the reach of the cost of it. So they would also 
like that to be addressed, and we’re hoping that the minister was 
dealing a bit with that. 
 
So I’m going to be . . . We’ll be asking some more questions on 
it. I know some of the other members also have some concerns 
with that. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move that we 
adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with good wishes to all 
members of the House that we’ll have some time at home with 
our families to also enjoy the optimism and the good spirit of 
fellowship that comes with celebration this time of the year, I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:19. 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................641 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................641 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................641 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................641 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................641 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................641 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................641 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................641 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................642 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Easter Greetings 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................642 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................642 
 Historical Events 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................642 
 SaskPower Contractor Safety Awards 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................642 
 Weyburn Women of the Year Awards 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................643 
 Prince Albert Business Awards 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................643 
 Disposal of Potatoes 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................643 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskEnergy Natural Gas Rates 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................644 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................644 
 Consultation on Land Use in the Great Sand Hills 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................646 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................646 
 Responsible Gambling Features in Video Lottery Terminals 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................647 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................647 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................648 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................648 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................651 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 9 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................648 
 Bill No. 15 — The Saskatchewan Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................649 
 Bill No. 16 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2003 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................649 
 Bill No. 17 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2003 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................650 
 Bill No. 18 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................651 
 Bill No. 13 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2003 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................652 
 


