















































Hansard: May 27, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1243 
 May 27, 2003 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To my immediate left is Bob Ruggles, who’s the assistant 
deputy minister for the programs division. To my extreme right 
is Dave Phillips, the assistant deputy minister for operations 
division; directly behind Dave Phillips is Rick Bates, the 
director of communications. Directly behind me is Lynn 
Tulloch, the executive director of corporate service division; 
and of course next to Lynn, to her left, is Ron Zukowsky who is 
the executive director of the policy and assessment divisions. 
 
And other department officials in attendance: in the back is 
Stuart Kramer, president of the Watershed Authority; Wayne 
Dybvig, vice president of operations in the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority; Denis Sherratt, director of the fish and 
wildlife branch; Sam Ferris, associate director of drinking water 
quality; Janine Orban, senior labour relations consultant in the 
corporate development unit; Dave Tulloch, senior manager, 
strategic financial and performance management — say that 
three times — of the fire management and forest protection 
branch. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d just like 
to welcome the minister and his officials here this evening. 
There’s many members of the opposition that have many 
questions for you this evening and I’d like to start out by letting 
the member from Saskatchewan Rivers have the floor and ask a 
few questions. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome this evening, Mr. Minister, and welcome to your 
officials also again. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to start out with a small, specific issue that 
has been raised in my constituency that is of a concern to, you 
know, a rather small group of people but it’s inside the 
provincial forest, Mr. Minister. 
 
In the Nisbet Forest immediately adjacent to the city of Prince 
Albert there’s some power lines running through there and 
electrical power lines. And you probably heard, Mr. Minister, 
about 10 days ago or so that there was a small fire in that area 
where a tree fell on the power line, and an old dry tree, and 
started a small fire. There was a very good and immediate 
response by the Buckland fire department, by the Prince Albert 
fire department, and certainly by the Environment and Resource 
Management. And we applaud that effort. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, it raised an issue, I guess, that of a large 
concern to the people that live adjacent to that forest, and that is 
the power line and the old-growth forest that is immediately 
adjacent to it. Mr. Minister, the power line has a 15-foot 
right-of-way on each side of the power line so it’s a maximum 

of 30 feet from the centre of the power line to the edge of the 
forest. And of course as we’re all aware, Mr. Minister, in that 
area of the world trees certainly grow a lot taller than 15 feet. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess there is a concern in the Prince Albert 
area that because of the proximity of this old-growth forest to 
the power lines, because of the, you know, as I’ve already 
mentioned, the age of these trees, many of them are easily being 
blown down by windstorms at this time. 
 
Has your department, Mr. Minister, looked at opportunities 
where some select cutting could take place in the near adjacent, 
in that area nearly adjacent to the power lines to alleviate the 
dangers of the dead forest falling on the power lines and 
creating more hazards with fires close to the city of Prince 
Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: —Well thank you very much for the 
question. First of all, I want to thank the member for his 
compliments of the fire program. I think it’s very important that 
we continue striving for the professional firefighters that are out 
there and the support staff, that we certainly appreciate your 
effort. 
 
We do take very seriously some of the challenges associated 
with some of the power lines that run throughout Saskatchewan. 
We do have a fuel break program in which we of course clear 
off a bunch of forested areas and thin out the trees throughout 
Saskatchewan. And in fact during Arbor Day I was out near 
Prince Albert and we did plant a tree and have a ceremony in 
one of the fire breaks around the city of Prince Albert. 
 
What we will be doing is we have been in contact with 
SaskPower. We do have kind of a continual contact and 
monitoring system with SaskPower throughout the whole North 
and in particular the Nisbet Forest. 
 
We also do some party fire monitoring. For example, if folks go 
out and camp for a day or other folks are out there just enjoying 
the scenery, that we kind of monitor the amount of folk that are 
out there and potentially those that might have a fire going, that 
we make sure that we work with them and educate them and 
monitor them to make sure that these fires are out. 
 
Secondly, throughout a number of RMs (rural municipality), 
and I’m sure it’s in the Nisbet Forest area as well, we have what 
they call the FireSmart program where we sit down with the 
cabin owners and homeowners and talk to them about things, 
for example, of reducing the natural fuels around their yard, 
being very careful around and using fire, looking at things like 
installing or purchasing sprinkler kits. 
 
So I think some of the preparedness and the educational effort 
that is associated with the fuel break program overall worked 
well in the event that you’ve made reference to, but certainly 
we’re doing it throughout the whole province and, as always, 
the programs continue looking at ways of improving and 
certainly trying to maximize the educational awareness that is 
necessary to reduce human-caused fires. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I have two specific instances that I want to bring to 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

your attention and I . . . First question that I would ask is 
whether your officials are familiar with a problem that is 
occurring in the RM of Sliding Hills with regards to the 
replacement of a regular bridge that collapsed in the year 2000 
and the attempts by the RM to put in place a low-level crossing 
type bridge that would still allow for transportation to cross but 
now has come under scrutiny from the Department of Fisheries, 
the Canadian Coast Guard, and all of the other federal agencies. 
 
Are your officials aware of the concerns that were raised by the 
RM of Sliding Hills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I will point out that while none of the officials have specifics in 
terms of correspondence and discussion with Sliding Hills, we 
are somewhat aware of the issue of them trying to construct a 
low-level crossing at the bridge site that you indicated has 
collapsed. 
 
I would point out that one of the things that is important to note 
is that DFO (Department of Fisheries and Oceans) is the 
responsible party when it comes to the whole notion of fish 
habitat. So in that event I would imagine that the RM of Sliding 
Hills would have these discussions directly with DFO. 
 
We’re obviously not in the position to influence DFO. As 
always, our department has indicated time and time again that 
the 30-some officers that DFO has shipped to Saskatchewan to 
be part of the regulatory regime in the province was something 
that we did not welcome, but they’re here and we have to make 
the best of it. And we would encourage the RM of Sliding Hills 
to work through DFO to try and resolve this issue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to relate to you some of the circumstances around this to 
indicate to you that I think officials in your department, in 
SERM, need to coordinate all of the people involved. And the 
officials at the RM of Sliding Hills have been working very 
diligently to try to bring about a resolve to this matter. 
 
And I want to indicate to you so that it is on the record that this 
bridge collapsed in the fall of the year 2000, and it was raised at 
that time. In fact, I sent a letter to then minister of Highways 
and Transportation, the member who represents Saskatoon 
Nutana at that time, and she responded by saying that a concrete 
low-level crossing is being assessed as an alternate installation 
at this site. Preliminary design details have been forwarded to 
the Department of Fisheries and Oceans and to the Canadian 
Coast Guard for their assessment under the Fisheries Act and 
the Navigable Waters Protection Act. Okay? So those are 
factual statements being made that the RM is to consult with 
those two groups. 
 
Well what has occurred, Mr. Minister, is that the Department of 
Fisheries was unwilling to move forward on this because they 
were concerned about the passage of fish. There are other 
low-level crossings in the Whitesand River. It’s not a problem. 
There’s a full understanding of it, and I believe now the latest 
response to the RM council is that the Fisheries department is 
saying, okay, we understand; it’s not going to be a problem for 
the fish. Indeed, they can still go through the culverts that will 
be there for a low-level crossing. 
 

But the situation is now that the Canadian Coast Guard is 
concerned that this is described as a navigable river and that 
canoeists must be able to go through the river at all times. Well 
there are low-level crossings already in the river and they 
portage over those crossings. 
 
So what has occurred is that the RM council is caught in a 
position where they can’t get approval. They’ve been trying to 
get an assessment done. They’re looking for assistance from 
Environment and Resource Management, the provincial body, 
that would bring Fisheries and the Canadian Coast Guard 
together at the same table along with the affected farmers 
because, Mr. Minister, what has occurred is that with the bridge 
out of commission, a farmer on one side of the river who has a 
cattle operation, lives on one side of the river and has a cattle 
operation on the other side, has to travel nearly 20 miles to go 
around through the nearest crossing to get around to take care of 
his cattle. It’s a huge impediment to a successful operation. 
 
The RM recognizes it and the RM recognizes also that the cost 
of building a regular bridge is prohibitive. And they’re trying to 
work with Fisheries and they’re trying to work with Canadian 
Coast Guard and they’re trying to work with the Environment 
and Resource Management officials to resolve this, but nobody 
wants to bring the people to the table. 
 
So I’d ask that your officials look at this as a problem that a 
municipal council has. They have raised this numerous times, 
and as I’ve indicated 2000 . . . the fall of 2000 and there are 
communications dated 2001, 2002, 2003. 
 
There are problems in resolving this and I would encourage you 
that, while I know you understand, you’ve indicated that the 
people that are here under the auspices of Fisheries are indeed 
controlled by the federal Act, yet they are affecting the 
development or the lack of development in our province. 
 
And I’m wondering whether your officials can work more 
co-operatively, can influence people to come to the table; and 
while you’ve indicated you’re not going to influence the 
decision, and that’s appropriate, but we need a coordinating 
body and I think that that body is SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) officials to bring 
these people together from . . . that are responsible for the 
Fisheries Act and are responsible for the navigable rivers Act 
and to be able to resolve this. 
 
And I’d like your commitment to have officials investigate this 
problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
The obvious answer is yes, we would certainly be in a position 
to try and work with DFO and the appropriate RM of Sliding 
Hills and other RMs that might have similar programs. 
 
I would say that Saskatchewan is not immune to some of the 
federal government’s wishes to have the DFO officers all 
throughout the province. As the member may or may not know, 
in Alberta as an example, I think they have 60 DFO officers, 
twice as many in Alberta that we have here. And I think 
Manitoba, I don’t know what their number is but it seems like 
Saskatchewan has less of the DFO officers, which we are 
grateful for. We want less interference so to speak, but more 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

 

collaboration. So there’s some days I imagine that, like the 
member, we sometimes wonder what the federal government’s 
doing coming forward and stopping the great development of 
Saskatchewan as the member noted. 
 
(19:15) 
 
I would point out right now, arbitrarily, SERM does offer 
technical help to the RMs that request the help in reference to 
some of the discussions with DFO. We are working on a 
administrative degree . . . administrative agreement that would 
do a number of things that we hope to have this agreement in 
place within a year, for the member’s information. And what 
the administration agreement would entail is collaboration, of 
course, to reduce overlap and to look at speeding up the process 
so we don’t have to go through three or four years for a simple 
low-level crossing. 
 
And in reference to the canoe route and the fish habitat, of 
course the coast guard takes care of the canoe route in the 
navigable waters argument, and the second argument in 
reference to the fish habitat, DFO undertakes that role. 
 
We are responsible of course for the fish, we are responsible for 
the waterway, and this is where I think it’s important that both 
levels of governments coordinate for a speedy resolution to 
some of these minor changes to the manner in which we cross 
rivers. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I’d also like to point out that there are other 
departmental agencies involved in Saskatchewan. I have a letter 
from the current Minister of Agriculture commenting about a 
river flow study that would be done by Sask Water. So we have 
letters from the Minister of Highways, the Minister of 
Agriculture, Sask Water officials involved, Department of 
Fisheries involved, the Canadian Coast Guard involved, and the 
problem is now three years old and it’s not been solved. 
 
So I appreciate your comments about resolving this and if 
copies of any of these letters, if any of your officials become 
involved in this investigation and if the RM is unable to supply 
some of those copies to you, to your officials, I’d be glad to do 
so. Because there is a definite need to work with the RM 
council to resolve this issue. And we have, we have a cross . . . 
we have a cross-reference here of many different departments 
and agencies working together and we need someone to 
coordinate it. And I think from the province of Saskatchewan, 
SERM is the ideal body to do that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the second issue is also an issue that while it is, 
the specific issue is relevant to my constituency, it is also 
something that is occurring in other parts of the province. And 
that is, Mr. Minister, that federal officials have been studying 
the flow of water through various creeks. And I won’t even 
refer to them as rivers because in my constituency this very 
specific body of water is often referred to as the Lilian creek. 
 
There seems to be a move from federal officials to have farmers 
who operate cattle operations, who have cattle operations along 
creek beds where these cattle pasture, to have these animals 
fenced out of the bottom of a dry riverbed or a dry creek bed. Is 
this something that your department is aware of, and could you 

tell me how long this type of action has been taken in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Once again, I would point out that 
when you look at some of the examples that the member uses in 
reference to Lilian creek, no, we weren’t aware that the federal 
government was looking at the creeks in the sense of fencing 
out, even from the particular aspects of a dry creek bed. 
 
And one, I can tell you that DFO is actively involved in 
managing some of the fish habitat and certainly a creek bed or 
potentially dry creek bed that could be used, I would imagine at 
this stage of the game that they would have a role and they’d 
want to get involved in that particular aspect of protecting fish 
habitat. We don’t generally do this within SERM or within the 
Watershed Authority. 
 
We certainly work very closely with the farm community in 
terms of trying to look at the whole notion of fencing from 
either dry creek beds or from regular creeks that do have water. 
And it is through the farmers’ agreements of the impacted area 
that we have fencing out of some of the livestock, as well as 
also different users in the specific area where SERM would 
collaborate with all the users in terms of putting a fence there to 
prevent livestock from venturing into the river, or in some cases 
maybe even a dry creek bed. 
 
But I think clearly what we would point out is that we would 
encourage DFO to do the same. 
 
We think if we work with the local parties involved, that they 
have a vested interest in ensuring that the creek bed, whether 
it’s dry or has some flowing water, continues to remain a 
healthy ecosystem. At the same time some of the best 
husbandry practices, which include taking water out of the 
creek to water the cattle further away from the creek, those are 
some of the practices that many of the agricultural . . . or many 
of the farmers get involved with. 
 
So we feel that the farming community, the agricultural 
community is quite responsible and the only time we would put 
fences around creeks as a provincial government is through 
agreements with the farmers in the impacted area, or if it’s a 
joint use agreement that we have to respect. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, is there an appeal process that 
the farmers that are affected . . . And just for your information, 
he’s an enforcement officer for Environment Canada. He has 
given orders to a number of farmers to erect fences to keep their 
cattle from depositing, and I believe the words are, deleterious 
substances, in the river. Now, what has happened is the farmers 
have been given 30 days or 45 days to erect these fences. This 
happened about a month ago. 
 
Now I can understand, as you’ve indicated, in agriculture there 
is no problem with farmers needing to prevent the feeding of 
animals by a feedlot situation on a riverbank where, or a creek 
bank, where in the spring along comes a flood of water and 
clears out the feedlot. That is a toxin that is then deposited 
through the creek system into the lakes and can cause a fish 
problem. 
 
This is strictly farmers who have pasture land, who have cattle 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

pasturing on the bottom of a riverbank, and now federal 
officials are coming along and saying, by the Fisheries Act we 
have the power to tell you to fence these animals out of the 
bottom of this creek. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, that doesn’t make sense to these farmers. 
They’ve had their cattle pasturing these creek beds for years and 
years and years. And there doesn’t seem to be an appeal 
mechanism. They’re given the order and the comment to them 
was, well if you don’t like the order you can obtain a permit. 
 
And the question is, who is to offer this permit? Is it SERM? Is 
it your officials that will grant a permit to a particular farmer to 
allow them to I guess deposit deleterious substances in the 
creek and then subsequently into the river, into the lake if that’s 
what would occur? There needs to be clarification and I’m 
wondering if your officials work with the people from 
Environment Canada to develop a strategy that will be 
understood and effective but most importantly, fair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I’ll point out is that first of all I think it is important for 
the member, and I’m sure the member appreciates the fact that 
one of the things that we want to do — whether it’s the 
Watershed Authority or it’s DFO or whether it’s Environment 
Canada — is to make sure that we look at a number of aspects 
of protection of water at source. It’s one of our most important 
aspects of our safe water strategy. 
 
And we often want to preach the fact that if you protect the 
water at source more diligently and vigilant, then what you’re 
going to have is the less requirement for treatment and less 
costly efforts of trying to clean up the water and so on and so 
forth. 
 
So obviously I know that member is appreciative of the fact that 
we often want to encourage farmers and the agricultural 
community, in which the agricultural community is certainly 
rising to the occasion . . . is to try and look at ways in which we 
could reduce the risk of water contamination to the degree as 
possible to make it, you know, to make it a practice that many 
of the agricultural community and non-agricultural community 
can follow to protect the water at source. 
 
What I would ask that member is generally Environment 
Canada, probably through the Fisheries Act, would put that 
order in and any federal Act would have to have a federal 
permit attached to it. And correspondingly, any provincial Act 
would have to have a provincial permit to it. 
 
One of the things that we’re trying to do — and it’s a long-term 
objective, pending discussions and negotiations under the 
agricultural policy framework — is we’re looking at 
environmental farm planning, a component of that which talks 
about some of these issues and mitigating some of the 
challenges to the environment when it comes to agricultural 
development and of course managing the risk, best practices, 
and so on and so forth. These are some of the principles that 
this long-term environmental farm planning component of this 
agreement would look at. 
 
But I would ask the member for a location of the examples that 
he’s using and we can get more specific information for him 

directly or to the constituent that he’s making reference to. And 
we will be very clear as to what the role is. And I believe, if 
there is an order in place and it is in power through the Fisheries 
Act, then the Environment Canada officials certainly would 
have their Act in which they can enforce the whole notion of 
fish habitat protection, rules and regulations that they would 
apply in this case. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, to 
clarify, I understand that your officials or your department was 
involved when there was discussion about waste substances 
being pumped into Last Mountain Lake. And that was of course 
human treated sewage. And now we have a situation where this 
has become a federal issue. 
 
So I’m wondering if there is . . . Is there a responsibility that is 
separate, that the federal officials are looking after something 
that involves agriculture and is out in rural Saskatchewan and 
that SERM was responsible for dealing with Last Mountain 
Lake? 
 
And the second question, Mr. Minister, is these farmers have 
been given sort of an ultimatum, a 30-day ultimatum to erect 
the fences. This is a busy time in rural Saskatchewan with 
seeding going on. And there are a number of farmers who have 
contacted my office and said, we’re not able to get this fence 
done; will we be charged under this Act? Will it be officials 
under Environment Canada or will it be SERM officials who 
will impose the penalties on these farmers? And who will 
actually lay the charge on the farmer for not having constructed 
the fence in the required 30- or 45-day period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much. What I’ll 
point out to the member, and I was hoping you wouldn’t be 
suggesting that two wrongs would make a right in terms of 
some of the efforts that we have to protecting the water at 
source; that whether it’s human cause or agricultural cause or 
livestock cause that we should undertake to have the notion of 
protecting the water at source as everybody’s responsibility — 
both provincial, local, and federally — and certainly with the 
number of environmental groups and organizations that are out 
there. 
 
(19:30) 
 
And the agricultural community as well appreciates the fact that 
all kind of material that’s going into any river, lake, or stream 
that we try and do our best to minimize that, to mitigate it, and 
again use best practices to try and protect the water at source as 
best as we can. 
 
So I want to reiterate that two wrongs would not make a right in 
this instance, and that we have to make an effort in both 
regards. 
 
I would also point out that I think it’s very important that if 
there is an Act laid under the federal legislation, then that 
federal department and that federal officer will be the one that 
will be laying the charge. 
 
And in this case SERM, or Saskatchewan Environment will not 
be proceeding with any kind of court action against that 
individual unless provincial environmental laws were broken 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

 

and were implicated in some way, shape, or form. Then of 
course we would have to undertake our duty then. 
 
But if it’s a federal Act and a federal charge delivered by the 
federal government, they’ll certainly be proceeding with the 
charges as per their legislation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I will 
supply all of the information that I have regarding this situation 
to your officials, but there’s no doubt, Mr. Minister, that many 
of these farmers are fishermen as well. They obviously want to 
ensure that the lakes in the Canora-Pelly constituency continue 
to have fish stock, and for not only themselves but their 
children as well. 
 
So this is not a matter of somebody trying to pollute a river or 
pollute a lake. This is a group of farmers who have had a 
complaint raised by someone that is also . . . By the way, Mr. 
Minister, the way that this has come to the attention of 
Environment Canada, somebody phoned in a complaint. They 
don’t know what they were complaining about but through the 
investigation now, the Environment Canada official has 
determined that it’s time to erect these fences. 
 
Is this a policy that would be in contravention of 
Saskatchewan’s environment guidelines or would your officials 
and your policies be agreeing with this? That is the question 
that the farmers are asking. Is it something that the province is 
wanting to promote as well, or is this just a decision made by a 
federal official to say, I would like to have these areas fenced 
up? 
 
There’s a total misunderstanding I think of the impact of this 
kind of decision. So I’d ask your officials to clarify this, most 
importantly for all areas of the province that are going to be 
affected by this type of decision, and try to somehow resolve it 
for not only the protection of our waterways and our lakes and 
our fish stocks but also for agriculture to continue to survive 
under the conditions that it has survived for years and years and 
years. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things I think is a very 
important principle when we talk about resource management, 
and certainly trying to engage as many of the stakeholders as 
possible, is that we believe in SERM that a power through 
partnerships theme is something that’s going to certainly pay a 
lot of dividends in the future when it comes to collaboration of 
all the different users and the demands on some of the resources 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we’ve done is we’ve talked to the First Nations, 
we’ve talked to the fishers, we’ve talked to the sport industry, 
we’ve talked to the Wildlife Federation. What SERM does, or 
Saskatchewan Environment does, is it really builds on a solid 
partnership approach with all the different entities that are out 
there. 
 
Now what we want to do is . . . the principle very clear is as 
many people looking after the 94,000 freshwater lakes that we 
have in Saskatchewan. We believe that in the long run, through 
good stewardship models of this sort, that having as many 

parties involved, that we can continue retaining the freshwater 
image that Saskatchewan has in having 94,000 lakes in our 
province. 
 
Now we do a comparison to Alberta, you’re looking at roughly 
7 or 8 or 9,000 lakes at the most, which they would enjoy 
having in the whole entire province. So we’re . . . They have 10 
per cent of the amount of lakes that we have. And I think the 
tribute of the many people and players that have been involved 
with this whole stewardship model shows that we’re on the 
right track. Things are moving forward, and we’ll continue 
building on the success that we’ve enjoyed over the past years. 
 
However it’s very important as well in this power through 
partnership theme is that we do a risk assessment where we 
look at the real risks. And many times in the agricultural 
community there’s been traditional practices and . . . (inaudible) 
. . . that on the outside may not appear to be environmentally 
friendly but in fact don’t really pose any threat to the 
environment. 
 
So part of the risk assessment that we do in relation to some of 
the agricultural practices . . . of course Ag and Food are 
involved and we’re involved, and as a collaborative approach 
with Environment Canada and DFO to try and make sure that 
there’s a risk assessment when it comes to the agricultural 
community, and that we identify the real risks and try to 
mitigate those risks. And logic and reason and common sense 
will certainly be the guiding themes when we start looking at 
building up a framework of rules and regulations when it comes 
to your example of cattle accessing river beds and lakes and 
streams and so on and so forth. 
 
So I think there’s a lot of good, solid stewards out there of our 
environment and we know that the big challenge is making sure 
that the agricultural sector and the urban folks and the many 
users of our lakes, rivers, and streams are active in the 
stewardship thought. And in that sense I think we’ll continue 
working very closely with the ag sector and with the farm 
families and the farming community to make sure that we look 
at the real risks and we assess those real risks and we put in 
plans over a period of time to help them mitigate those risks to 
protect our water at source. 
 
On the other hand, we don’t want frivolous charges and we 
don’t want to have a heavy-handed federal government that 
comes in and disrupts that chemistry that we’ve developed. So 
we, in our strength as Saskatchewan Environment, advise the 
federal government that, we have a good system here; you 
should adapt with some of your strengths as well so we can all 
have a common goal of protecting the environment for many 
years to come. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a constituent 
call me and he had some concerns and questions about what he 
called the design flood criterion. Can you give me some 
information on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I think the 
design flood criterion is very simply is we would ask a 
constituent or a proponent that has a development along a 
riverbank or along a watershed as to what they’re, are 
developing along that watershed — whether it’s a subdivision 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

or whether it’s a private home or whether it’s a cottage — that 
we would look at imposing certain rules on that development, 
taking into account the probability of the waterline. 
 
And we do a number of . . . using different models to estimate 
what the probability of the high waterline would be. So we 
would look at the criteria to have a flood-prone area along that 
bank, maybe one, you know, in 500 years as to what the 
probability of a flood is. And of course I wasn’t around 500 
years and . . . but so this is why we use modelling, to give a 
good estimate of what is . . . what we envision or what we think 
might happen of a flood once in 500 years. And that’s kind of 
what the design flood criterion is in its simplest form. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, when you bring the 1 to 500 
years in, is that a recommendation, or is that what they have to 
follow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just to point out that there’s a couple of examples here. For 
example, if the Municipal Affairs department wants to approve 
a subdivision through their planning branch, then of course they 
would ask us for advice on this whole argument of the flood 
plain. And obviously local municipal involvement and input 
and also some of the bylaws that may be in place, they would 
also have a role to play as well. 
 
But they would ask us for advice on the flood plain and what 
we would do is then they would either accept that 
recommendation or, again, subject it to discussions with other 
players such as the local municipal body that may have a 
different bylaw in place. That’s how, generally that’s how the 
recommendations work. 
 
And overall they have accepted the recommendations. And 
what we’re simply trying to do there is to make sure folks are 
aware that above a certain peg line that there is the risk of 
flooding and it’s, you know, we use the model 1 in 100 years, 
and you do calculations. And really, 1 in 500 years and 1 in 100 
years calculation,. there isn’t much deviation in both those 
models so this is the reason why we go to 1 in 500. 
 
(19:45) 
 
And some of the national . . . For example, the CMHC (Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation) folks, they may not 
approve a mortgage if it’s below a peg line pending the 
recommendation either received by Municipal Affairs if it’s an 
approved subdivision and if there’s collaboration and agreement 
by local municipal bodies to their bylaws. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That was kind of 
my next question to you because the constituent, he had 
mentioned British Columbia has a 1 in 200 years and Winnipeg, 
Manitoba is 1 in 160 and the rest of Canada 1 in 100. So I was 
wondering how much change it was from 500 years to 100 but 
apparently you’re saying it’s very similar in Saskatchewan. 
 
This particular constituent is planning on building a house on a 
piece of property. And on that piece of property it sounded like 
it was . . . The RM had gone to Sask Environment, I believe it’s 
Environment, and they had given them these recommendations. 
So now they’re enforcing it on him. 

But I was wondering if an RM further down on the same line 
didn’t have the same bylaw, would that recommendation apply 
to him? Would he be denied a permit to build a house there? Or 
just because that particular RM doesn’t have the 1 in 500, might 
have the 1 in 100 or maybe doesn’t have any stipulation, I guess 
the question I’m asking you is would you step in and enforce 
that on another RM along the same river basin, same river? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things as I mentioned before 
is I think it’s very important that we point out that if in the 
event that there’s a subdivision to be approved by Municipal 
Affairs, of course the Municipal Affairs branch will ask for 
advice, and we’ll give them the advice, and generally they’ve 
accepted the recommendation of this 1 in 500 flood plain. 
 
However, if a local municipality or a local body decides that 
they don’t want the 1 in 500 scenario, that they want a lesser 
kind of flood plain deviation from what we think would be a 
safe area, then they would run the risk at putting that particular 
home builder at risk of having their home flooded or their home 
at worst being washed away. 
 
Now one of the things it may seem extreme in the 1 to 500 year 
flood plain that we’re looking at but I would point out that 
again the first argument is that the 1 in 100 year time frame and 
the 1 in 500 year time frame, the deviation isn’t that significant. 
And all we’re doing is adding extra caution and care to those 
folks that wish to take that advice in the event that they want to 
look at ensuring that folks aren’t building in a flood plain area. 
 
And that may seem to be extreme but if you can remember in 
the early ’70s when we did set the standard in the early ’70s, we 
had extreme flooding throughout the province — ’74, ’75, ’76 
— in which we seen the 1 in 100 year levels the flooding being 
higher than the 1 in 100 year standard. And this is the reason 
why we went to 1 to 500 standard, is to provide that extra 
caution. 
 
And while the examples that you’ve used are less extreme than 
ours, we’d point out in the prairie landscape that we’re fairly 
comfortable that the 1 in 500 year flood plain is something that 
we could certainly be recommending to folks that are building. 
 
And the other example is that we’re not the most extreme case, 
of course. You have the Ontario government that doesn’t use a 
flood plain, but rather uses a Hurricane Hazel standard which is 
of course much more extreme. 
 
So my advice to the local municipality that if they do put a 
bylaw that looks at having construction happen below a 1 in 
500 peg line, they would run the risk of being held liable for 
approving a development in that area in the event that the flood 
area does get the water that is needed to make the home at risk. 
So that’s certainly advice they can take or not take. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My next question 
on that is, when you develop the 1 in 500 . . . and I was trying to 
find some information for the constituent and I know that your 
office, I think, is planning on sending me the information on it. 
They said the bundle hasn’t shown up last time I talked to my 
CA (constituency assistant). But the only information I found 
with the . . . was 1989 there was a study done by the Hydrology 
of Floods in Canada by Edgar Watt, Queen’s University in 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

 

Kingston, Ontario. 
 
Is that where you got this 1 in 500, or did you kind of develop 
your own? Or did you just use this studies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
We have over 400 stations throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan where we’ve had records that date as far back as 
1910. And so what we do is we’ve used our own modelling and 
not the guide that you had made a presentation on. And what we 
do over, say an example, over a 25-year period, is we analyze 
all the data. 
 
And then from the data we use different modelling to determine 
what the extreme — again, based on all the suggested data — as 
to what the extreme flood plain might be. And it’s easy. It’s a 
standard practice in which we’re able to determine an accurate 
flood plain, again using statistical information. And it’s a 
standard practice across Saskatchewan, across the country. And 
we would point out that we’re fairly comfortable with that 
science. 
 
So the answer is clearly we’ve used our own information. 
We’ve got over 500 stations across the province . . . or sorry, 
400, and some of this information went back to 1910. And 
again we do a lot of calculating to determine where the flood 
plain could eventually arrive. Even over a 25-year period, we’re 
fairly comfortable with that kind of modelling. 
 
And to make a long story short, it is something that we’ve been 
using on a constant basis and we’re very confident in this kind 
of projection. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, the area that I’d 
like to discuss with the minister has to do with the water levels 
in some of the lakes in the Qu’Appelle River system, 
particularly the Pasqua, Echo lakes and the other two lakes near 
Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
There’s an issue that . . . an unresolved issue that has been 
raised in this legislature earlier dealing with the flooding of 
some First Nations land and a dispute between PFRA (Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and First Nations over 
water levels in the lake, in these lakes. I believe that same 
problem extends to Crooked and Round Lake. 
 
I guess my question, my first question would be to the minister 
is, are any of the weirs located in such areas that they cannot be 
accessed except by crossing First Nations lakes or land? And 
secondly, what First Nations land would be flooded, have been 
flooded in the past and would be flooded this year if the water 
levels in the lakes were at their . . . at the levels that they have 
been in past years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again in reference to the Qu’Appelle 
Valley in terms of which structures are where, first of all we 
point out to the member that we have seven bands that we’re 
currently involving with this whole notion of the Qu’Appelle 
Valley water system. And what’s at question here is 
approximately 2,000 acres of First Nations land that is being 
flooded. And the only structure that is on First Nations land is 
the Round Lake structure. The other two structures, Echo and 
Crooked, as a result of their operations there’s some backwater 

on First Nations lands. 
 
So again we’re dealing with seven bands and 2,000 acres of 
land being flooded. And there are three structures, one on First 
Nations land and two others that actually cause the backwater 
on to First Nations land. 
 
Mr. Hart: —Minister, I take it that this whole issue hasn’t been 
resolved. And some time ago your department or the Watershed 
Authority issued a statement indicating that the water level in 
the lakes affected would be at least a metre lower than their 
customary level. Are you still holding to that forecast as far as 
water level, or do you feel that perhaps the water level may 
even drop below more than a metre from its normal level? 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. I think one 
of the things that we want to do is first of all advise the cabin 
owners of the potential challenges that we will face in the event 
that some of the structures are not being utilized. I would point 
out that as a result of some of the increased moisture this year, 
that the runoff and so on and so forth has kept the lake levels 
dropping a lot slower than we anticipated. 
 
But clearly within a month we’re fairly certain that the drop 
could be as high as a metre, and we’re simply advising folks 
that that could be easily achieved within a month. But again 
depending on the moisture and the rainfall and the runoff, that 
will also have an effect. 
 
So while the runoff is good at this stage of the game — there is 
a lot less dropping of the lake level, at a slower rate — but 
within a month we feel that the 1-metre drop-off is certainly a 
target that would be accurate. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, as I understand this issue, it seems like 
there’s two parts to this issue. One deals with, I understand, that 
the federal government through PFRA is negotiating with First 
Nations. And there has been some compensation paid in the 
past but it appears that the federal government is digging in 
their heels as far as compensation to First Nations in the future, 
and there has been . . . Federal officials have indicated that 
perhaps the province has a responsibility. 
 
Now I know, Minister, you, during question period when a 
colleague of mine asked questions regarding this issue, you had 
indicated that your department and the province has been 
dealing with the issue and regard this as a serious issue. You 
indicated that you have written letters and have been talking to 
federal officials. 
 
Have you, as a facilitator and a mediator, have you brought both 
parties to the table and have you had face-to-face discussions 
with both parties on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Very quickly, all the parties were 
brought together on April 2003. Nothing was resolved at that 
time, and I would ask the member do you believe that we 
should pay this compensation or not? I certainly wouldn’t mind 
hearing your opinion on the matter. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, it’s not an issue of whether the 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

province should be paying for this or not. It’s an issue of we’ve 
got a situation that will directly affect the well-being of the 
economy of this province. And at the very least I believe the 
province has a responsibility to act as a mediator and a 
facilitator to get the two parties together. 
 
And you’d indicated, Minister, that there was a meeting in April 
2000. Do you have meetings . . . future meetings planned? 
 
I mean it’s quite fine to say that we’ve written some of the 
federal ministers and some of the federal officials and we called 
a meeting and neither party could agree so I guess there isn’t 
anything we can do about it. In the meantime we have people 
who have significant investments in the tourism industry in this 
area of our province. 
 
And certainly, if the situation is allowed to continue, that we 
will certainly see a fairly large negative impact on that industry 
which will mean the province will suffer, revenues will be 
down, and therefore the province certainly has a responsibility 
to see that this issue is resolved. 
 
And so my question, Minister, is what further action have you 
got planned to resolve this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again just to clarify, the last time the 
parties got together to talk about this matter was April 28, 2003. 
And I would ask that member once again, what is your position 
on the matter? Do you believe the province should pay? In your 
earlier statements you said that this is not an issue of whether 
the province should pay or not, you indicated, and I would say 
to you that is the issue. 
 
The federal government is telling us you have an obligation to 
pay here and we’re saying here hold it here. You set the 
precedence by settling with Standing Buffalo, you set the 
precedence. The Indian Claims Commission clearly pointed our 
your role and now you’re sitting there saying well that’s not the 
issue. 
 
Well the issue is very clear. The issue is very clear. The federal 
government wants us to pay their bills, and I’m going to ask 
you today, the Sask Party, and I asked the critic of that several 
days ago in question period, does he believe we should pay the 
federal government’s bills? And that member got up and he 
said, oh all you’ve done is written a few letters. Well we’re 
taking the position at this stage of the process that the provincial 
government is not about to pay the federal government’s bills. 
 
Now I’m going to ask that member, if you insist on stroking the 
discontent associated with this particular challenge, at least 
have the courtesy — at least have the courtesy — to tell those 
folks that are listening tonight whether you think the province 
should pay or they shouldn’t pay. The answer I would ask you 
to give me is a yes or a no. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. Hon. members . . . 
Order. Now, hon. members, we are starting to move into an area 
that I wouldn’t like to go to, so I would ask all the members to 
lower the tone a little bit if we could. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister seems intent on asking 
questions rather than answering the questions. It seems to me a 

role of the minister of this government should be to answer the 
questions. Certainly the minister used that tactic of not 
answering and asking questions in question period. That 
member may after the next election, if he’s lucky, be sitting on 
this side of the House and he will have ample opportunity to ask 
the questions and he will certainly receive answers, Mr. Chair. 
 
And as far as the province paying, if the province through its 
inaction doesn’t get this issue resolved, the province will pay in 
one form or another. So there I ask again of that minister what 
plans has he to resolve this issue in the immediate future? 
Property owners, people that are using the resort facilities are 
asking the questions. They want this problem solved and it’s 
that minister’s responsibility to see that this problem gets 
solved. 
 
And so again I ask the minister, what plans has he got to resolve 
this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
point out first of all the other answer has been very clear. We 
answered the member this evening. We answered the critic 
several days ago where we said no, we’re not about to pay the 
federal government’s bills. They’ve set a precedent in reference 
to Standing Buffalo. We’re standing by that position. 
 
Now what I would appreciate a little bit is some clarification 
from the members opposite on their position and on their issue. 
 
Do you believe that we should pay the compensation? The 
simple answer is yes or no. That’s a simple answer. We’re 
saying no on this side and you guys haven’t said a peep as to 
your position. Now to have somebody with the fortitude to 
stand up and express the Saskatchewan Party position on this 
whole notion of the Qu’Appelle Valley water system, the 
answer’s very clearly yes or no. On this side we’re saying no. 
What is your position? 
 
Mr. McMorris: —Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s interesting that 
you’re trying to frame . . . the minister is trying to frame the 
whole argument as to, it’s a one issue thing. Either you pay or 
you don’t pay. Either you’re in the negotiations and discussions 
or you’re not. Well frankly that is an absolute untruth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because you can be at the table and you can 
negotiate and you can take part in the negotiations, and without 
having to pay the bill. 
 
Now I don’t know how much work the minister has done on the 
file, but I have done a lot of work on the file and I’ve talked to a 
number of people in PFRA that are not saying anything like that 
at all. They are simply saying that the provincial government 
has a role to play but is scared to go to the plate. And it’s not 
necessarily dollars and cents that that role is. He won’t get to 
the plate to even talk about it. All he’s simply done is sent a 
letter saying, oh I hope you resolve this. 
 
The structures were put in place in the ’40s for agriculture use. 
There is no agriculture use of those structures anymore; it’s 
pure tourism. And the spinoff from those structures at Echo, at 
Katepwa, and at the end of Round Lake are pure tourism 
usages. The water level on those lakes is for the recreation of 
the people through that whole area. 
 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

 

And Fort Qu’Appelle alone in that area puts through at least 
15,000 people a year. They depend on the lake. And what 
they’ve heard from the provincial government is, we’re going to 
send them a letter. I’m sure that will solve it. 
 
And you talk to the federal government and the federal 
government says there is a responsibility for this provincial 
government but like so many other issues you can’t get them to 
the table to talk about it. 
 
It’s not a dollars and cents issue to the people that I’ve talked 
about through the federal government. It’s not a yes or no 
answer, either you get to the table and you pay your $12 
million; that’s not the issue. As much as you try and frame it’s 
the issue, that is not the issue. 
 
Get to the table and find out what the other issues are. You 
haven’t even been there so how can you stand in the House and 
say it’s a one issue dispute? 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I have attempted to not . . . I’ve 
attempted not to interfere in the natural order of the debate but it 
is becoming more personalized as each speaker gets going, so I 
would ask the speaker to put . . . Order. I would ask that the 
comments be put to the Chair and through the Chair both by the 
minister and by members. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, how 
will the minister know what the issues are around the table 
when they refuse to go to the table? He can use scare tactics and 
he can make it as oversimplified as he possibly can, Mr. 
Speaker. The minister can try and frame the argument around a 
one issue, a $12 million bill. And, Mr. Speaker, that is not the 
only issue that’s being discussed around the table. 
 
There have been many water structures that the provincial 
government has taken responsibility of that were set up by 
PFRA for agriculture use and have since changed. And what 
was the cost to the government in those instances? Very little. 
This one, they’re trying to frame it around a $12 million bill and 
that is not the only issue. 
 
But once again, talking to the people in the federal government, 
when this provincial government won’t even come to the plate 
to listen to what the other issues are and then come into the 
House and say that’s the only issue there is, is a complete 
disservice. 
 
Now if that’s your position, I would ask you to come out to the 
cottage owners in July, when the water is a metre below the 
normal level, where the fish stock are having a hard time 
surviving, when the tourism has dropped off to nothing, when 
the bill that the provincial government is more or less sending 
out, when the businesses of the Fort Qu’Appelle area are 
sending in their PST (provincial sales tax) and it’s about a 
quarter of the amount of what it was last summer and then ask if 
the provincial government doesn’t have some responsibility in 
this area? It’s too scared to go to the table to even find out what 
the issues are? 
 
I think it’s naive at best for the minister to think that he has no 
responsibility in this area. And unfortunately what he will do is 
play scare tactics, scare tactics with the people and say it’s only 

a $12 million issue. 
 
Well quite frankly it isn’t a $12 million issue and I would press 
the minister to get to the table and find out some of the other 
issues. Because some of the other issues are not the past 
compensation for land flooded out, it’s the future of who mans 
the water structures. It could be as simple as that, but how 
would the heck . . . how would he ever know . . . how the heck 
would he ever know when he’s never at the table? 
 
So I’d ask the minister, I’d challenge the minister to get to the 
table and find out what are some of the other issues around 
because certainly there are more than the one that he’s been 
spouting about. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. What I’d point 
out is that certainly we’ve been working very closely with a 
number of organizations in and around this particular matter, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
I would point out one of the most important things is that we 
talked about a water co-management agreement and sharing that 
we worked with the First Nations and QVIDA (Qu’Appelle 
Valley Indian Development Authority). We certainly advised 
the federal government that they’ve set precedents in terms of 
the Standing Buffalo settlement. 
 
We also agree with the fact the First Nations lands are being 
flooded. They are being flooded; we’ve agreed with that. And I 
think the other factor as well, Mr. Speaker, is we want to let 
common sense prevail on this whole process of discussion and 
negotiations in terms of who pays what. And we’ve got to be 
very clear there to make sure that we work alongside all the 
parties and, at the same time, we come across as the people that 
are going to provide the solutions. 
 
And one of the solutions that is being asked of us to provide, 
besides the co-management agreement . . . Besides the 
correspondence and the discussion that’s been going on 
between a number of ministers on this side, and the discussions 
we’ve been having in cabinet, and the meetings that we’ve had 
with the . . . with both the QVIDA group and the joint group 
that we’ve had on April 28, 2003, we’ve been very active with 
this particular file. 
 
And when it comes down to it, the bottom line is there’s a $12 
million compensation claim and the federal government is 
saying to us, okay you guys negotiated a co-management 
agreement with the water rights in terms of . . . not the water 
rights, but the water issues, in terms of accessing the river. 
You’ve talked about respect of the First Nations, which we 
have. We also accepted the fact that there is flooding of the 
First Nations land which should not be happening. 
 
We also understand that PFRA operated these structures for a 
number of years since the 1940s. And we even went back and 
researched some of the QVIDA First Nations inquiry report. 
And I’ll quote from page 215 of that document, where it says, 
recommendations: 
 

Having found that the Government of Canada owes an 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

outstanding lawful obligation to the QVIDA First Nations 
with respect to the PFRA’s acquisition of the right to use 
and occupy their reserve lands for flooding purposes, we 
therefore recommend: 

 
1  That Canada immediately commence negotiations with 

the QVIDA First Nations to acquire by surrender or 
expropriation such interests in land as may be required 
for the ongoing operation of the control structures at 
Echo Lake, Crooked Lake, and Round Lake or, 
alternatively, remove the control structures. 

 
2  That the flooding claims of the Sakimay, Cowessess, 

and Ochapowace First Nations be accepted for 
negotiations under Canada’s Specific Claims Policy 
with respect to 

 
(a) damages caused to the reserve land since the 

original construction of the dams in the early 
1940s, and 

 
(b)  compensation for the value of any interest that 

Canada may acquire in the reserve lands, (and a 
subsection to that is) and future damages to 
reserve lands. 

 
Now as you look at some of the other recommendations to 
Standing Buffalo, and so on and so forth, there is nothing in the 
whole document under the recommendations in terms of 
negotiations that involve Saskatchewan. Now what we have 
done is we have inserted ourselves as a province because we are 
concerned with the effects that that member speaks about in 
reference to tourism and the provincial park systems, and the 
opportunity in that particular area. 
 
We understand and respect the challenges that the cabin owners 
and the folks in the entire area face. We also respect and 
understand that the First Nations are having their lands flooded. 
We understand that as well. And we also understand that the 
inquiry clearly pointed out that Canada has the obligation to 
negotiate and settle. 
 
Now what the member is suggesting that we’re doing is we’re 
not doing enough. The issue here is we have talked 
co-management, we have inserted ourselves into discussion, we 
have written correspondence, we’ve had meetings, we’ve had 
discussions. We’ve warned the cabin owners of the potential 
challenge with the non-operation of the structures. We have 
accepted the recommendations of the inquiry. We have also 
agreed that the First Nations lands that are being flooded, which 
they should not be settled. We went through all this process and 
we’ve accorded patience and respect to all the groups. 
 
So I ask the member again very calm and reasonably: the issue 
left at the end of the day is whether we should pay the 
compensation amount or not. Now what we don’t want to do 
. . . If you want to make sure that calm and reasonable 
approaches to mitigating and addressing this particular 
challenge is undertaken, that is what we want to do. We want to 
mitigate any future challenges with this particular issue so that 
we may be able to coexist for many years. 
 
All those points clearly state that we have been working very 

hard on this matter. In fact my colleague, the Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs, has been diligently working on this 
particular issue and has worked many, many hours. So I think 
this is not an issue of us scooting off a few letters. We have 
researched the issue and clearly I think Canada has been 
referred to in our discussions; Canada has been referred to in 
the precedents with Standing Buffalo; Canada has been referred 
to in the inquiry. So again, we feel that we should not be paying 
the federal government’s bills. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I mean, you covered 
a lot of points here and none of those we are disputing. We are 
certainly not disputing that the issue of flooded First Nations 
land should be compensated for. That has been agreed on prior, 
through the . . . I guess it would be the treaty land claims 
entitlement decision. And so there’s some compensation that 
needs to be paid. And we believe that that’s a federal issue. 
 
But to just simply stop at that and then back away and say there 
are no responsibilities, the minister now has talked about, we’re 
certainly working a lot harder. He talked about the Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs dealing with the issue. Well that certainly is 
an awful lot different than the answer that we got in Hansard 
back on May 12 when all the answer was is, oh, you just want 
us to pay the federal bill. That has absolutely nothing to do with 
it at all. 
 
What we want . . . Because right now I would say that the two 
sides, the federal government and the QVIDA or whatever, 
Qu’Appelle Valley Indian Development Authority, are 
entrenched and aren’t moving on the issue. And we’ve been 
fortunate that there’s been enough water flow that the water 
levels haven’t changed much at all right now. But by the end of 
July we’re going to see a significant drop in the water levels 
and I know the cottage owners along the Calling Lakes 
especially, I’m sure all the lakes, have received a letter from the 
Watershed Authority saying what to expect. 
 
It’s great what to expect. We know the issue. We see the two 
sides entrenched. The minister has just said, we’re working very 
hard and we’ve researched the issue. The first . . . The Minister 
of Aboriginal Affairs has done a lot of work on the issue. What 
is the work when all he’s trying to frame it around is who pays 
the federal government’s bill? Obviously that’s not the only 
issue. If that was the only issue then what department, as he is 
saying, is doing all this work, the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs 
is doing all this work, when it’s a one-issue problem which he 
keeps going back to? 
 
We have no question with the claim. We have no question on 
who pays it. But right now they’re entrenched and they’re not 
getting any closer together. And the persons and the people that 
are going to pay for this problem, this lack of agreement, is 
going to be the provincial government through lack of income, 
through PST and tourism and everything else. 
 
You’ve said . . . The minister has said that he’s done a pile of 
work on it. I would like to know what is the work that he has 
done without getting to the point that, oh, you just want us to 
pay the federal bill again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out that Saskatchewan has agreed in writing to 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

 

both QVIDA and the federal government to participate in a 
co-management discussion with QVIDA to help resolve some 
of these issues. 
 
And co-management involves looking for effective mechanisms 
for co-operation, consultation, and communication. So again, 
QVIDA and the provincial government have talked very clearly 
about co-management, and we believe that’s a very important, 
valued contribution that we have made as a province towards 
this exercise. 
 
Now we’ve also had a number of correspondence, as I 
mentioned to you. We’ve had a number of meetings and I, 
along with the former minister of Justice — I think it was in 
December sometime — we met with QVIDA. We spoke about 
the co-management role that they could play, and I felt at that 
time there was some excitement. 
 
And we have been involved with three negotiation meetings on 
these issues. We have been very clear and very fair when it 
comes to acknowledging and making sure that the cabin owners 
throughout the whole system are aware of some of the potential 
challenges. We have not hid nothing from them. We’ve also 
agreed with the commission in terms of the First Nations land 
being flooded, that they should not be flooded. 
 
And I would ask that member, in the recent request, and we got 
a licence to operate those structures, and that licence is going to 
cost the province $12 million. The bill was sent to both the 
federal and provincial governments from QVIDA — $12 
million licence fee. Now how it’s broken up, of course they 
leave that whole notion for us to decide. 
 
So that is what the difficulty is at this stage of the game — the 
request for $12 million for this licence. Now who pays that? 
Co-management, they agree. Flooded land issues, we agree. 
Correspondence, we agree. The work effort that is needed, we 
agree. Calm, reasonable discussions, we agree. Making sure 
that each party knows what’s going on, communication, we 
agree. Flooded lands shouldn’t be happening, we agree. 
 
The last thing that come to the front was who pays this $12 
million licence. And that’s a simple position that we’re taking 
forward is that clearly a precedent has been set with Standing 
Buffalo, when they settled with Standing Buffalo. And I would 
ask that member, we have undertaken extensive consultation, 
we continue to remain optimistic, but clearly the federal 
government has to pay this particular bill and we’re 
encouraging to do so, so we can get on with continue to having 
a peaceful coexistence and building the economy and ensuring 
that this situation doesn’t occur again. 
 
Now we appreciate the advice of the opposition but clearly we 
can’t play politics with this matter. Leadership is necessary, 
decisions have to be made, and we certainly have to continue 
looking for solutions, and this province will certainly be 
continuing to look for those solutions. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The minister talked 
just now of the meetings that they’ve had with the Qu’Appelle 
Valley Indian Development Authority. And you’ve had a 
number of meetings and you’ve talked about co-management 
and all those issues and you’re finding some common ground 

there. 
 
Quite frankly the dispute is between the Qu’Appelle Valley 
Indian Development Authority and the federal government. 
You’ve talked, you’ve sent a couple of letters to the federal 
government, you’ve had extensive talks with the QVIDA. What 
have you done with the federal government to push them on this 
issue other than a couple letters? 
 
Have you sat down across the table and expressed your concern 
rather than just correspondence? A couple letters to a couple of 
federal ministers? What meetings have you had with the federal 
government on this issue, or have you had any and just 
corresponded through letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I think one of the most important things that we want to point 
out to folks is that we are very clearly committed to finding a 
solution. We’ve always maintained that and one of the things 
and the promises that we want to do is to ensure that the 
province is not seen, as the member wishes to portray, of us 
sitting back and saying, well you guys figure this out. 
 
We have inserted ourselves at great risk and peril to try and 
come up with a solution. And the risk and peril I’m talking 
about here clearly is to be on the hook for some serious federal 
bills that may result from some of the discussions. 
 
However I know and I’m privy to the fact that yesterday, I 
believe, that the Intergovernmental Affairs minister, the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote, had discussions with 
Mr. Pettigrew, the national minister on this particular issue. 
 
And while Mr. Pettigrew of course couldn’t find the solution 
over the telephone conversation, I am aware that tomorrow that 
the federal lead negotiator will be meeting with the president of 
the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, Mr. Stuart Kramer for 
two hours tomorrow. 
 
And following that discussion again our federal . . . or our 
provincial Intergovernmental Affairs minister, again the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote, will be travelling to 
Ottawa to have discussions with federal officials. And I believe 
the federal minister Ralph Goodale will be privy to those 
discussions and issues that he’s bringing forward. And we 
continue keeping an open line of communication clearly trying 
to find a solution here. 
 
And what I would ask that member is that we think — we think 
— a calm, reasonable approach by all the parties involved will 
find the perfect solution which I think will not only solve this 
problem today, but understand that: (a) there’s some economic 
challenges we face if we don’t resolve it; (b) obviously that 
we’ve got to stop flooding First Nations land, because we’re 
simply . . . that’s been going on for a number of years and the 
First Nations should not have their lands flooded; and (c) that 
we don’t have a continuing, huge, tremendous amount of 
money to pay each year for the enjoyment of all people of the 
Qu’Appelle Valley river system. And that is what we hope to 
have happen. 
 
(20:30) 
 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

Now what we have to be very careful of is that we don’t sit by 
and watch things happen; by the same token we don’t 
compromise our provincial position. The federal government 
needs to resolve some of these matters financially on their own. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess, just my final comment is, it’s taken 
us 40 minutes to have the minister stand up and say that, we 
will be meeting with the federal government; we’ll be meeting 
with the federal government as opposed to sending letters. 
 
We’ve asked what the government has been doing. And every 
time at the start of this session, he would say it’s a $12 million 
issue and we’re going to stay right away with it. You want us to 
meet and have to pay the $12 million, and that was the answer. 
 
Could have you just said . . . And I’m glad that you have said 
that the provincial government will be meeting with the federal 
government to try and insert themselves more than just through 
letter correspondence into this disagreement because the impact 
for the provincial government is huge. 
 
I’ll be looking forward to hearing what the person in charge of 
the Watershed Authority finds after he has his two-hour 
meeting with the federal government. Hopefully there’s some 
area for movement. And that’s simply where we were going at 
the start of this whole session, is what is the provincial 
government doing to inject itself into the dispute. Thank you for 
your final statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve indicated . . . 
I’m sorry. Mr. Chairman, as we’ve indicated, it’s very 
important that we point out to folks is that at the end of the day, 
the clear argument is whether we’re going to insert ourselves as 
payee to this challenge. 
 
And I certainly on this side have said, look if there’s no 
solutions coming from the opposition, then don’t try and stroke 
this thing because it doesn’t serve any purpose. You know, if 
leadership is required in this matter, then this provincial 
government will rise to the occasion. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good evening to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Chair, this whole debate has been 
quite interesting and it reminds me of the many times that I 
have received letters and correspondence from Métis as well as 
First Nations people asking for some assistance to be able to 
resolve disputes between the federal government and First 
Nations or Métis people. 
 
And the fact remains, and it seems it remains today, that there 
isn’t a mechanism in place, there doesn’t seem to be a body that 
. . . people or an organization that will deal with these disputes. 
And I recall asking former ministers of Aboriginal Affairs 
whether or not . . . what their role was, whether their role 
included dispute resolution, mediation, that kind of thing. 
 
The very fact, Mr. Chair, that we continue to get these letters 
and these requests for assistance to resolve these disputes tells 
everyone in this House something, that we don’t have a proper 
process in place to assist when there are disputes, and this 
situation in the Qu’Appelle Valley is evidence of that once 
again. 
 

Now I just want to make that comment because it’s important I 
think that in this province of Saskatchewan we maybe have to 
incorporate into the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs’ 
roles and responsibilities, the responsibility to be there when 
there is a dispute between the federal government and First 
Nations/Métis people. 
 
Thank you for that moment of being able to put that forward. I 
think it’s very important and we’ve got to do something about 
it. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister. I wanted to ask the minister some 
questions this evening regarding the fire towers in northern 
Saskatchewan. I submitted some questions through written 
questions in this Assembly to the minister’s department 
regarding, I guess, processes that were underway to deal with 
fire towers that were not in very good condition. 
 
Mr. Minister, at this time I’d like to ask you, when it was 
determined that there may need to . . . that we may need to have 
to take a look at those towers to ensure that they were in 
top-notch condition and safe, was the Saskatchewan Safety 
Council asked to assess the condition of the fire towers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer I believe is no. We didn’t 
use that particular association or that organization. We got two 
separate engineering assessments on the towers and we can 
provide the names of those engineering firms very quickly here. 
 
And this year, as we’ve mentioned time and again, we’ve got 
six towers being built and there’s two separate designs for those 
towers. And basically, from what we can gather from the 
information that the engineers have said, that these towers are 
safe and sturdy and steady for use. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I need to ask the 
minister a fairly direct question. 
 
Mr. Minister, when Murdoch Carriere became the director of 
forest protection services in Saskatchewan for the North, I’m 
wondering — actually not wondering — You had made a 
former statement in this Assembly to one of my other 
colleagues that he had a plan in place for forest protection 
services in this province. 
 
I’m asking you today, Mr. Minister, was the plan or part of the 
plan for aerial surveillance of the forests for fire protection 
reasons rather than to have towers in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Certainly I think one of the things we 
want to point out is that the fire program looked at the 
surveillance and the whole notion of making sure that we 
respond to fires as soon as they’ve started. 
 
We began that process with towers. And roughly two years ago, 
49 of the 50-tower system that we had in place were basically 
condemned. And so as a result of that we’re now in the process 
of looking at a mixture of towers versus planes. And to further 
add to the mix, what we’re doing is we’re undergoing an 
independent, thorough analysis through the forestry centre as to 
what is the best scenario to respond to some of the firefighting 
challenges that we face. Is it towers? Is it planes? Is it a mixture 
of both? Both have their attributes. 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

 

And this independent assessment being done by the forestry 
centre, we anticipate that report to be received by this fall. And 
we’ll certainly look at the ways and means in which we could 
improve our forest fire surveillance system and thus be very 
responsible when it comes to the taxpayers and the costs of 
operating the fire program throughout the province. 
 
I would add that there’s no question that we’ve had some 
success despite the fact that there’s been droughts and the 
global warming challenges that we face. As an example, when 
we look at the Alberta cost of forest fire fighting, you’re 
looking at well over 300 million. And last year — we’ve had a 
terrible year — that was their cost of operating in Alberta 
versus the 119 here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think in doing the analysis that we’re . . . While we’re not 
doing anything negative towards Alberta, we’re just simply 
reaffirming that our manner in which we fight fires, all the 
while improvements can be made, it’s still something that we 
can be proud of. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, in some of the previous questions 
regarding this issue of replacement of fire towers, it’s my 
understanding that there are only, I think, five or six towers that 
have been replaced and rebuilt. And one of my colleagues 
brought up when they were speaking with you last during 
estimates that there was some question about whether those 
towers — the new towers — were safe in themselves. 
 
We have heard that there weren’t even guide wires, so I’m not 
too sure who was monitoring this, but that is of concern to me. 
If there’s going to be money put into this kind of thing, I think 
that we would certainly . . . I would hope that you would 
monitor the situation from here on in ensuring that whoever 
gets the contracts to do these is constructing them in a safe 
manner. 
 
Mr. Minister, are there aerial . . . airplane depots for aerial 
surveillance in northern Saskatchewan? And I would ask you if 
you could inform the Assembly which airline company is in 
fact contracted to do aerial surveillance right at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Okay. Thank you very much. Certainly 
we appreciate the concern in reference to the safety of the 
towers. And there is two different type of towers that we have 
developed. One is almost . . . like both of them are on three, 
three sections so it is kind of a tripod style tower. And then one, 
of course, has an extension and then the observation deck 
versus the second scenario or second satellite tower which has 
the three legs that protrude and, of course, the observation deck 
directly on top of those three legs. 
 
And we are aware of the sway factor. I think roughly the sway 
factor is about a foot either way. We’ve mitigated that 
somewhat. Although the design, we’ve been assured by the 
engineering firm that the design is safe. It is felt that there was 
. . . because of the concerns that the firefighters or observation 
officers may express, we put a collar and guide wires as well to 
make sure that these, the observation decks with the extensions 
on them are more sturdy and certainly again with the 
concurrence and blessing of the engineering firm. 
 

In reference to the aircraft companies that we’ve hired, there are 
seven of them . . . I’m sorry, 12 of them in total. We have the 
Northern Dene. We have the Meadow Air. We have the Ile a la 
Crosse Airways. Again we have the Northern Dene with a 
different style aircraft. And then we have Pelican Narrows, 
Courtesy Air, Transwest, National Aviation, National Aviation 
— some of these companies I name twice because they bring 
two different types of aircraft to it — Mitchinsons and Jackson 
airways. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I have a couple of direct questions to you and I would 
challenge you to answer yes or no to these questions, as you had 
requested one of my colleagues do just a few minutes ago. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, after the Murdoch Carriere investigation was 
complete, did the minister get a copy of that finalized 
investigation report on his desk? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — As the member may know, there is a 
lawsuit being logged against this government, and we will not 
be making any comments in reference to that particular matter. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, one more 
direct question. Did the minister, did the minister get a copy of 
the deputy minister’s response to that investigative report? Did 
the minister get a copy of that from the deputy minister or from 
anyone, to inform him of what the deputy minister’s decision 
was in this case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Once again, Mr. Chairman, I would 
point out to that member and the member very well knows, that 
this government’s under a lawsuit and we refuse to make any 
comments on this matter pending the challenges associated with 
the lawsuit. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, in response to the sexual 
harassment complaints, the report, and subsequent events that 
were brought to the attention of this House, the minister of the 
Public Service Commission asked for some clarification and a 
review into the zero harassment policy. 
 
Mr. Minister, from your knowledge about that report and the 
recommendations that came forward, could you tell me today 
just what you think has been accomplished by that report? From 
your perspective as a minister, do you think that it’s 
satisfactory? And after you answer that question, I would ask 
you one more question before turning questioning over to my 
other colleague. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. The department 
received a copy of the Public Service Commission review of the 
government’s anti-harassment policy. We have distributed that 
review to the senior managers and are working with the Public 
Service Commission to implement the new provisions. So the 
answer is, we have received a copy and we are working with the 
PSC (Public Service Commission) to look at the new 
provisions. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister, I didn’t 
really ask you if you’d received a copy. Mr. Minister, what I 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

was wondering is, from your perspective as the Minister of the 
Environment, you were, you were . . . I guess it was your 
department that held a responsibility in a sense for this issue, 
and making sure there was policy in place and that the policy 
was understood, and that there was application of policy 
measures in place to ensure that that policy was carried out, and 
the consequences of sexual harassment would have been dealt 
with properly. 
 
Now clearly that was not the case because even though there 
was a zero tolerance for sexual harassment policy in place, there 
weren’t provisions for the application. And that’s why the 
minister of public services ended up having the review done 
and new recommendations came forward from that. 
 
From your perspective as a minister now, do you feel confident 
that if there were a situation that came forward like that again in 
your department, that all the gaps would have been filled in 
now, that you would have no concern about proper process 
taking place, as far as application of policy goes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Again as I mentioned at the outset, we received a copy of the 
Public Service Commission’s review of the government’s 
anti-harassment policy. And certainly we’re working with our 
staff in future situations and will continue to develop respectful 
workplace improvements. And of course, all our government’s 
learning from this. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, a more direct 
question. Mr. Minister, if someone came to you that was in the 
public service, that was working in any capacity in your 
department or under your department, and they complained to 
you of sexual harassment personally, what would you do with 
that complaint? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Certainly as we’ve maintained, the 
deputy minister, who’s the permanent head, would be looking at 
the whole matters of the employees, and not the minister. And 
obviously there’s an obligation to take it to the permanent head 
and the permanent head has to make sure that they take in every 
complaint. And zero tolerance means that every complaint will 
be dealt with seriously. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, Mr. 
Minister, in the event . . . well I shouldn’t say in the event. It’s 
my understanding that some of the complainants, at least one, in 
the Murdoch Carriere harassment case did come to the 
minister’s office, did speak with the minister’s office, whether it 
was directly to the minister or not but they did come to Regina 
to talk to people in the department about the harassment that 
they were undergoing and they went home very disappointed — 
didn’t seem to get a response that was looking into their best 
interests. 
 
And so that’s why I ask you the question, Mr. Minister. I mean 
some of this we don’t know. I mean, we don’t know. We hear 
both sides of things and . . . but I wanted to bring that to your 
attention. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s one part of the recommendations that 
states that there will be a manager’s checklist and that was a 
recommendation that was to assist managers in case complaints 

came to a manager about sexual harassment. 
 
However, where I see a bit of an impasse in some of the 
recommendations or I guess a gap in the recommendations is 
specifically, what if the harasser is the manager as it was in this 
situation? I don’t see anything in those recommendations or 
application of the zero tolerance for sexual harassment policy as 
it stands now that would deal with an issue if the manager was 
the person that was committing the offence. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, are you assured that in the event that a 
manager . . . in the future, a manager was the one that was 
committing the offence that there would be some measure that 
could be taken for a complainant? Because I don’t . . . I’m not 
confident yet that that aspect of this whole issue has been 
resolved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I was not aware 
of any telephone calls or visits that I personally received as a 
minister in my minister’s office of the complainant or any other 
individual coming forth to complain about harassment. And of 
course if we did, we would refer that matter to the permanent 
head. 
 
And I’d also point out that we’re not of course making any 
comments on any cases — that is to be said without even saying 
it. 
 
(21:00) 
 
And secondly, the other point is that while we would like to 
refer the specifics of the answer in reference to whether senior 
managers, if they are the problem here, that the Public Service 
Commission minister would give you the very specific answers 
as to how that situation would be handled, and I’d like to defer 
that answer to her at a later time for her to answer in detail. 
 
However, there are many other access points that the person 
that may be feeling harassed at the job site, they can approach 
the human resources staff, they can approach their unions, they 
can approach other senior managers. There are various points 
that they can forward their concerns and complaints to besides 
their manager. But again, I would ask that that be clarified and 
expounded upon by the Public Service Commission minister. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d just like to thank 
the minister and his officials. We know the government has to 
get the next set of officials in for Learning estimates, and we 
look forward to the minister at the next set of estimates and 
hope the minister would be more open and co-operative at that 
time. So thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, having made extremely 
significant progress, I would move the committee report 
progress and proceed to estimates in Department of Learning. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Beside me 
is Dr. Craig Dotson, deputy minister of Learning; beside Dr. 
Dotson is Dr. Michael Littlewood, executive director of school 
legislation and administration; and beside Dr. Littlewood is 
Joylene Campbell, Provincial Librarian, Provincial Library. 
Behind me is Nelson Wagner, executive director of facilities; 
beside Nelson is Dr. Margaret Lipp, executive director of 
Saskatchewan Learning; on Dr. Lipp’s left is Don Sangster, 
executive director of school finance; behind Mr. Sangster is 
Glenda Eden, manager of financial planning corporate services; 
and behind Dr. Lipp is Kevin Hoyt, director of finance 
corporate services. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome to the 
minister and welcome to your officials. I look forward to the 
opportunity to discuss a number of issues with you this evening. 
 
And I know that all of us will realize in Saskatchewan when we 
talk about education most people don’t really talk about 
education or what’s happening in the school system as much as 
they talk about funding education. And it’s the issue that I 
understand. 
 
And I realize the minister and the Minister of Finance have put 
forward a commission that’s going to be dealing with financing 
K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) education and they’ve 
announced that Ray Boughen of Moose Jaw has . . . is going to 
be heading this independent commission on financing 
education, K to 12. 
 
It’s something that I know the general public is going to be 
interested in and I’m also glad that the work is something that’s 
going to be completed this year, although I would wonder if it 
will be completed in time to make a difference for next year’s 
budget. 
 
But this year’s budget, Madam Minister, has concerned a 
number of school divisions already because even though the 
government says they’ve increased funding by $32.3 million — 
and I agree there has been, it was 477.6 in 2002-2003 and this 
year, 2003-2004, it’s 509.9 — but at the same time there was 
special warrants in September for 9.2 and for January for 6.9 for 
a total of 16.2. And that’s half of the total amount of increase 
that we’ve been talking about. 
 
Madam Minister, the calendar year increase for teachers’ salary 
this year is going to be $23.3 million and we already have 6.9 
million of that. In order to keep your commitment, or the 
government’s commitment to cover the teacher salary costs, 
we’re going to need $16.2 million be spent by the end of 
December. 
 
Is the minister able to commit to paying the other $7 million 
that’ll be required to pay for the balance of the teachers’ salary 
increase that was negotiated in the contract for the first three 
months of next year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you for the question. We have 

committed to paying the complete cost in 2002, which we did. 
We committed to pay the complete cost in 2003, which we did. 
We have not done our 2004 budgeting. That will remain to be 
seen. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So I know that in 
a number of press releases and a number of times both the 
Minister of Finance and the Minister of Learning have indicated 
that the government is covering the increased costs of the 
teachers’ salary negotiations but you were indicating that this is 
only to the end of this year, which will probably already send 
some shivers of worry down the back of a number of school 
boards. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell me what the basic cost of 
increasing the basic rate recognition to $233 in most of the 
province and 254 for Regina and Saskatoon . . . what will be the 
total cost of that for the province for this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. The total increase, year over 
year on the basic rates, was $34.5 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, could you also tell me what 
the increase for special education and transportation will be for 
this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Year over year, increase in recognized 
expenditures in special ed was 1.9 million and in transportation, 
2.2 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I know that on budget day or 
shortly thereafter, every school division gets a printout of the 
departmental increases and I’m wondering if we could receive a 
copy of that printout over here so we can look at some of the 
other increased costs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes, we can send you the printouts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I appreciate that, Madam Minister. On budget 
day the other thing that happened is that school boards were 
given . . . realized that the computational mill rate was increased 
by 0.4 which of course meant that there was going to be more 
money expected from the local boards. Can you tell me what 
that figure will amount to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Changing the computational 
mill rate has no necessary effect on the local mill rate or the 
local taxes. It has a distributional effect on the grants. The point 
four mill rate increase in the recognized revenue in the formula 
is 15 million. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So that does 
mean that there is $15 million is going to be expected to come 
from taxpayers, from property owners because it decreases the 
amount of funding the boards can receive in provincial grants. 
So of course, as indicated when we first started this discussion, 
the number of school boards that talk about the education issue 
as a money issue is something that we all know is happening. 
 
Earlier in this session we talked about the fact that there are 65 
school boards that are going to be in . . . 65 per cent of school 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

boards will be increasing their mill rate this year. And from the 
information I’ve received, there are eight school divisions who 
actually are going down. Everybody else is going to have to go 
up. 
 
Madam Minister, I have had some letters from some school 
divisions, and I’m sure you’ve received the same thing, where 
they are indicating that because of a decline in enrolment the 
money that they were receiving from a provincial grant will not 
be enough to cover the salary increases. Davidson school board 
is saying that. Outlook school board is saying that. Rosetown, 
which is a zero grant board, is forced to close one school and 
cut back funding to another school. And the list goes on and on. 
 
It’s a huge issue. It’s something that has to be addressed and 
when we talked about the . . . listened to the government talk 
about education being a priority, this is something that has to be 
looked at in the near future so that we can actually encourage 
the people to move to this province. 
 
Madam Minister, I’ve had a letter from Bankend School who is 
really concerned about keeping their school open and they’ve 
. . . I’m not sure if you had the opportunity to receive this letter 
as well, but I want to read you part of it. And the lady has 
indicated that we should live up to what we’re trying to promote 
in this province of Saskatchewan and that is in Saskatchewan 
our future is wide open. 
 

Securing the future of Rural Saskatchewan, which includes 
. . . communities, schools, people, and especially . . . 
children, who will be our future, is the most essential 
priority we can have today. 
 
Integration, amalgamation, (and) degradation seems to be 
what happens every time we change the structure of this 
Province. For example, look at health care, we allowed 
integration and amalgamation to happen and now (what do 
we have left). There are very few, if any hospitals left in 
Rural Saskatchewan . . . leaving residents trying to obtain 
health care. 

 
We are securing your . . . asking for help in securing our rural 
schools and the future of the children in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, what is your government reply to the school 
boards and to parents who are very concerned because the 
amount of funding that is given to schools is not adequate to 
keep the schools open? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. The issue facing rural school 
boards . . . school boards of education is particularly declining 
enrolments. Despite the declining enrolments, we have 
increased provincial operating grants every year. And 
particularly one of them that I’ll mention is the isolated schools 
which we have an isolated school factor that we calculate in for 
truly isolated schools which we’re spending $16 million on. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, there’s been a decrease in 
the number of students in Saskatchewan over the last five years. 
And even though there may have been some increased money, 
when you think about the number of students per pupil grant, 
you don’t have to be spending more money on students because 
we have a lot fewer students than we used to have. It’s not a . . . 

It’s something that every time that statement is made there are a 
number of school boards who are very frustrated because when 
you spend the same amount of money on fewer students, of 
course there’s going to be more money per student. 
 
So it’s not something that we can say, hey look, we’re really 
doing something great because the people of the province still 
know that they’re paying more money in property taxes to 
cover not just costs of the salaries, but support staff and 
education and 22 per cent increase in SaskEnergy and all those 
type of expenses that are beyond the control of school boards. 
So I take it school boards are going to find little solace in saying 
that there’s been an increase in the isolated school factor. I’m 
hoping that your department is looking at a bigger issue than 
that. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to go on to the issue of libraries 
because I know last year we, the Department of Learning took 
over the library system from Municipal Government, and I’m 
wondering if you can give me first of all an outline of what’s 
happening in the library system, how if anything has changed 
now that it’s now part of the Department of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The public library system has not changed 
as a result of its coming under the Department of Learning. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And, Minister, how many people are employed 
in the provincial library system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There are 27.3 people employed in the 
department, the Provincial Library branch. We don’t know how 
many people are employed out in the library system itself; 
they’re not our employees. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, there must have been a 
reason for moving libraries from Municipal Government into 
Learning. If there was no changes, then there was no point in 
doing it. Maybe you’d care to further expand on what is 
actually happening now that the libraries is under the 
Department of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Just a little bit of history. The department 
of Municipal Affairs and Housing no longer exists, which was 
where libraries were housed. Now we’ve put into . . . under one 
department four separate entities which are early childhood 
development, K to 12, most of post-secondary, and the 
provincial library system. And of course Learning has focused 
on lifelong learning, and the provincial library system supports 
lifelong learning outside of institutions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I’m sure that you’re aware 
last year when this change happened, a move from Municipal 
Government which is no longer in existence — I guess it’s 
Government Relations, I am corrected — there must have been 
a reason and I do know of some cases where the library system 
was into the school and it worked very well. 
 
I’m wondering if you’ve had any . . . you’ve measured some 
outcomes, if you’ve had any reports back saying, this is a good 
idea, this is a bad idea. What is actually happening out in the 
real world when it comes to moving libraries into the 
Department of Learning? 
 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — The combination of the four separate 
entities in the department has only been ongoing for the last 
year, as we all know. There are continuing to be explorations of 
partnerships and synergies that can be developed between the 
library system and the colleges, the library system and SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
the library system and the universities, and the library system 
and the schools. 
 
If you’re talking about combining local public libraries in 
schools, this is a local decision and that is governed by The 
Public Libraries Act. And when they do agree to a joint 
facilities, they have . . . it provides there has to be a written 
agreement. And the written agreement allows the parties to 
define the purpose and the common vision and to address 
potential problem areas. The successful implementation 
depends on the involvement in the agreement from the key 
players including the regional library boards, the local library 
boards, the municipal councils, and the school division boards. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How many 
agreements or potential agreements have been signed or are 
being worked on between towns and regional libraries in a town 
and maybe between the school showing that they actually are 
interested in having some sort of shared facility. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There are approximately . . . there are 30 
such agreements in place. The most successful is the joint 
venture library in Tisdale where the community complex 
includes grades 6 to 12, regional college, a community health 
clinic, a performing arts theatre, and a library that delivers 
school, college, and public library services. And this was due to 
local community development of this initiative — the success. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I knew that you 
would get excited about this. Madam Minister, how many 
regional libraries are there in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Seven. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And is there still a number of mobile book 
vans in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Wheatland has the only one left. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Second part to the answer, in the 
Saskatoon public division. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So I . . . there is 
no tracking by the Department of Learning as to the number of 
employees there are in these various regional libraries around 
the province, I understand. Is there set salary rates for them? 
Are they part of any of the unions that are within the 
Department of Learning system? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Some employees are unionized and some 
are not. The ones that are unionized are represented by CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) and we have nothing to 
do with the collective bargaining process setting any of the 

things like wages or hours of work that are covered by 
collective agreements. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I see that there is an increase 
in this part of the Department of Learning of about, I believe, 
$11,000. Can you give me an idea of where this money is going 
to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — This year’s budget provided for an 
increase in the grant pool for public libraries, the provincial 
public libraries, and those monies are being distributed 
according to a formula. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, what kind of formula? Is it 
the formula that your department has brought forward or is it 
something that’s happening in each region? 
 
This is something that’s great. It’s exciting. It’s an opportunity 
to do something to get people working together in the 
community, to get the school system part of the town system, to 
have people . . . When we have the library in the school, we’re 
going to have people using the school for more than just 
education of K to 12 students. 
 
I think it’s something that could work very well. It can save 
some money. It could be an opportunity for people to actually 
feel like they’re back into the school system and the school 
being part of the community again. 
 
So I’m wondering, can you give me some more information and 
show me that this is something that we’re going to be building 
on? We’ve talked about amalgamation of school divisions. Are 
we talking about working these library systems into the . . . into 
a . . . town offices into the schools? Are you sending letters out 
to town councils? What are you doing to encourage to people to 
ensure . . . to make sure that they know what’s happened with 
this new move? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. The formula that we use for 
distributing the money to the public libraries is a formula that’s 
been recommended by a committee of professionals in the 
library system — and it’s been in place for several years — so 
we took their recommendations and continue to disburse the 
money through that formula. 
 
We too are excited about what libraries can do — connecting to 
schools, universities, colleges — and the thing that we’re seeing 
that’s very exciting is the e-library services. With 
CommunityNet now out in the communities, it’s being able to 
connect the schools and the colleges and the campuses; and this 
is where people are going to learn differently and learn outside 
of institutions that we traditionally have seen. 
 
So this is very exciting and it is one of the reasons why we’ve 
put together a department that covers all the learning and the 
learning avenues and venues and capacity that we have in our 
whole province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We’re really 
warming up now because this I think is something that can be 
exciting. Can all the libraries now, the regional libraries are all 
connected to the Internet, are you saying? 
 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. All regional libraries are 
connected to the Internet and about half of the provincial library 
branches are connected to CommunityNet, which is about 170. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you give us an idea of 
what the per capita grant is for the libraries? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The amount of money will vary region to 
region according to the formula. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, does that mean that a small 
town will receive less money than a larger place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Like the funding that goes to the school 
boards, it goes to the whole area the school board covers. So the 
funding to the public library goes to the region, not individual 
towns. But if there is a particular region that you’re interested 
in, we can give you that. If that’s . . . if you’ve got some 
particular one in mind, we can find that out. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Could you give me the information on the 
Wheatland area, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We don’t have it here, but we will send it 
to you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If you can get 
me the information for this year and last year, that would be 
great. 
 
Madam Minister, the equipment that’s in these libraries, are 
they owned . . . Is some of the assets on the books of the 
Department of Learning or do they all belong to the libraries? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — None of the assets belong to the 
department. Legally they belong to the regional libraries. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening to the 
minister and her officials. Madam Minister, I just wanted to ask 
you, it’s sort of a general question and it would be thoughts on 
policy development in education and the certain services, 
facilities needed, and that kind of thing. 
 
I read with some interest how the Saskatoon (East) School 
Division, Saskatoon (East) board, dealt with their budget 
process this year. They said they have completed another 
challenging budget process, and they go on to say in this 
memorandum: 
 

This year the board was faced with teacher salary increases 
negotiated by the provincial government which effected 
costs in the range of $400,000. The board also faced a 25 
per cent increase in insurance premiums and between 20 to 
22 per cent in fuel costs. Our net grant increase from the 
provincial government was $147,000. 

 
So this did leave them in a precarious situation. What they did 
was they made cuts to peripheral programs and they transferred 
some money from reserves so that they could deal with the 
situation. They also increased their mill rate by 2.64 per cent in 
order to balance their budget. So their new mill rate is set at 
19.81 right now. 
 

I don’t want or expect you to have to start tabulating anything 
with these figures. What I was finding about this information 
that was really quite commendable was that this same school 
division was looking for ways to find efficiencies and savings 
and in order to provide that they entered into a partnership with 
the Saskatchewan Valley School Division to share busing 
facilities and personnel. That partnership is going to save them 
$67,000 this year, and contribute to a lower rate of taxation than 
otherwise they might have had to impose on taxpayers. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I’m . . . when I read this it reminds me of 
something I see in some of the cities. In Regina when I’m here 
throughout the legislative session, as well in Saskatoon, is just 
great numbers of school buses travelling within small areas. 
And some of them no doubt are for the Catholic school 
division, some for the public school division, and some for the 
French schools. 
 
And it has occurred to me, and I know my colleague from 
Kelvington-Wadena has mentioned this before and she may 
have entered into discussion about it with you, but have you 
ever explored the possibility of getting those players together 
from those different school divisions and suggesting that 
possibly partnerships would be very beneficial in cutting costs? 
 
It just seems that if these two school divisions did this and 
they’re experiencing a great saving in the cost of busing, that it 
might be very advantageous for other school divisions within 
the province to look at doing the same. 
 
And I’m wondering if there has been negotiations, discussions, 
whatever you choose to call it, to effect this kind of a change so 
we would have more efficiencies. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. It’s difficult for the department 
to know what individual school divisions and their neighbours 
need. So while we support initiatives that different divisions 
have started and have entered into with their neighbours, we 
can’t bring people to the table without knowing they don’t share 
the same routes; they don’t . . . we don’t know what they all 
share. They themselves at a local level are developing 
partnerships and entering into agreements that are finding 
efficiencies and are serving their populations quite well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, do 
you have knowledge of any other school divisions that have 
partnered for sharing their busing services? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — A couple of examples. Buffalo Plains, 
Cupar, and Indian Head are sharing buses. Eston, Elrose, and 
Rosetown are sharing a bus garage. Those are a couple of 
examples of ongoing . . . and that’s been going on for quite a 
few years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I know that with the cutback for capital construction 
this year there’s a number of school divisions that are 
concerned about where they are on the priority list for building. 
And Hudson Bay School Division has been talking about . . . 
talking lately, I guess, for a number of years about the school in 
Porcupine Plain. 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

 

I know that they had made a B-1 application, that Mr. Kirby 
had been out in 2001 and in 2002 again. And this year when 
they saw the decrease to the budget, they were concerned and 
they were wondering where this facility is on the list of 
priorities for your department. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The priority list comes out in June and 
Porcupine Plain, as other divisions that have submitted 
priorities, will find out in June where they are on the list. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, this morning the Council of 
Ministers of Education Canada released the results of a major 
national writing test under the school achievement indicators 
program. The assessment was administered to 24,000 13- and 
16-year-olds in all the provinces and territories except for 
Nunavut. 
 
The results among 13-year-olds in Saskatchewan is very 
troubling compared to their peers in Alberta, BC (British 
Columbia), Manitoba, and really in Canada as a whole. 
According to the test, on a scale of 1 to 5, 13-year-olds should 
be achieving scores that would put them in at least a level 2. 
 
According to the results released this morning, there are 
significant concerns in Saskatchewan. Among 13-year-olds 
tested in this province, 25 per cent did not attain level 2 scores. 
This is quite different from the results in other Western 
provinces. In Manitoba and Alberta, 17 per cent didn’t achieve 
the level 2 scores, and in BC it jumped to 20 per cent, and then 
17 per cent as a whole when we look at Canada. 
 
When we examine the results in this way, there is significantly 
greater numbers of students in Saskatchewan who are not 
achieving the level they should be compared to the rest of 
Canada. When we look at the number of 13-year-olds in 
Saskatchewan who did achieve the appropriate scores, they are 
still almost 8 per cent below the national numbers. 
 
Can the minister tell us what . . . if her department is concerned 
about the results and what they think could be done to improve 
the students’ performances. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’re quite proud of our school system 
but we do know that there are things that can change. We have a 
curriculum called the Evergreen Curriculum which means it’s 
always changing, and it’s changing in response to survey 
results. And we participate in surveys at several different levels 
and with different national/provincial partners so that we can 
continually improve our system and our way of teaching. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, this result . . . these tests that 
we received today, or the results of the tests that we received 
today should be, and I’m sure are, very upsetting to a number of 
people. Because I do believe that we have a good school system 
and yet when we do measure up, there seems to be a problem 
here. And I know that whenever there’s a problem as in 
education or as in any other department, as soon as you look at 
it, as soon as you realize that there is a problem, the sooner we 
can start working on a solution. 
 
So I know a couple of years ago we had a concern about math 
scores and that’s something that was worked on. And now 
we’re seeing that 13-year-olds have problems in this area. I 

know . . . I’m not blaming teachers. I’m definitely not blaming 
school boards. I’m saying that there’s an issue here that has to 
be dealt with. What is your department going to be doing as 
quickly as possible to deal with this issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — As you pointed out, the results have just 
come today. And this isn’t something that we respond to in a 
knee-jerk way. We have several things that we’ll be doing. 
We’ll be looking at the results within the department, and then 
we’ll be looking at the results with our partners, and then we’ll 
be looking at a joint solution to what we can see as our options 
to address the results. 
 
We have a detailed assessment for learning process. This year 
it’s focused on mathematics and next will be the English 
language. So this isn’t something that these 13-year-olds 
acquired today or yesterday. This is something that has been 
acquired over time and will take some time to address. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, we are . . . I understand that 
it’s not something that can be solved overnight. But I also 
know, as I know your department knows, that when it comes to 
building this province and it comes to growing the province, 
we’re going to need a skilled, educated workforce. And it 
means that everybody has to be involved. 
 
When we understand that there is a problem and we are given 
the information that shows there is a problem, we have to be 
dealing with it immediately. And yes, of course there has to be 
consultation but there has to be an immediate reaction and a 
knowledge that things are going to change. Because to continue 
to do the same things over and over again when you know 
there’s a problem is definitely not going to be helping our 
students who are the key to the future of this province. 
 
So I’ll be waiting to hear what you’re . . . what you and your 
department are going to be doing to deal with this issue. 
 
The math issue is something that I understand is still being 
talked about. I understand that things move slowly in 
government but when we’re talking about children that are three 
or four years away from graduating, we don’t have a lot of time 
to be working with them. They have a lot of things that are 
going to be changing. 
 
Madam Minister, one area of Learning that we think we need to 
discuss is the correspondence classes. And I know now with 
Internet and with some of the programs that are available 
on-line, that correspondence is . . . maybe the importance of it 
and the uses of it is maybe decreasing. Can you give me an idea 
of the number of students that are taking correspondence classes 
and the number of classes they’re taking? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There are approximately 5,000 people 
registered at any given time, which has remained constant for 
quite a while. The increase that we do see is in on-line 
correspondence and learning. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, it’s kind of surprising to me 
that there isn’t a decrease in the number of students taking 
correspondence classes with the on-line learning capabilities. 
 
Is your department discussing this issue? Is there any 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2003 

 

encouragement to see students use the on-line method rather 
than the correspondence classes? And can you again tell me 
how many classes they’re taking? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The consistent 5,000 number has reflected 
a modest decrease in the pencil and paper type of 
correspondence, and an increase in the on-line correspondence. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, is there a breakdown 
between the traditional pencil-paper type of correspondence and 
the on-line? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I’m . . . certainly there is and we’ll send it 
to you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, is there a difference in cost, 
and can you tell me what the cost is for taking these courses? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — It’s 350 for the print correspondence 
method, and 500 for the televised learning. There’s no charge 
right now for the on-line learning since it’s in the . . . still in the 
developmental stage. 
 
Ms. Draude: — That answer leads me to believe that there is 
going to be a cost in the future for the on-line learning. Can you 
tell me how much money the department receives from these 
courses and tell me where it shows up in estimates? 
 
(22:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There is estimated revenue in the current 
year of $2 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, on page 93 of Estimates, it 
says, correspondence school revolving fund as subsidy. Can 
you explain that, and will you also explain what the statutory 
recovery is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The 439,000 is the amount that we 
subsidize the program for. The $2 million revenue plus the 
439,000 — that’s the cost of the program. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So this 2.439 million means that that’s what it 
costs to have the 5,000 students taking these courses. And what 
does this statutory recovery mean? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We don’t have the official here to provide 
that answer but we will provide it for you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I didn’t mean to 
ask you a question you didn’t have the official here for. 
 
Can you tell me how many teachers are involved in this 
correspondence school and perhaps what the other costs are 
besides the cost of hiring teachers for marking these exams? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There’s 22 FTEs (full-time equivalents) of 
teachers in the correspondence branch from the Department of 
Learning. And the other costs are the cost of materials and the 
cost of exams — marking and exams. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, in a number of provinces 
they have virtual classrooms now. Is this something that the 

department’s looking at? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — A lot of our on-line courses are offered 
where the teacher is in one place and the students are all over 
the province, so the province itself is almost a virtual 
classroom. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The number of 
classes . . . out of the 5,000 courses that are being offered right 
now or being taken right now, are there more in rural 
Saskatchewan? Or I guess what I’m asking is if there’s more of 
a shift in the number of classes that are being taken in rural 
areas where perhaps there’s a difficulty getting teachers to fill 
positions in math, science, that type of thing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Rural schools do access the system, both 
in print and television more so, but so do urban students 
because there are congregated masses of them. But yes, rural 
schools do have a high incidence of usage. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, there’s a number of schools 
in the province now that are joint-use facilities, and there is a 
differing opinion on them, depending who you talk to. And I’m 
wondering, after some time now, if your department has a 
position on it and if you can expound on what you feel are the 
virtues or the problems with joint-use facilities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There’s basically two kinds of joint use, 
and one of them is the high school/college model and that’s in 
Yorkton, Estevan, Weyburn, North Battleford, and Melfort. 
And people are very happy with this model. They share several 
things in the buildings, most notably the industrial arts capacity 
of the schools. 
 
And the second one is the K to 12 where two schools share, like 
Yorkton Catholic and Yorkton Public, and Regina Catholic and 
Regina Public. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Has there been any assessment made to 
determine if there’s actually any real savings in the school 
system, between the public and Catholic system, when there’s a 
joint-use facility as opposed to two separate buildings? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — The department okayed joint-use facilities 
with the understanding that there . . . or the expectation that 
there would be a 10 per cent cost in capital . . . or reduction in 
capital costs and the cost of land. And we believe that that has 
happened in the examples I have cited. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, you say you believe that’s 
happened. Has the schools actually showed you that that has 
happened when it came to the actual construction costs? I’ve 
had indication that there was no savings in the construction and 
I am also wondering what their . . . what the thoughts are in the 
operation of the school building. Has there been any analysis to 
determine if there’s any cost savings in the operation of the 
building —a shared-use facility as opposed to a single facility? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — We’ve not analyzed the cost of operations 
of joint-use schools. And what we do believe that the expected 
10 per cent savings in capital construction and land acquisition 
has been achieved. 
 



May 27, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

 

Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, are there any joint-use 
facilities on the books right now or planned for in the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — There are school divisions that are 
discussing the joint use of their capital projects that they’re 
ongoing at the moment that haven’t finalized their 
presentations. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, there are a number of school 
divisions feel that they are going to go up the priority list 
quicker if they do say they’ll be a joint-use facility. I don’t 
know if the boards actually feel that this is going to be a benefit 
to their students individually or whether they just believe it’s 
the only way they’re going to be able to get the school, and get 
the school more quickly. 
 
I would think until there was an analysis done to determine if 
there’s actually a cost benefit, not just in building the school but 
in the operation of the school, it should be something where it’s 
not held over the school board’s head as a hammer to ensure 
that they would get a joint-use facility as opposed to a 
stand-alone facility. 
 
(22:15) 
 
Madam Minister, I would ask that . . . your comment on that to 
tell me if it is something that is used in the priority listing when 
determining which schools are going to be built. 
 
And also, as we’re going to be closing, I’d like to thank your 
officials very much for their help this evening. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Yes, there is a modest premium given to 
the joint-use proposal. And I’d like to thank you for your 
questions, and thank the officials tonight for attending. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:19. 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
  Wiberg .....................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1243 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1247 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1250 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1254 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................1257 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1257, 1260 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1260 
 


