















































Hansard: April 07, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 415 
 April 7, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
to stand in the House today again, Mr. Speaker, to present a 
petition on behalf of producers from the community of Eastend, 
on the far south side of the Cypress Hills. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
petition concerns the government’s intentions with regard to 
renewal of Crown grazing leases. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 42. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Moose Jaw, Eyebrow, and Tugaske. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition of citizens concerned about how the government 
is handling the Crown land leases. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure current Crown land lessees 
maintain their first option to renew those leases. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 

prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Eyebrow, Central Butte, 
Marquis, Tugaske, and numerous other towns on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens opposed to the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
premium increases to farmers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Shellbrook and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned in the 
handling of the Crown land leases by our NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from North 
Battleford and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 42 in the Arm 
River constituency; 
 
A petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 2; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 12, 13, and 18. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

To the Minister of CIC: how much money does SaskTel 
plan to spend on advertising in each quarter of the 
2003-2004 fiscal year? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a whole host of similar questions for 
the other Crowns and various government departments 
including The Future is Wide Open campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
welcome the teachers, the steering committee, and 
Saskatchewan Learning officials who are here at the fifth 
annual Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy. 
 
They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery and, as I call their 
names, I would ask them to just give a little wave. And they are: 
Joshua Bekker of Regina Christian School; Paulette Belisle of 
Ecole St. Pius X in Regina; Ed Bourassa, the regional 
superintendent of curriculum and instruction, Melfort; Donna 
Dreher of Delisle Elementary; Tracey Ellis of Davidson High 
School; Renato Franchetto of Burstall School; Tony 
Hamilton-Irving of Hazlet School; Mark Hughes, College Park 
School, Saskatoon; Candace Jenson, École College Park, 
Saskatoon; Lisa Kraemer, Kennedy Langbank School in 
Kennedy; Michael Laskowski, St. Alphonsus Elementary 
School in Yorkton; Dave Little, Valley Manor School, 
Martensville; Andrew Longstaff, Gladmar Regional; Gordon 
Manz, Brunswick School in Melfort; Kenneth Marland, Buena 
Vista School, Saskatoon; Joe Meehan, John Paul II Collegiate 
in North Battleford; Larry Mikulcik, William Derby School in 
Strasbourg; Michael Roszell, Wynyard Composite High School; 
Christopher Shabatoski, Holy Rosary High School in 
Lloydminster; Charlotte Shoemaker, Kipling School; Catherine 
Smith, Naicam School; Sherry Stadnyk, North Battleford 
Comprehensive High School; Bernard Staszczak, Punnichy 
Community High School; Victor Stevenson, Elsie Mironuck 
School in Regina; Ted Weir, Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, 
Regina; Genevieve Wood, Vincent Massey School in 
Saskatoon. 
 
I want to make special mention of the steering committee and 
department officials. On the steering committee are: Trudy 
Betthel from Prairie Heights School in Oxbow; Mary Anne 
Hovdebo, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) Woodland Campus in Prince Albert; and 
Marea Olafson, Eston Composite High School. And from 
Saskatchewan Learning: Armand Martin, Ray Robertson, Gail 
Saunders, Anna Schmidt, and Brent Toles. 
 
This group of educators will meet with MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), caucus, and Executive Council staff, 
and government officials, and members of the media to learn 
about how our system of democracy works. And when they 
return to their classrooms, they will be better able to help their 
students and their fellow educators to understand the 
parliamentary democracy. 
 
So, members, would you please welcome the SSTI 
(Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy) 2003 delegation. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with you in welcoming the 25 social studies teachers, the 
department officials, and the steering committee who are here 
from various communities, as you mentioned, all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They’re here to learn about the legislative process and the 
day-to-day functioning of the legislature while it’s in session. 
These teachers have had the opportunity to meet with people 
such as elected officials, the legislative Clerk, and members of 
the media. And they’ve learned what goes into the preparation 
of an ordinary day at the legislature while the House is in 
session. 
 
As Minister of Learning, I had an opportunity to spend some 
time with the group over lunch hour and we shared a hot wasabi 
mustard salad dressing experience. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all appreciate the important role teachers 
place in our society. As Minister of Learning, I fully appreciate 
the influence teachers have on young people and the broader 
influence they have as role models within our communities. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in wishing the teachers 
attending this Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute an informative 
and enjoyable learning experience. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, I would like to join on behalf 
of the official opposition in welcoming the SSTI teachers here. 
I’m sure your time here spent so far has been very informative 
and I know the next hour will be more so. 
 
We congratulate you and we thank you for your commitment to 
your students and to the province, and have a great time here for 
the rest of your institute. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

World Health Day 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is World Health Day and the theme this year is Healthy 
Environments for Children. 
 
Every year over 5 million children die worldwide because of 
unsafe water, diseases caused by air pollution and tobacco 
smoke, and hazardous chemicals in their environment. These 
deaths can be prevented and governments around the world 
must make every effort to ensure safe and healthy environments 
in our homes, our schools, and in our communities. Poverty, 
poor sanitation and hygiene, and poor housing contribute to 
unhealthy environments and disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every child deserves to grow up in a healthy 
home, be educated in a healthy school, and play in a healthy 
and safe community. Healthy public policies are critical in 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

 

order to provide healthy environments where children live, 
learn, and play. To safeguard the health of our children and all 
the citizens of our province, we must continue to take every 
measure to educate our citizens and reduce the environmental 
risks to have a healthy province and healthy children. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Closes Tax Gap with Alberta 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. The headline reads, “Saskatchewan closes a tax 
gap with Alberta.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago, after two terms of right-wing 
mismanagement, the provincial taxes paid by Alberta residents 
compared to those paid by Saskatchewan residents was $1,749 
less for Albertans. 
 
Well I’m pleased to say that over the last decade this 
government, through sound and responsible financial 
management, has reduced the so-called Alberta advantage by 
over $1,000, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, if other charges 
such as auto insurance premiums and utility rates are included, 
the Alberta advantage disappears completely and becomes the 
Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been lowering 
taxes over the last decade, and during the last three years we 
have made dramatic reductions. For example, Mr. Speaker, a 
family of four earning $50,000 a year has had a 37 per cent 
reduction in personal income tax. And, Mr. Speaker, that same 
family has seen its provincial income tax burden fall from 
$4,000 in 1993 to $2,510 in 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is constantly yammering on about 
tax reduction. They apparently haven’t noticed that this 
government is already reducing them, Mr. Speaker, for the 
people of this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan 
College of Commerce Budgets 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday the Leader of 
the Opposition, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, and I had 
the pleasure of attending the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) College of Commerce’s budget 2003 
presentation. At this annual event, groups of students with the 
College of Commerce put together and deliver their alternative 
provincial budgets. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the students and 
the organizers of this highly beneficial event. Thank you as well 
to Dean Lynne Pearson and everyone at the College of 
Commerce. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a special note and congratulations to premier 

Ryan Plewis of Swift Current. He was the premier of a team 
called the Sask action party that was one of the successful 
teams, and he also was recognized as one of the most valuable 
members of his own team with another award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key to this exercise is that students must be 
grounded in reality when they’re preparing their budgets — no 
flights of fancy or smoke and mirrors are allowed. And the 
alternative budgets put forward, while different in their 
approaches somewhat, all stuck to the rule of being realistic and 
forthright. If only members opposite could follow the 
commerce students’ example. 
 
For instance, the growth projections in the budgets were all, 
they were all in the 3 per cent range, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear to 
me that had the Minister of Finance presented his provincial 
budget at the university event rather than in this Assembly, he 
would have gotten an F for producing such a work of fiction, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that it’s time for this Finance minister to 
go back to school. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Saskatchewan Learning 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
province has every reason to be very proud of our teachers and 
all those who are involved in delivering quality education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Professional Journal for Education, Phi Delta Kappan, in a 
recent issue reports on a student assessment study done by the 
organization for economic development and co-operation in 31 
countries in the world. And the Professional Journal for 
Education says this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . the province of Saskatchewan is achieving better equity 
outcomes than any other province — and better than any of 
the other 31 countries in the OECD study. Saskatchewan, 
large in area and in its commitment to education, although 
small in population and resources, posted astonishing gains 
in reducing the gap between its poorest and best students 
. . . 

 
That’s a direct quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re continuing to build on that record. In 
the past year and a half we have doubled the number of 
pre-kindergarten spaces in this province. In the last two years, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve doubled the number of community school 
spaces in this province. Saskatchewan now has the lowest 
dropout rate, Mr. Speaker, in all of the Western provinces 
among high school students. And, Mr. Speaker, in 2003 every 
publicly funded Saskatchewan school will have access to 
high-speed Internet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

World Senior Women’s Curling Championship 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to take this opportunity to congratulate four ladies that 
either live in or are directly tied to the Indian Head-Milestone 
constituency. They are Nancy Kerr, Linda Burnham, Kenda 
Richards, and Gertie Pick. This foursome, better known as the 
Nancy Kerr rink, completed an 11-0 run on Sunday to capture 
the World Senior Women’s Curling Championship in 
Winnipeg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The victory is the third title won by 
Saskatchewan at the world level this year. Saskatchewan’s 
junior women and men teams swept the world championships in 
Switzerland last month. The win means Saskatchewan has won 
three out of the possible six world curling championships in 
2003, setting the stage for a clean sweep by Canada after this 
next weekend’s world championships men’s and women’s. 
 
Kerr blew open the gold medal match with five in the third end. 
Kerr then ran the Morris rink out of rocks in the eighth to clinch 
the title. This is not the first time Nancy Kerr has been on a 
world championship rink. She was also a member of the Marj 
Mitchell rink from Regina that won the worlds . . . Canadian 
and worlds in 1980. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say these members are all from 
around the Indian Head-Milestone constituency, and I’ll be 
supplying another box of pins for them when they go on the 
2004 . . . road to the 2004 world championship. 
Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Forest Centre Building 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. This government has long recognized the value of 
Saskatchewan’s forest industry to what is becoming very much 
a diversified economy. The forest industry is Saskatchewan’s 
second largest manufacturing industry. It contributes more than 
$750 million annually to our provincial economy. 
 
There are approximately 300 forestry-related private sector 
enterprises in Saskatchewan and since 1999 more than 800,000 
new, direct, and indirect jobs have been created in this sector. 
 
The province, Mr. Speaker, is on track to meet and exceed its 
target of creating an additional 10,000 jobs through the 
increased sustainable use of our forests. That’s why I’m proud 
to acknowledge provincial funding of $4 million, which takes 
the Saskatchewan forestry centre’s brand new building in 
Prince Albert to the next stage of development. 
 
Prince Albert’s reputation as a hub for forestry activities and 
employment is getting a boost. Not only will the new 
Saskatchewan forestry centre be the cornerstone of the industry, 
wood products and innovations and technology transfer, it 
really will help to revitalize Prince Albert’s downtown and 
create new jobs. 
 

This new 75,000 square foot building will show that 
Saskatchewan’s wood products and new technologies can house 
a very vibrant and growing and building and developing 
forestry centre, and I want to congratulate all of those who have 
been part . . . have supported this government’s initiatives to 
make it happen. 
 

Regional Drama Festival 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on March 
27, 28, and 29, the Kennedy-Langbank School was a beehive of 
activity as the local drama club hosted the regional drama 
festival. Participating in the regional drama festival were 
students from high school drama clubs in Carlyle, Moosomin, 
Oxbow, Montmartre, Redvers, Estevan, and the host, 
Kennedy-Langbank Drama Club. 
 
Over the three days the students presented their dramas for 
adjudication, as well as participating in numerous workshops 
where they learned how to hone their acting prowess. After 
everything was said and done, the McNaughton High School 
production of The Teen Age received top honours. Estevan 
Comprehensive was runner-up with their performance of 
Double Income No Kids. 
 
Many special awards were also presented. Of note, in acting, 
Ezra Paul’s portrayal of Arthur, and Shayna Bourhis as bag 
lady, both of Kennedy-Langbank School, received recognition 
in excellence in character development and portrayal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the staff and students of Kennedy-Langbank High 
School did an excellent job in hosting this year’s regional 
drama festival. Congratulations on a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday the NDP were forced to admit it lost $6.2 million on a 
failed bingo scheme — $6.2 million down the drain. And the 
minister didn’t even know if the government had done any type 
of due diligence or had any type of business plan for this 
venture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $6.2 million of taxpayers’ money gone on another 
reckless NDP scheme that did not pan out. Mr. Speaker, will the 
minister table any sort of business plan or market research the 
NDP did before it decided to bet $6.2 million on its failed bingo 
scheme? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned to the 
member and when I’d indicated that there was a committee in 
advance of . . . what there was in fact was all the operators of 
the A bingo halls, together with numerous charities, that came 
to SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) — 
both hall operators and charities that benefit from bingo — that 
had come to the government in the early 1990s and asked if we 
might consider supporting link bingos. 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

 

So based on what was happening in other provinces, and 
particularly in Alberta where numerous people from this 
province were attracted to their operations, SLGA felt that yes, 
they would try and assist in supporting those 1,500 charities in 
our province that desperately need some help. And that was the 
decision that was based, based on what was happening in other 
places. The target set here was an increase of participation of 10 
per cent. Alberta was shooting at 15 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — There was no market research and there was 
no business plan. There was no due diligence. The NDP’s entire 
decision was based on the fact that mega bingo was operating in 
other provinces, but as it turns out it did not succeed in other 
provinces either. Mr. Speaker, was the $6.2 million spent on 
mega bingo approved by cabinet? And if so, how did cabinet 
approve risking $6.2 million without even a business plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the decision made at that 
time was based on the best information it had available. It was a 
management decision that was supported, and what in fact this 
is, is that SLGA interested in helping the charities that rely on 
bingo revenues. 
 
Alberta was experiencing a 15 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, 
linked with these kind of games. SLGA examined the Alberta 
experience and made a business case based on, as I mentioned, 
a 10 per cent growth. And there were some small communities 
throughout this province that did benefit and appreciated that 
link bingo; as a matter of fact my home community where their 
bingo hall paid out upwards of 50,000, 20,000 and $10,000 
jackpots as a result of this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — . . . taxpayers’ dollars and we have to assume 
that it was approved by cabinet. How on earth did cabinet 
approve risking $6.2 million on mega bingo without any due 
diligence or business plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, SLGA, at that time, made the 
modest projections of a 10 per cent increase in participation. 
Those are modest projections that would have seen the game 
pay for itself over a period of time and it would have been 
revenue neutral. When it did not meet its objectives, Mr. 
Speaker, the government chose to use the monies generated 
through other forms of gaming to defray the costs of this 
particular initiative rather than passing those costs on to our 
charities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — . . . by the NDP from day one and now he’s 
trying to say that somehow they helped charities by not making 
them pay for this $6.2 million failed scheme. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the problem is we cannot count on this minister to 
tell us the truth. On Friday the minister said mega bingo was 
requested by an advisory committee of bingo hall operators. It 
turns out that is not the case, Mr. Speaker. The advisory 
committee was set up after, after the NDP blew $6.2 million on 
the mega bingo scheme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP blow $6 million on mega bingo 
with absolutely no due diligence and without it even being 
initiated by the bingo industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I guess the member did not 
hear me because we were approached — SLGA was 
approached — by bingo hall operators and charities that said, 
we need your help. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We will 
not apologize for working with the bingo industries that works 
to attract new players and provide support to 1,500 charities 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I gather the members opposite certainly would not support our 
charities and organizations in this province. SLGA, Mr. 
Speaker, is very successful in regulating gaming and liquor 
sales to generate more than $300 million in revenue for public 
services each year, Mr. Speaker. As any business enterprise, 
some investments involve risk and do not succeed. Nobody 
likes to see that happen but you make an effort to help those 
people that need help. I don’t think they believe they would do 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, why didn’t this government just 
give the $6.2 million to charity instead of blowing it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same government — 
this government — that is lecturing us about charities when 
they’re the ones that in 1995 promised that they were going to 
give 10 per cent of VLT (video lottery terminal) revenue back 
to communities. And they never kept their promise. And they 
have the nerve to lecture us about charities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister advise this House if the cabinet 
approved this and if he as a minister approved this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m not sure where the member has been 
in the recent past but I was not there so that’s the answer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I indicated, the SLGA made a decision to support our 
charities in this province based on what was happening in other 
areas. And had that project been successful, it would have 
generated more money for the charities and, Mr. Speaker, it 
would have been revenue neutral. Unfortunately that failed. But 
with the profits that SLGA made through its diligent operation 
of liquor and gaming in this province, Mr. Speaker, we were 
able to offset that cost instead of putting it on to the backs of the 
charities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Liquor and gaming is to go to charities in this 
province and whether it comes from bingos or some other form 
of generation of revenue from liquor and gaming, it is still 
money lost to the people of this province and to charities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the weekend I spoke to bingo hall operators 
who told me mega bingo was not the industry’s idea, it was the 
government’s plan. They went along with this scheme because 
the government was telling them this would increase attendance 
at bingo halls. It turns out the NDP had no research to back up 
this claim; they had no business plan. They simply forced their 
mega bingo scheme on to business hall operators and wound up 
losing $6 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP blow these $6 million on mega 
bingo with no research to show how it would work? And why 
does the minister say bingo hall operators initiated this scheme? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that member has the 
documentation from those bingo hall operators, please table 
them because, because we had, we had bingo hall operators and 
charities, Madam Member — Mr. Speaker, to the member — 
that came to SLGA pleading and asking for help. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, we are not going to apologize 
for making an effort, a sincere effort, based on what was 
happening in other places, to support the bingo industry, to try 
that in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have no need to 
apologize for that. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Is . . . This did not help bingo hall operators; 
this did not help Saskatchewan charities to make more money. 
It hurt them. The problem was the overall number of bingo 
players did not increase; the amount being spent on bingo did 
not increase. The NDP mega scheme simply cannibalized 
existing bingo revenue so that most bingo halls and charities 
ended up losing money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again why did the NDP waste $6 million on mega 
bingo with no research and no business plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the decision was based on 
the best information it had available at that time. What this is, 
Mr. Speaker, once again SLGA was interested in helping 
charities that desperately rely on these bingo revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Alberta was experiencing a 15 per cent increase. We had 
projected a modest 10 per cent increase which would have in 
fact, would have in fact been revenue neutral and would had 
paid for itself in the long run. 
 
This was an effort to help our 1,500 charities. SLGA is very 
responsible in managing the $300 million that comes in for 
highways or hospitals and from that revenue, from that profit, I 
don’t think anybody in this province would deny us trying to 

make a small investment to support our charities throughout this 
great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is one more example of the 
NDP sticking its nose and taxpayers’ money somewhere where 
it did not belong. Twenty-eight million dollars on SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company); $29 
million lost on dot-coms in the United States; millions lost on 
the land titles debacle; millions more lost on cable companies 
and cellphones service in Australia; and now $6 million on 
bingo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it every time the NDP comes up with one 
of these schemes, it’s taxpayers who wind up in the jackpot? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does this NDP government keep sticking its 
nose where it doesn’t belong, and why did they blow $6 
million, and will the minister table his reports on the due 
diligence that he did? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again, as I 
mentioned, the SLGA generates more than $300 million each 
year to support public services such as highways and health, 
Mr. Speaker, and infrastructure. 
 
Although the revenues for bingos and for charities did not 
achieve its 10 per cent growth, Mr. Speaker, the target in 2000, 
bingos do average well over $20 million each year for 
non-profit groups — groups that obviously the members 
opposite would not support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is typical of this NDP 
government. Do they have any priorities over there? I’m sure 
the people of Saskatchewan, whose money this is, could find a 
whole lot better ways to spend $6.2 million than on a failed 
bingo scheme. 
 
What about waiting lists? What about purchase of CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scans, kidney dialysis, 
in-patient treatment centres that are badly needed in this 
province, new money for urban municipal governments, money 
for seniors services? 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead this government, on a hare-brained 
scheme, chose to spend $6.2 million on linking bingos, and 
losing all this taxpayers’ money. Mr. Speaker, what are the 
priorities of this government and did the minister and cabinet 
approve this expenditure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, SLGA did in fact 
examine the implementation of link bingo in Alberta. And 
SLGA looked at how Alberta’s bingo industry had thrived and 
how it was structured and how they were linked. And, Mr. 
Speaker, compared with their experience to Saskatchewan’s 
bingo industry and structure, it was determined that a linked 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

 

bingo game could be implemented in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, SLGA revenues funded that link bingo, providing $1.2 
million in development costs and another additional $5 million. 
And I do not believe that this coalition government has to 
apologize for supporting our charities. 
 
And when that member talks about the investments that are 
made, she fails to read that the provincial government has used 
Crown corporations as a vehicle for investment. In the period 
’92 to 2002, $1.012 billion, Mr. Speaker, has been invested and 
the return on that investment has been $2.26 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for College of Medicine 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
during the fall session of the legislature in December, I asked 
the Minister of Health about the difficulties facing the College 
of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan, which had been 
placed on probation and told they had two years to meet 
standards for accreditation. Yet the minister of Learning at the 
time jumped up and said he had met with officials at the 
university. He said, and I quote: 
 

I’ve have indicated to the president and to the public . . . 
(we will) be strongly supporting whatever initiatives are 
required to make sure we have a viable, sustainable College 
of Medicine in the province of Saskatchewan for years and 
years to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the minister of Learning then became the Minister 
of Finance. Yet in his first budget for the province, the College 
of Medicine was completely ignored, and no money has been 
allocated to help them begin to meet the accreditation 
requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister not follow through with his 
December commitment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as we discussed last week, 
we continue to support a strong and viable College of Medicine 
and we are working with our partners to address strategies that 
we need to put in place to meet those requirements that were 
put forward in the accreditation process. 
 
We have received the recommendations from the academic 
health sciences group and we will work together with them to 
put the money forward that is needed to address those 
recommendations in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, last week the minister 
indicated to the media that the college’s needs weren’t 
addressed in the budget because the request came in too late. 
However, the minister in the lead up to the budget 
announcement said the budget hadn’t been finalized until the 
last minute, and he had lots and lots of input into the document. 
And late Friday, department officials told the media that indeed 
the college’s preliminary requirements had been received by the 

NDP government at the end of February or very early in March. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
Learning and presumably the Minister of Health had a very 
good idea what the college would be needing to begin the 
process of meeting the accreditation demands. Why in the 
world did this Finance minister not include a commitment to the 
college in the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Last week’s paper quoted Mr. Coates, the 
vice-president of academics from the university, saying they 
don’t have a figure in mind, a dollar figure in mind. So that is 
why we are reviewing the recommendations and will work with 
them to address the recommendations and what’s needed to 
move those forward. 
 
The report was received from the Academic Health Sciences 
Board at the end of February and we are reviewing those 
recommendations. It is now the April 7. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
accreditation report indicated that it may cost something in the 
magnitude of 8 or $10 million to meet all the accreditation 
issues that are facing the College of Medicine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is no secret. In fact the Minister of Finance, 
when he was the minister of Learning, and was quoted in the 
press as saying he recognized that the College of Medicine had 
been underfunded by his NDP government for years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance is a 
graduate of the College of Medicine. He understands or should 
understand — and if he doesn’t he certainly needs to be told — 
that his College of Medicine is in danger of losing its 
accreditation and this province is in danger of losing its College 
of Medicine. 
 
Why in the world didn’t the Minister of Finance do something 
about it in the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you. We didn’t get the 
recommendations until the end of March . . . or the end of 
February, which puts it outside the budget process. So we are 
now reviewing those recommendations and I can assure the 
college, the university, the students, the medical students in this 
province, and the people of Saskatchewan that we will not see 
the College of Medicine leave this province. We will do 
everything we can to support it and sustain it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last week the Finance minister indicated he was 
prepared to use special warrants later this spring to finance the 
College of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan in order 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

for them to begin meeting their requirements for accreditation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the NDP government did receive the 
preliminary recommendations and funding request from the 
college and the University of Saskatchewan with enough time, 
with enough time to be included in this provincial budget, but 
for some reason the NDP chose to ignore it. The Minister of 
Learning just indicated that, in the very near future we’ll make 
some kind of announcements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are still in budget debate in this Legislative 
Assembly. The NDP could simply amend their budget to 
include an allocation for the College of Medicine. Why is the 
minister intending to use a special warrant for this purpose 
instead of the budget process underway at this time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the 
support of this government for the College of Medicine, it has 
been impressive. When we talk about the university funding 
mechanism which was clearly indicated to address some of the 
concerns in regard to research and the College of Medicine, we 
have preferentially provided additional dollars to the University 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talk about what are the needs of the College of 
Medicine, we have not yet got a dollar figure from the 
Academic Health Sciences Network with . . . which this 
government created, which was one of the points that the 
accreditation committee said was moving forward. They were 
very happy to see the Academic Health Sciences Network 
created. They’ve made a recommendation. We have not yet 
looked at the numbers in terms of the recommendation to 
address the library concerns or the concerns with regard to 
faculty. As soon as we have that information, we will bring that 
forward. Right now we don’t have a number to put into our 
budget estimates because we haven’t got that number, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know this 
government continues to procrastinate and to say, it’s going to 
occur in the future. In the meantime, in the meantime, we lose 
our young people who no longer want to remain in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the use of special warrants are usually for 
emergency spending that comes up well after the annual budget 
for the province has passed. This situation is different. The 
province knew about the college’s needs. They knew the time 
frame needed to work under but still they chose to ignore this 
priority in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this move to use special warrant spending by the 
NDP, even before their own budget process is complete, is a big 
concern because the minister is indicating to taxpayers that he is 
prepared to circumvent the budgetary process and increase the 
deficit and debt of the province even further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we will be debating the first interim supply 
Bill to finance the government’s new spending plans. Why 

doesn’t the minister just amend their . . . the budget and include 
support for the College of Medicine to the interim supply Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this is the ludicrousity 
of the members opposite. Here we have a Finance critic who 
says we should put a number in when we don’t even know what 
the number is. Is it 4 million? Is it 8 million? Is it 10 million? 
We don’t know that number, Mr. Speaker. And this man has the 
gall to get on his feet and say, put some money in. Well we 
can’t put money in until we know what the dollars are, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government respects the process. It respects the fact that 
when we’re going to have a program or we’re going to have an 
item, we need to have a dollar figure attached and we just don’t 
float numbers out there until we know the numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister talks 
about, floating numbers don’t mean a whole lot. Six point eight 
per cent growth versus the whole world? Mr. Speaker, that’s 
ludicrous, that’s ludicrous. 
 
You know the other thing that’s ludicrous is that the NDP 
continue to spend outside of the budget — the international 
hockey championship bid, the loan for the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders— and now the suggestion by the minister that 
support for the College of Medicine will be allocated the same 
way, outside . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
spending outside the budget is going to get this province into 
huge difficulties. Special warrant spending is intended for 
emergencies, not for massive spending outside of the budget 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has just tabled a budget that has 
not even been passed by this Legislative Assembly. It’s 
supposed to show the people of the province the government’s 
complete financial plan of the year. Yet the minister and the 
NDP are already announcing spending outside of it. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker: will the minister tell this Assembly 
how much special warrant spending outside of the provincial 
budget the minister and the NDP government have planned for 
this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We all know the linkages of the 
members opposite to the Devine Tories. We all know that that 
administration did not even have a Treasury Board meeting for 
some two years. They would not present budgets to this 
Legislative Assembly. And here we have a member who wants 
us to put numbers in before we even know what the numbers 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

 

are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I tell you this is also the same group that in the last 
election said, no spending for health care; no funding for the 
College of Medicine; no funding for education. And that was a 
double whammy on training in this province because you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? We wouldn’t have a College of Medicine if 
those guys were in government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 9 – The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2003 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 9, The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please, members. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 – The Saskatchewan 4-H 
Foundation Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 10, The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Amendment Act, 
2003 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 – The Municipal Employees’ 
Pension Amendment Act, 2003 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, 
The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there is a long-standing 
tradition in this House, and in all Houses, that debate in this 
House should be on subjects and matters that are before us and 
not on personal attacks. Mr. Speaker, it is also a long-standing 
tradition that it is unacceptable in this House to accuse another 
member of being intentionally misleading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard very clearly in her third question to the 
House in question period, the hon. member for Weyburn, in 
referring to the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, use these words: 

. . . we cannot count on this minister to tell us the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that there . . . I would 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that that was a statement that is 
clearly, clearly intended to challenge the integrity of the 
minister and to accuse the minister of misleading the House 
 
There may be the argument made that it’s indirect but we all 
know as well, Mr. Speaker, that members cannot do indirectly 
what the rules do not permit them to do directly. I would ask, 
Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member would rise in her place, 
withdraw that remark, and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
under Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, rule 491, it states: 
 

The Speaker has consistently ruled that language used in 
the House should be temperate and worthy of the place in 
which it is spoken. No language is, by virtue of any list, 
acceptable or unacceptable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from Saturday’s paper, April 5, 
on an article, headline reads: 
 

Opponents slam bingo ‘boondoggle’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, it says and I quote: 
 

The Opposition Saskatchewan Party first raised the botched 
bingo attempt in Friday’s question period . . . (when) MLA 
Brenda Bakken asked if the province had done due 
diligence or put together a business plan before getting into 
the bingo business. 
 
No one was able to answer that question. 
 
Ron Osika, minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority . . . didn’t know if the province had done due 
diligence or made a business plan before launching mega 
bingo. 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member, would he please 
stick to the point of order or get to the point. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am and I 
will. I’ll carry on with the quotation: 
 

He did say there was an advisory committee established 
prior to the project and the committee thought mega bingo 
. . . (was) a good idea. 
 
SLGA spokesperson Lisa Ann Wood said that was 
actually not the case. 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
The member is entering into a debate on a point of order and 
providing debating . . . debating other issues other than the 
point of order. So I find that . . . Order, please. So I’ve given the 
member an opportunity to link it but he has not, so I will take 
any others who might want to comment on the point of order. 
Otherwise I will rule on the point of order. 
 
Why is the member from Indian Head-Milestone on his feet? 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, to speak to the point of order. 
 
It goes on to say here: 
 

(Only after) The government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. If the member wishes to 
speak to the point of order, he would speak to the point of order, 
please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — It’s clearly that the committee was struck 
after when the minister said it was. It was misleading the House 
for him to say that it was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Once again, members . . . Order, 
please. Once again what I’m finding here, members, is that the 
member’s raised a point of order with respect to use of language 
and parliamentary processes, and the response is a matter of 
debate. Which is quite fine for this House, but it’s not to be 
done during the time of a point of order. 
 
I clearly also did hear the member’s statement when it was 
made. I did not want to interrupt the flow of question period at 
the time. One of the guidelines that a Speaker has to use during 
. . . on items like this is a judgment call with respect to 
precedences, and the other is whether or not people that are 
involved actually are offended by it. And clearly in this case 
members were offended. 
 
I would rule on this that what a member has done is used, by 
implication and indirect way, of what she did not do directly — 
and that is not use language that is unparliamentary directly, but 
the implication was quite clear indirectly. And furthermore, that 
the issue in the question period or any other debate should be 
issues of substance against policy, rather than on personal 
matters. 
 
And I find that over the last while, particularly in some cases 
even off the record, that members have been personal. I would 
ask — far too personal — I would ask members to respect each 
other with respect to keeping personalities out of the debate to 
the extent that they can. 
 
I would simply ask at this stage that the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy arise and withdraw the statement. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to withdraw my 
statement and apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member and we will continue with 
orders of the day. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 38 through 49 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 38 to 49 have been 
submitted. 
 

(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate right is Ron Styles, deputy minister of Finance. To 
his right is Kirk McGregor, assistant deputy minister, taxation 
and intergovernmental affairs. Directly behind Kirk is Dennis 
Polowyk, assistant deputy minister, treasury and debt 
management division; and directly behind me is Glen Veikle, 
assistant deputy minister, treasury board branch; and to his right 
is Joanne Brockman, executive director, economic and fiscal 
policy; and just behind Joanne is Jim Nelson, director, audit 
branch revenue division. These are the officials from the 
Department of Finance that are with us today, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, before I move the resolution I would like to 
note a small change to the interim supply request as compared 
to previous years. Interim supplies over the past three years 
have requested two-twelfths of the amount to be voted within 
the estimates. In addition to requesting the two-twelfths, this 
supply Bill requests an additional amount for the Department of 
Learning and an additional amount for the Department of Ag, 
Food and Rural Revitalization. 
 
The additional 17 million for the Department of Learning will 
address the issue of funding for school boards who operate on a 
10-month basis and the proposed supply Bill will eliminate 
school board concerns that were raised last year. 
 
The additional funds for the Department of Ag, Food and Rural 
Revitalization will fund loans under the 2002 short-term hog 
loan program. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I would like to move resolution no. 1: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $991.941 million be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 2004. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’ll get to that 
question sometimes today, I hope. 
 
I’d like to welcome the minister’s assistants, as far as the people 
that are here to provide the minister with some information and 
help us to understand, not only the official opposition but the 
people of Saskatchewan, as we move into interim supply. I’m 
sure there are many people wondering what that really means 
and what is the minister referring to when he talks about 
two-twelfths and the reason for this Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d ask that you would explain to the people 
of Saskatchewan why you have chosen two-twelfths in one case 
for the spending that is required by the various departments and 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

 

what this will mean to the people of Saskatchewan regarding 
the ability to make payments and the like. Please give that 
explanation to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think that we all 
know that we’re just starting into the Committee of Finance and 
that there will considerable discussion on the overall estimates 
of government. And of course these overall estimates will be 
voted off and that is the full budget number. 
 
What this interim supply Bill does is it allows the government 
to pay out to third party organizations, dollars right now, that 
are coming payable, until the budgetary estimates are eventually 
voted off. So this is . . . what it is, is an opportunity to allow the 
government to pay the bills that will be coming due to 
government in the very near term and to provide those 
additional dollars as a proportion, which is basically one-sixth 
of the overall budget estimates, so that those bills can be paid 
until the final estimates are voted off, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chair, to the minister, you also have indicated that statutory 
amounts of course are not being voted on. Could you explain to 
the people of Saskatchewan exactly what is meant by statutory 
amounts and why we don’t have actual votes taking place on 
those things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, the interim supply 
vote does minus off the statutory amounts, because the statutory 
amounts are dollar figures that are actually included in 
legislation and as such have already been approved to be paid. 
So the statutory amounts basically are taken off the interim 
supply because they are already covered off by the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Good. Thank you very much for those 
explanations, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in preparing your budget obviously we’re looking 
at an expenditure of one-sixth of the budget for the next two 
months. We’re also looking, of course, as revenue. And 
government has identified many sources as to where their 
revenue will be obtained throughout the course of this fiscal 
year. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn your attention to the Budget 
Summary document, if I could. On page 19, when you indicate 
in your opening paragraph and I’d like to enter this into the 
record by reading that it says: 
 

Gross domestic product (GDP) measures the production or 
output of an economy. Nominal GDP is based on market 
prices that include inflation. It measures the value of 
production of an economy. Real GDP removes that 
inflationary component to measure the volume of 
production of an economy. 

 
With that introductory paragraph could you explain in, probably 
I would refer maybe to layman’s terms, what is meant between 
nominal GDP and real GDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member 
opposite, nominal GDP is the growth in the economy that 

would include inflationary pressures. And what real GDP does 
is it actually measures the growth of an economy minus the 
obvious changes in inflation. 
 
So when we talk about real GDP, we’re actually referring to 
1997 dollars. So nominal GDP generally is a higher figure than 
real GDP and it depends on the base year in terms of . . . And 
those base years change from time to time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, that’s 
how I understood it, that in fact when you would look at 
nominal GDP and you would have inflation built into it and we 
know we are in an inflationary rate somewhere in that 2 to 3 per 
cent and if you subtracted that inflation from nominal, we 
would end up with a real GDP number that probably was 
slightly different. 
 
Now if I could ask you to look at page 22, when you have a 
chart that you’ve prepared for the people of Saskatchewan 
called the economic outlook for Saskatchewan and I’d ask you 
to look at the two columns headed by the years 2003, 2004. 
 
Now if we followed your explanation or your definition of what 
you just said, in 2003 you have listed that the nominal GDP will 
be 5.2 — an extremely high number in comparison to the rest of 
the numbers for previous years. And you indicate that the real 
GDP is 6.8, in fact a higher number than the nominal rate. Then 
in 2004 your chart does the very same thing. It has a nominal 
GDP of 2.3 and a real GDP of 3.5. Now in 2005 your numbers 
sort of match the definition that you gave us — 3.3 for a 
nominal rate and 2.4 for a real GDP rate. 
 
Could you tell us what is happening between, in fact, 2002 
when you indeed show that we had a negative real GDP of 
negative 1.4 and a nominal of 2.5? In each case we have two 
years where the real GDP number is smaller than the nominal, 
and in two years it’s larger. Could you explain for the people of 
Saskatchewan how your department has arrived at these 
numbers, the kinds of analysis that went on to produce these 
kinds of numbers, for all four years, if you would? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, first off the 2003 
price assumptions for Saskatchewan’s principal commodities 
are all lower than the 2002 actual average prices, with the 
exception of natural gas. Now, for example, average oil prices 
in 2003 are actually expected to be more than 4 per cent lower 
than they were in 2002.  
 
And on page 20 of the budget summary document there is, if I 
refer the member to page 20, presents the price assumptions for 
wheat, barley, canola, oil, natural gas, and potash.  
 
And if he looks at the numbers carefully he will notice that the 
difference for wheat, for example, from 2002 to 2003, is 170 to 
169.84, and that’s Canadian dollars per tonne. In 2004 it will 
further drop to 168.52, and 2005, 172.95. And same with 
barley: 152 to 147 to 141 to 142 — that’s 2002 to 2005. And 
canola 375 to 367. WTI (West Texas Intermediate) oil, 26 to 25 
to 24 to 24. Natural gas is the one that does go up, 3.78 to 4.25, 
and then drops back to 3.75. And potash we’re projecting at 209 
to 201 to 196 to 198. 
 
So the difference is basically on price assumptions for principal 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

commodities and that’s why the difference is there. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But, Mr. Minister, 
it still doesn’t explain your definition that you gave us when 
you said that nominal GDP contains inflation. Real GDP is 
GDP minus that inflation. So in all cases we’re sort of looking 
at what you’ve produced here and saying, if you’ve got a 
number that contains inflation and you subtract out that 
inflation, we should have a smaller number. 
 
Are you suggesting that maybe we’re in a deflationary kind of 
mode that we had in the ’70s where we didn’t see, in fact see 
massive inflation rates and then a deflation situation? Because 
the two years just don’t add up. 
 
So could you explain how your definition that you gave to this 
House, how the paragraph that you have included in your 
budget summary that talks about nominal GDP being a larger 
number than the real GDP, how does that fit with the fact that 
you’ve now reversed those two numbers for the years 2003 and 
2004? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, there’s a little 
difference in terms of the concepts involved here. When we talk 
about inflationary in the usual context of the consumer bag that 
most people would talk about and what’s reported widely in the 
media, that’s what, when we talk before the adjustment, we’re 
talking specifically with regard to that. 
 
When we talk about the, as the member noted, with regard to 
these specific commodities which are very important to the 
Saskatchewan economy, that we are predicting some 
deflationary type things, lack of growth in those areas. 
 
So we’re really not comparing apples to apples. We’re making 
an adjustment on the consumer price index, which is the 
inflation that we talk about and what is adjusted in terms of the 
1997 dollars. But we are seeing differences with regard to the 
commodities that we’ve itemized out on page 20. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Wow, okay we 
understand what you’re referring to as far as the consumer price 
index. There still is a great concern by people when they look at 
your projections because there are not massive declines. 
 
I know you’ve made reference . . . And I’ll just use your wheat 
chart that you have for the price of wheat per tonne, $170 to 
169.84 — that’s 16 cents per tonne. That’s like a third of a cent 
per bushel. I mean that’s not significant numbers at all — 
dropping to $168.52 in 2004. That’s a little over $1.30, 
probably like 3 cents a bushel. So these are not massive 
amounts, Mr. Speaker . . . I mean, Mr. Minister. There are not 
the significant changes that you indicate for the drastic change 
from real GDP to nominal GDP. Those numbers just don’t seem 
to add up. 
 
Could you explain to the people how those very insignificant 
changes in the prices that you’ve used, how they can make 
those kinds of huge changes in the GDP? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, there’s two things 

to consider. The values of the commodities in 2002, we’re 
seeing a decrease in 2003 but we had some significant negative 
volumes in 2002. 
 
So there’s two factors to consider in here — the commodity 
prices and the volumes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, we’ll . . . I guess, Mr. Minister, we’ll 
agree to disagree on that one. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s take a look at your growth projections of 6.8. 
And I know you’ve identified that in your preparation of this 
document you are using reduced prices from 2002 to 2003 for 
wheat, for barley, for canola, for oil, for natural . . . No, sorry. 
Natural gas is up a little bit and potash is down. 
 
So in all cases you’ve used a rate or a value for a particular 
product. Whether it be a tonne of grain or a barrel of oil, you’ve 
used a smaller number. Yet you say that we’re going to have 
6.8 per cent growth. More than double the growth of all of 
Canada obviously and in more than one sector than just 
agriculture. How can you . . . How do you produce a number of 
6.8 per cent growth when you’re indicating that the values of all 
the products that’s used . . . that you used to calculate the kind 
of return for the province of Saskatchewan, are going down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, the answer is 
simple again. It’s the volume. 
 
Last year we only had 14.1 million tonnes and we’re projecting 
that to grow into the 24, 25 million tonne range. So even though 
the commodity prices may have dropped off, we’re looking at a 
significant increase in the volumes. 
 
And the assumptions with regard to real GDP as outlined 
previously are based on returns to a normal or an average crop. 
So with a jump from 14 million tonnes to 25 million tonnes, the 
real GDP growth will be realized. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, in the calculation of your 
revenue amounts for the various components, you’re projecting 
for oil a significant decline in the amount of revenue. So we’re 
dropping by well over $300 million. You’re projecting a drop in 
potash revenue. You’re in fact projecting a drop in natural gas 
revenue from the end . . . forecasts of March 31, 2003, Mr. 
Minister. I want to clarify that. This is not in comparison to 
your estimate amounts. This is in comparison to what you have 
forecast as your concluding revenue sources for March 31, 
2003. Those have all declined in the amount of dollars that you 
expect, yet you’re saying that there is a 6.8 per cent growth. 
How does that balance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member 
opposite does point out that we are forecasting lower revenues 
in those specific areas. And I think the important thing to 
recognize here is there is no direct correlation between real 
GDP growth and the revenue projections of government. 
 
Part of this is related to equalization check offs. Part of it is 
related to issues within the sector economics that apply to these 
various numbers. So the reality is, there is no direct correlation 
between the 6.8 per cent and the revenue projections. 
 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

 

And I would point out that last year, with the volatility that we 
experienced in the economy last year, that there is a clear 
example of how it works in Saskatchewan. We had a minus 1.4 
per cent in real GDP and yet the revenues of government were 
up $310 million. 
 
So that’s just an example of why the 6.8 per cent and the 
revenue projections for those commodity sectors would appear 
to differ. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there 
are many sectors that contribute to the GDP for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a tremendous forestry area, we have a mining area, we 
have agriculture, we have production of natural resources, the 
kinds of things that lead to the complete GDP. 
 
Which sectors, Mr. Minister, lead — and I know you wouldn’t 
have access to all of those as far as what percentage they 
contribute to the GDP but — what are the top two or three or 
four sectors that contribute the largest to Saskatchewan’s GDP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think of the many 
economic sectors, the top three would be the service sector, 
number one; the resource sector, number two; and the 
agricultural sector, number three, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
another question connected to GDP. What do your officials 
estimate agriculture to contribute to the GDP in terms of a 
percentage? You’ve mentioned it’s probably number three in 
order. What amount does it contribute to the GDP in total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — For 2003, Mr. Chair, we’re 
predicting agriculture to contribute approximately 9 per cent to 
the GDP. Last year, 2002, was more in the 6 to 6.5 per cent 
range. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, then if . . . And I’ve heard you 
in the House and other members of your cabinet indicate that 
your projection of 6.8 per cent growth is based on the fact that 
there was a tough year in agriculture for the last couple of years 
and quantity is down, and we know that. When we talk to 
farmers, especially on the west side of the province, their bins 
aren’t very full right now — in fact, they might be pretty empty. 
So as a result there isn’t the tonnage that we’ve expected. 
 
But yet you indicate that the agriculture sector is only going to 
contribute about 9 per cent to the overall GDP. So if we’re 
going to see even a return to a normal crop year — I think is the 
words that you used in the Assembly, Mr. Minister — if we see 
a normal crop year, we still may only see 9 per cent 
contribution for GDP. How are we going to get a 6.8 per cent 
growth to all of Saskatchewan if agriculture is only going to be 
contributing that small percentage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, the simple answer, Mr. Chair, 
is because the volumes in crop production is increasing 82 per 
cent on our forecast, and that’s the simple answer. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll see 
how an 82 per cent growth in tonnage, which normally means 9 

per cent of GDP, is going to move GDP from negative 1.4 to 
6.8. That’ll be interesting I guess, as we move along, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But let’s turn to a couple of other areas, Mr. Minister. I know 
there are many of my colleagues who would like to ask you 
some questions related to their areas but I still have a number. 
 
Mr. Minister, on page 22, again of your Budget Summary 
document, your officials have included a chart called the 
Saskatchewan real GDP. And you use the number for 2002 of 
30.5. 
 
Mr. Minister, I heard you in this House read numbers from 
various financial institutions that were projecting the GDP 
growth in the province of Saskatchewan. Three of the numbers 
that you read were that the GDP for 2002 that those institutions 
were using was 31.5 in two cases and in one case it was 31.6. 
Your chart indicates that that number is 30.5. So either the 
financial institutions have used the wrong number for the last 
year or your officials or yourself has used the wrong number. 
 
Could you clarify the difference why we see in the papers a 
number of 31.5 as the GDP for last year and in your document a 
number of 30.5? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, there’s only two 
forecasting groups right now that have tagged 2002 real GDP in 
Saskatchewan at 30.5 and that’s the Department of Finance here 
and the Conference Board of Canada. 
 
The other forecasters in their preliminary forecasts have all 
indicated real GDP higher than 30.5, but we’re expecting an 
adjustment from many of those forecasters later as we get into 
late April, May, and perhaps as late as late May before the 
adjustments are made. 
 
So as it currently stands, there are only two groups that have 
forecast the dip in our economy to the extent that we have and 
that’s ourselves and of course the Conference Board of Canada. 
We’re expecting that the other forecasters will be making their 
adjustments within the next one to two months. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, the forecasters that have used 
the 31.5 number have indicated that they feel that GDP will 
grow to 32.5 which fits into that 3 per cent growth. 
 
If you use your number of 30.5, you’re projecting that it will 
grow from 30.5 to 32.5, double what all of the other projections 
are. Because it doesn’t matter whether you use 31.5 to a 32.5, I 
would believe that as we would have the projections reassessed 
by the various firms — and your suggestion is that the 31.5 is 
not accurate that they’ve used, that in fact 30.5 is accurate — 
will you see a reduction in their numbers more so to still stay at 
a 3 per cent growth rate? 
 
Your numbers are into that almost 7 per cent growth rate which 
doesn’t match with anyone else in the country, which doesn’t 
match with the province of Alberta. And I note that you 
indicated or one of your members indicated that it was great 
that Saskatchewan was second to Alberta and I note that 
Alberta has just used the GDP growth rate for 2003 of 4.1 per 
cent. 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

So we have some situations that the people of Saskatchewan 
can’t quite understand. You’ve used a number of 30.5 to get to 
a number of 32.5. That is a 7 per cent growth rate but if your 
initial number of 30.5 is wrong, as some of the other institutions 
are suggesting, a growth rate of only 1 from 31.5 to 32.5 is still 
only a 3 per cent growth rate. So how do you relate those two 
numbers, Mr. Minister? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I think the simple answer 
is that most of the private forecasters have not incorporated the 
fact that the volume of production in Saskatchewan in 2002 
dropped to 14.1 million tons. That’s the simple reality. 
 
Our projections of 6.8 per cent, I think . . . And I will quote 
from the BMO Financial Group Special Report March 28, 2003, 
and what it says here and I’ll quote: 
 

There are two reasons for this large difference of opinion. 
First, private sector forecasters estimate 2002 real GDP 
growth at +1.3%, while the government puts the figure at 
-1.4%, a difference of 2.7 percentage points. Thus, over the 
two years 2002 and 2003, private sector forecasters have 
growth averaging 2.2%, while the government has it 
averaging 2.7% — a much more reasonable difference of 
opinion. (and) 
 
Second, the government is assuming a return to average 
crop production in the 2003 growing season, while a 
number of private forecasters are not as optimistic. For 
2004, the government and the private sector are in the same 
ballpark, with the government projecting real GDP growth 
of 3.5% and the private sector at 3.3%. 

 
So the reality is that there’s two factors involved here, Mr. 
Chair. There’s the base level with regard to real GDP. Most of 
the other private forecasters haven’t factored in the reality of the 
actual volume of production on our commodity and that’s 
where the difference on the base occurs. 
 
And the Conference Board of Canada, which has already 
assumed the same base as we have of 30.5, are only projecting a 
one-third return to normal crop whereas we’re predicting a 
return to a full recovery. 
 
So that’s the difference. The numbers are really . . . it’s based 
on forecasts and estimates. And the other forecasters, the 
private forecasters, once they’ve made the adjustment for the 
volume of production in 2002 and if they were to assume a 
normal crop year, their numbers would come out exactly the 
same as ours because the models aren’t that much different, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, let’s 
turn to another area, which is the province’s debt. And if I could 
refer you to page 49 of your Budget Summary document. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Public Accounts Committee and I think this 
Legislative Assembly relies on the information produced by the 
Provincial Auditor’s office. 
 
On page 49 you indicate, or this document indicates that the 

combined debt of the Crown corporations and government for a 
number of years — and you show 1994 and 2002, ’03, ’04, and 
’05 — you indicate that in 1994 the combined debt, the overall 
debt of the province of Saskatchewan was $14.9 billion. In 
2002 it’s 11.4 billion, and in 2003 we’re projected to be at 11.7 
based on your summary for March 31 that just ended. Mr. 
Minister, I believe one of your officials has the document with 
him. 
 
Understanding the finances of the government — I’m sure that 
Mr. Styles knew that I would be asking these questions — that 
indeed on page 34, the chart that is there indicates the overall 
debt of the province of Saskatchewan from 1991 to 2002. And I 
note, Mr. Speaker, that the year 2002, the Provincial Auditor 
indicates 11.4 billion which matches the 11.4 billion that you 
have in your chart. 
 
But when I go back to the year 1994, your chart indicates 14.9 
billion and the Provincial Auditor’s chart indicates 14.2. So 
either there is a difference in how GDP is defined or . . . I’m 
sorry, how the liabilities of the government are defined because 
we’ve relied on the numbers, this Assembly has relied on the 
numbers of the Provincial Auditor. We’ve had this chart in our 
hands for years. 
 
Could you explain why the Provincial Auditor’s indicating that 
the overall liability of the Crown corporation and the 
government debt in 1994 was 14.2 billion, and your chart 
indicates $14.9 billion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, my officials tell me 
that they don’t have the detail of the breakdown of that 
information here with us. The question from the member 
opposite is that in 1994 there is a difference between what the 
Finance officials have put forward as the overall Crown and 
government debt of 14.9 billion at that time, and what has been 
stated in the Public Accounts which is 14.2 billion. 
 
And so what we’ll need to do is find out the breakdown of the 
aggregates and how that would net out then; what’s included in 
our number that isn’t included in the Provincial Auditor . . . But 
we’ll get that information to the members opposite, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d 
also encourage your officials . . . as I pointed out to you, that 
2002, the 11.4 matches with what the Provincial Auditor has 
said. It’s 11.4, your document says it’s 11.4. So somewhere 
there’s either some confusing numbers from 1994 in the 
Provincial Auditor’s document or in your document. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government over the last number of years, 
and I want to, I indeed want to congratulate the former Finance 
minister for moving to quarterly reports. And we’ve seen 
quarterly reports that is I think much more beneficial to the 
people of Saskatchewan to understand the financial picture, the 
overall picture of the province as we move forward, to see those 
quarterly reports. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to make reference to the third quarter 
report. And I would not be surprised if you don’t have that with 
you, or maybe one of your officials is going to have it . . . and 
she does, that’s excellent. 
 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

 

Mr. Minister, the third quarter report suggested on the revenue 
side — and I think we were looking forward to a debt and we 
were looking forward to a lot of change in the overall picture — 
it forecasted that the third quarter report for, and I’ll use the 
number of the tax, the overall taxes of $3.381 billion, okay? 
 
Then when you produce your budget document the numbers 
have changed significantly. In the non-renewable resources it 
changes. In fact it even changes in the transfers from the federal 
government overall. 
 
When the people of Saskatchewan and businesses and all and 
everyone who looks at the third quarter report to get an 
understanding of the overall financial picture of the province 
sees that a short three months later the numbers were really out, 
they weren’t that close, that leads one to question whether or 
not the numbers that were given when the third quarter report 
was released, what they had to do with reality because we see 
such a tremendous change. 
 
We knew the price of a barrel of oil. We heard the former 
Finance minister talk about that. We knew that there were 
discussions going on with all the tax situations. 
 
Could you explain how the third quarter report missed the mark 
as far as its projections when we look at the final report that 
you’ve indicated is there for March 31 of 2003? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, the question from, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, from the member opposite is why the big 
change from the third quarter report to the actual budget 
documents. 
 
First off, when the third quarter report was filed, there hadn’t 
been a whole lot of new revenue numbers compared to 
mid-term. February, we received the adjustment from the 
federal government with regard to the mining tax base. And I’m 
sure the member opposite is aware that originally the October 
numbers that we had, September, October numbers we got from 
the federal government had talked about a clawback of 300 
million in equalization based on that mining tax base. 
 
Now the change that was, the concession made by the federal 
government at that time was that instead of using the 1999 
mining tax base as the base year, they used the forecast from 
2000. That resulted in the provincial government receiving 150 
million back at that point, which is . . . which was a substantive 
amount compared to what we’d included in the third quarter 
forecast. 
 
We also received the spikes or the so-called war premium on oil 
and gas. Those numbers became available in January, February; 
and also the corporate income tax, the personal income tax, the 
numbers on equalization, and the CHST (Canada Health and 
Social Transfer) numbers came out in February from the federal 
budget. 
 
So we don’t get those numbers . . . we only get those numbers 
twice a year. Those numbers were provided in February and 
were, all of these were then incorporated into the revenue 
projections that brought the budget together at this point in 
time, Mr. Chair. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, as I understand equalization and how it works, is as 
our revenues grow — especially in certain sectors, oil and gas 
being one of the sectors — basically we contribute or we lose 
equalization based on the revenue that we obtain. 
 
You indicated that in your budget that the year-end number for 
oil revenue was 798 million. And I’ve made reference to the 
fact that for this coming budget year you’re projecting a drop to 
490 million — a $300 million drop. 
 
When you talk about equalization and the new agreement that 
has been put into place, how does that translate into the fact that 
you’re now projecting only $172 million worth of equalization 
for the upcoming year? Is there any correlation between the oil 
and gas loss of $300 million worth of revenue or are we still 
contributing a portion to the new calculation that was done for 
the mining base? What kinds of things have contributed to the 
fact that we have increased our equalization from basically a 
negative position last year to one of 172 when in fact our oil 
and gas projected revenues are dropping by over 300 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — So, Mr. Chair, equalization is a 
relatively complicated sort of item and has been a subject of 
great debate across the country for some time. 
 
When we look at equalization as bilateral agreements between 
the Government of Saskatchewan and the federal government 
— and of course it is a process that is enshrined in our 
constitution; the principles of equalization are enshrined in the 
constitution — but each of these agreements are five-year 
agreements. The current agreement will be up the end of March 
2004. And at any given time, we budget on an annual basis but 
the numbers in terms of the entitlement on an annual basis and 
prior-year adjustments, generally speaking there are four years 
open in any given year. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So the reality of the day is that yes, when oil and gas revenues 
go up the equalization dollars from Ottawa go down and that’s 
roughly how it works. But when we look at prior adjustments, if 
you look at the impact of the mining base change in terms of 
significant impact on the province of Saskatchewan in terms of 
equalization, there are I think 32 or 33 bases, revenue bases in 
the equalization formula. They look at where these revenue 
bases fit in for the province of Saskatchewan; they look at the 
average across Canada; they provide the equalization on that 
basis. 
 
If there’s clawbacks that need to occur from an entitlement then 
that adjustment is made. So it’s a little more complicated in the 
fact that not only do you have the current year to talk about or 
the forecast year in terms of entitlement, but you also have to 
make the adjustments in terms of clawbacks based on the four 
open years. 
 
So it’s not a simple, if this goes up this goes down, or if that 
goes down that goes up; because there are a number of factors 
that come into play and those factors come over multiple years 
as opposed to just the budget year that you’re looking at. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

final question on equalization. The number that you have in 
your document of $172 million, is that number prepared by 
federal financial officials who indicate to your Saskatchewan 
officials that that’s it, or is it in co-operation where you work 
. . . where your officials work with federal officials to disprove 
or to prove that that number is accurate? And I recognize your 
comments about its complexity and going back a number of 
years and having to amend the year based on something that’s 
happened three and four years ago. 
 
But is that number that’s produced for this document, is it 
produced by federal officials, your own officials, or 
collaboratively? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the question was, 
how does the process work? Is it a collaborative process and so 
forth with regard to equalization? 
 
Apparently what happens, Mr. Deputy Chair, is that the federal 
government provides its numbers ’02-03. That’s a fixed 
number. The department officials then look at that fixed number 
in terms of equalization from the federal government, utilizes 
the fourth quarter updates that are available to the provincial 
government, and then . . . and whatever other factors that might 
be apparent at the time, and then incorporates that into the 
forecast for ’03-04. 
 
So the ’03-04 forecast for equalization is the federal 
government’s ’02-03 numbers as updated by the provincial 
government officials. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I want to turn to a few specific items in your budget 
before I allow some of my colleagues to pose a few questions to 
you. Mr. Minister, I know . . . I believe a former Finance 
minister provided this. 
 
Could you . . . or if you don’t have that information with you 
today, but could you provide that information to the opposition 
that on the transfers from the Government of Canada in the 
category of other, you’ve indicated that we’re going to be up at 
about $194.6 million from last year’s 139.5. Would you have 
the information as to the various transfers, which departments, 
which sectors from the federal government have transferred the 
monies to the Saskatchewan treasury in that total amount of 
$194.6 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, what the 
member opposite is talking about is the difference between the 
’02-03 forecast of 139.5 and the ’03-04 budget of 194.6. It 
seems like it’s a significant jump in federal-provincial program 
funding. 
 
And most of that would be related to the new federal-provincial 
health accord. For example, 32 million with regard to the 
Health Reform Fund; 16 million for the diagnostic medical 
fund; and there’s quite a . . . there’s a breakdown of a lot of 
smaller, other pots that we’d be more than prepared to provide 
that information to the member opposite. Most of it would come 
from the new federal-provincial health accord which was 
recently signed by the federal and provincial governments. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for willing to 

provide that information to us. 
 
I’d also ask, Mr. Minister, if you could right now clarify . . . 
We’ve heard announcements from the federal government 
regarding highways and the project for Saskatchewan, the 
five-year allotment of money. How much monies does the 
province intend to receive for this fiscal year? 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, I would understand that the payments 
from the federal government for things like Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance are also included in a category, and I would suspect 
it’s other. So I did hear you I think, and I’d like you to clarify, 
that your officials will provide a complete breakdown of the 
194.6 million as far as the various sectors that will . . . various 
sectors of the federal government that will be contributing. Is 
that so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes, that’s correct, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. We’ll provide the complete breakdown with regard to 
federal-provincial funding, crop insurance, health accord, all of 
those numbers. We’ll provide that to the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, a couple of final questions. 
 
You’ve indicated in the area of taxes that the corporation 
income tax . . . Your year-end you had anticipated $178 million 
on March 31 just passed and for this current fiscal year you’re 
going to jump to 340.9 — a huge growth in corporation income 
tax. That kind of growth is great and we’ll see a revenue for the 
government, but could you give the reasons why your officials 
are projecting that kind of rapid increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would refer the 
member opposite to page 32 and . . . with regard to corporate 
income tax. And I’ll just read what it says here: 
 

Corporate Income Tax (CIT) revenues have been extremely 
volatile throughout Canada. This is largely due to the 
fluctuating economic conditions facing corporations and 
the ability of corporations to apply deductions and prior 
year losses in other taxation years under the national CIT 
system. The chart at the bottom of . . . page (32) illustrates 
the volatility in Saskatchewan’s CIT revenues over the past 
10 years. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

The 2002-03 Budget Estimate was significantly influenced 
by assessment results for the 2000 . . . (tax) year . . . (the) 
information indicated a sharp decline in Saskatchewan’s 
CIT base. However, (the) 2001 assessment results 
demonstrate a substantial rebound in that base. 

 
So this newer information impacts not only the reconciliation 
adjustment for the 2001 taxation year for the purposes of the 
’02-03 revised forecast, but also the anticipated ’02 
reconciliation adjustment and the ’03 payments for the purpose 
of the ’03-04 budget estimate. 
 
So it’s, as you can tell, Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s a complicated 
issue. Again it involves multiple years and it also involves 
different assessments from different base years. So that’s most 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

 

of where it’s coming from. It’s not like the corporate income 
tax base in the province of Saskatchewan just doubled 
overnight. It’s mainly related to some changes with regard to 
the information that we received from CCRA (Canada Customs 
and Revenue Agency) in Ottawa. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
I hope that the federal calculations are accurate with regards to 
the corporate income tax for this province because it seems that 
a growth of, you know, nearly $200 million is phenomenal in 
that area and I hope that those numbers are accurate. 
 
Mr. Minister, two years ago you introduced the forest fire . . . or 
your government introduced the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
I recall that we had legislation passed that created that fund. 
Initially it was created at $50 million, and then there was some 
discussion about whether or not the legislation was in place to 
maintain that fund and we passed legislation. I noticed that that 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund has completely disappeared from 
the Estimates book that we have for this current fiscal year. 
 
Is that going to require a legislative change to change the 
legislation that was put in place two years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, no, there isn’t any 
legislative changes required. The structure’s in place. It’s 
provided for by the legislation. It’s just that we haven’t 
provided any dollars to the Forest Fire Contingency Fund in this 
budget, but there’s no legislative requirements for change 
required. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, this seems rather strange if I 
can, I can make that analysis. 
 
Two years ago we had to deal with supplementary estimates 
because there was no fund in place. And we passed estimates 
last year of over $7 million in addition to the 36 million that 
was spent in the Department of Environment under the section 
(ER10) dealing with forest fire fighting. 
 
This last year your government proposed that there would 
indeed be the complete elimination of the fund — no revenue 
set aside as was previously done. 
 
So in other words, it’s sort of an off-balance-sheet kind of 
accounting because I notice in your documents that you 
distributed on March 28, supplementary estimates are indicating 
that for this past forest fire year, we’re going to vote on, as 
numbered vote 26, we’re going to vote on an additional $41 
million of forest fire fighting expenses in addition to the budget 
estimate that you have indicated of 35 . . . I believe 35 million. 
And I want to clarify that, Mr. Minister. Yes, your estimate for 
the year that just ended is $35.185 million was spent by way of 
the Department of the Environment. 
 
(15:30) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we’ve had $76 million worth of firefighting 
costs last year. Your budget for the upcoming year proposes 
only an additional basically $700,000. It’s still at 35.8. We 
know that there are sectors of the northern part of Saskatchewan 
that did not get the snowfall, did not get the rainfall. We’re 
probably going to be into a high forest fire season, yet your 

government chooses and your Finance officials choose not to 
set aside additional funding that was needed last year. We 
needed $75 million last year — 76 million. 
 
This year you’re saying, well we’re going to survive again on 
$35 million, and I guess rely on either special warrants or 
supplementary estimates that we’re going to deal with a year 
from now. So it’s almost like the system that you used last year 
when you used off-balance-sheet accounting . . . Or the former 
Finance minister used off-balance-sheet accounting by moving 
the funding of capital construction in the K to 12 (kindergarten 
to grade 12) and post-secondary area off the balance sheet. We 
have the same thing kind of occurring here. 
 
Should you not have been budgeting a far greater number than 
35 million based on the expenditures of this past season, based 
on the expenditure of the previous season, based on the fact that 
you had . . . your government thought it wise two years ago to 
set up a Forest Fire Contingency Fund of $50 million? And now 
you say, oh it’s not needed; we’re not going to do anything 
extra; we’re going to rely on $41 million of supplementary 
estimates. 
 
Somehow there seems to be a lack of a vision, a lack of a plan 
to deal with a very important resource in our province, and that 
being the forestry industry and making sure that forest fire 
fighting abilities are there. Something seems to be missing, Mr. 
Minister. Could you explain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, last year was a 
very, very bad year for fighting forest fires, there’s no question 
about it. The numbers that are referred to in the budget with 
regard the Department of the Environment — he indicates it’s 
going from 35.185 to 35.8 — that’s correct. 
 
The Forest Fire Contingency Fund had about 34 or 35 million 
available which was used to fight forest last year, and also in 
the supplementary estimates, an additional 41 million. So the 
reality is that the amount of dollars to fight forest fires, which is 
one of the worst years on record, was substantial by the 
Government of Saskatchewan and of course have, as we talked 
about last week, has added to some of the debt that has 
increased in the province of Saskatchewan as well. 
 
So the member opposite is absolutely correct. We haven’t put 
any new dollars into the Forest Fire Contingency Fund; those 
dollars have been depleted. We haven’t added any new dollars 
this year. 
 
And we’re coming off a very bad year where we were required 
to put in an additional 41 plus what was previously allocated. 
And we’re hoping that with the increased moisture levels this 
year that the forest fire situation will be markedly improved. 
And we’ll have to address pressures as they arise, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, as I’ve indicated and you’ve 
concurred that last year we spent well over $75 million fighting 
forest fires. Maybe an abnormal year, I agree with you. But we 
did spend well over . . . almost 50 million in the year before, 
and that was also a bad year. So we’ve seen the need for a 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

Now you make reference to the fact that the fund contained 
money. Could you explain? Because it was my understanding 
from questions that I asked of the previous Finance minister a 
year ago that indeed the Forest Fire Contingency Fund wasn’t a 
fund that had money. Could you clarify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The dollars in the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund last year were dollars that had been carried 
over from the previous year. There wasn’t any new 
appropriation applied in last year’s budget to the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, if I was to check the Provincial 
Auditor’s report as of March 31 of 2002, would I have found 
mention of the fund and where would it be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d refer the 
member opposite to the 2001-02 Volume I Public Accounts on 
page 26, schedule 5, Forest Fire Contingency Fund, 2002, 
number itemized 33.995 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much for that, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, my final question — you indicated that, you 
know, you’re going to sort of have a wait-and-see kind of 
attitude regarding the forest fires and whether or not we have 
kind of a cost factor that will be above the $35.8 million that 
you see budgeted in the document. 
 
Mr. Minister, if there are going to be additional dollars required, 
will you be relying on the same process as the government 
relied last year, which is indeed to introduce it under 
supplementary estimates, or will you be looking at special 
warrant expenditures during the year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think the answer to the question, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, is that it depends on the circumstances. If it’s 
smaller amounts that would be required, then of course there’s 
potential offsets in terms of underexpenditures from other 
departments and things of that nature. If it was a large amount 
then we’d have to look at that in the context of when did it 
occur and what are options available. 
 
So I guess it’s one of those ones where you can’t really provide 
an answer because it would depend on the circumstances and 
would also depend on the quantum of dollars that would be 
needed. Obviously the government would pursue whatever 
options it felt was in the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan at that time, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And to the minister, welcome to your officials. I have a couple 
of questions on K to 12 learning, Mr. Minister. 
 
The budget this year shows that we’re going to have about a 
$32 million increase in K to 12 operating, and when you came 
into the House today you stated that there was going to be an 
additional 16, I believe $16.1 million that’s going to be voted 
on today, and I believe that would be the special warrants that 
were asked for by the government for September to December, 
9.2 million; and January to March of 6.9 million. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I apologize if there’s been any 

confusion to the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Chair, but we 
are not voting on the supplementary estimates at this point. 
We’re talking about interim supply. And the interim supply is 
two-twelfths of all other departments. But what we’re talking 
about — because the K to 12 system does not dispense funds in 
July and August; they work on tenths — so what we’re voting 
. . . we’re asking for, in interim supply, is two-tenths of that 
budget. So that would allow us to carry us into the near future 
before we get into voting off the actual budgetary estimates, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you for that clarification, Mr. Minister. 
When I looked at the budget and the $32 million increase that 
was suggested, I also know that there has been $16.1 million 
spent for special warrants for the teachers’ salaries so far. So 
that’s going to be showing up in this year’s budget as far as I 
can see. The 9.2 million and 6.9 means that there . . . that is 
$16.1 million, which is actually about half of the budget 
increase that we’re . . . that the minister has been talking about. 
Is this money actually going to be showing up in this year’s 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the 
special warrant in the supplementary estimates for the 
Department of Learning for K to 12 foundation operating grant 
is 6.643 million. That was the special warrant funding. 
 
There was additional funding provided from the Department of 
Learning last fall to cover off the teachers’ contract for 
September, October, November, and December. This was . . . 
these were dollars that were not provided on a special warrant 
basis. We’ve added the 6.643. These dollars are now in the base 
of the foundation operating grant. 
 
And the member opposite is correct in indicating that the 
increase of budget over budget is in that 
32-point-something-million range. And part of that would 
include the special warrant and the additional funding that came 
from the Department of Learning to cover off the September to 
December teachers’ contract as well, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — But, Mr. Minister, the total budget for 
2002-2003 was 477,000,600, and for 2003-2004 was five zero 
nine, nine hundred, which is 32 million 300 . . . If you’ve . . . 
we’ve already spent 16.1 million of that for salary increases that 
the government has said that they’re going to pay for, so that 
would only leave about $16 million left that hasn’t been spent 
already. Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — No, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I mean the 
reality is that once you look at what was in the base last year, 
and you added the additional dollars to cover off ’02-03 to the 
end of the year, now we provided the dollars on top of what was 
required; so that is ’02-03 funding. So that 32 million, budget 
over budget, will be spent over the government’s fiscal year, 
and that is dollars over and above last year’s budget estimate, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, the 
government’s fiscal year is of course different from the schools’ 
calendar year. And when we know that the Provincial Auditor is 
going to add up the numbers for 2002-2003, he’s going to add 
in the special warrant numbers, and that means that the total K 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

 

to 12 operating which from . . . to 2003 will be $493.7 million. 
That’s $16.2 million which is part of your . . . the government’s 
promotional literature right now. 
 
Does that mean that we are . . . at least a portion of that either 
has to be added to last year’s budget or has to be added to this 
year’s budget, unless it’s just left in supplements altogether? 
We have to see this number showing up somewhere. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that just 
for purposes of clarification, the interim supply that we’re 
asking for today for the Department of Learning is 196.398 
million. Okay, that’s the two-tenths that we’re talking about. 
 
The question with regard to the special warrant of 6.643, 
obviously that will be included in the forecast for the ’02-03 
year, and would be reflected in the public accounts when the 
public accounts come out. 
 
The budgetary estimates that we’re including for ’03-04 would 
be the increase, the budget estimate increase in that $32 million 
range on the foundation operating grant. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So what we’re talking about here is a two-tenths supplementary 
amount or an interim supply that we’re asking for related to the 
entire budget of the Department of Learning. So I would 
apologize if there’s any confusion here, but we’re not talking 
about what would be reflected in the Public Accounts of ’02-03. 
What we’re talking about is two-tenths of the budget estimate 
for the Department of Learning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To the 
minister: then the question that I will have to be asking — and I 
guess obviously that will have to be asked to the Minister of 
Learning — is that if a portion of this money has already been 
spent, then the teachers’ salary increase that was discussed in 
the budget and by the minister saying that the salary increase 
has been covered, a portion of that, probably from December 
on, won’t have been covered because it will be already have 
been spent from January to March of this year. So we would 
have to require a special warrant to actually cover the rest of it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I can get into that question with the Minister of 
Learning in estimates, but my further question to you would be 
on the Education Infrastructure Corporation. We have $32 
million, I believe, left in that corporation; $32.4 million is left 
in that corporation. And this year we see the capital spending 
has been moved back to Department of Learning and we’re 
going to be spending about $18 million on capital. Two million 
of that will be to pay off, to pay back some of the capital 
construction from the, from the Education Infrastructure 
Corporation. 
 
First of all, out of this $32.4 million, has that money all been 
allocated or is there money in there that will be spent in this 
year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The answer is that those dollars have 
been allocated to projects and will carry on. Most of these 
projects of course are completed over several years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 

Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, then even though it shows 
that there is $32.4 million left in this, in this fund, it has all been 
allocated and will be spent this year so next year we can see that 
whatever amount of money this government will put in for 
capital structures, we will again be paying back that bill to the 
corporation in next year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us an idea of how much of that 
$32.4 million was for K to 12 structures and how much was for 
post secondary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have the 
breakdown on the 32.4 million so I would ask the Learning 
critic, perhaps when we get into the estimates for the 
Department of Learning to ask those specific questions because 
the department would have a better idea of the breakdown than 
we have at this point in time. 
 
And I must also indicate that this is a statutory amount that is 
not part of what we’re voting on here in interim supply at this 
point in time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
school capital this year of $18.6 million is about half of what 
was spent in K to 12 infrastructure building last year, a 
considerable decrease when we know that at the school systems 
there is a requirement of about $300 million for capital and for 
ongoing maintenance. It would mean that there is considerable 
less emphasis put on the importance of the school structures. 
 
And again when I see out of this $18 million, over 2 million of 
it was spent on paying back that . . . their debt, it sends a signal 
to the school system that this item is not very important to this 
government, to the minister, who was at that time the minister 
of Learning. 
 
This $18.6 million has been allocated this year and out of it 
again the 2.4 that is going to be transferred to the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation would leave about 16 
million. Has that money already been allocated? We’re aware in 
the budget there was . . . a school was announced in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. Has there been any other schools announced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think other 
than the announcements that have been made, the Department 
of Learning will make further announcements in terms of the 
capital projects that will be approved. And the critic for the 
Department of Learning, the member opposite, knows that 
many of the rollouts in terms of capital projects that haven’t 
been approved, the Department of Learning . . . (inaudible) . . . 
be making those announcements usually over the one to two 
months after the budget is prepared. 
 
In terms of the global numbers, generally speaking, when we 
look at last year, there was $40 million provided to the K to 12 
education sector and the previous year was 24. So even with the 
drop back to the 18.6 over the two years, there’s still more 
dollars. And those dollars that were provided and will be 
provided through the EIFC (Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation) this year are going into schools throughout the 
province. So the amount of dollars that is available over these 
two years is actually more than what was available in the 
previous two years, Mr. Deputy Chair. 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister, over two 
years there has been more money admittedly put into school 
infrastructure. But in the last year, this budget that we’re 
discussing right now and the interim supply that we’re 
discussing right now, there is a decrease of about 50 per cent in 
education infrastructure. And I know that the school boards 
across the province are very concerned about this issue. And 
again they’re concerned about the number that was put into 
school operating money when we know that school . . . the 
teachers’ salaries are not totally covered. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said that the 32.4 million in the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation has all been spent. Is there 
a list that we can see . . . that is available so we can see what 
projects have been included? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
terminology is they have been committed to be spent. They’re 
not spent yet. So the reality is that there are dollars available for 
capital in the province of Saskatchewan. And what we’re 
talking about here is not the EIFC funding, which is a statutory 
amount; we’re talking about the two-tenths with regard to the 
interim supply. And that’s two-tenths of the Department of 
Learning’s current budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Some questions 
here with respect to interim supply as it relates to the Crown 
sector if I may, Mr. Deputy Chair. And the first question, a little 
bit more specific, in the interim supply document it highlights 
the — under lending and investing — the 3 million for ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan). And I 
wonder if the minister has any details as to what that lending is 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The 3 million estimated for ISC 
would be the capital needs for ISC for the budget year ’03-04, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I wonder if the 
minister knows whether or not that’s a reinvestment or an 
improvement of existing capital, or would that be related to the 
start-up of our automated land titles system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I couldn’t tell him. He’d have to 
actually ask the minister responsible for ISC when those 
estimates come up. What we’re voting on here are the interim 
supply and the proportion of two-twelfths that would be 
applied. Detailed questions as to the allocation would be more 
appropriately put to the minister when the minister has his 
officials from the Department of Justice here, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and we will ask 
those questions I think in Crown Corporations Committee when 
that Crown testifies before that committee. 
 
The lending and investing . . . or at least the lending activities of 
the Crowns are all a part of this first two-twelfths interim 
supply it looks like for the most part, at least for the major 
Crowns. 
 
And I guess a question I would have relates to SaskPower. We 
will be . . . There’s been some hint as to the dividends that the 

GRF (General Revenue Fund) can expect from SaskPower in 
various media reports, specifically that the dividend’s going to 
be much higher than it was last year. 
 
The corporation’s outlined I think a much more optimistic look 
at this year and highlighted the problems that they had with 
respect to the cost of generating electricity, and cost of natural 
gas was one of them as well as the drought. But we hear 
indications that the dividend is expected to be much higher 
from SaskPower, and clearly the overall dividend in the budget 
from CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) is 
at that $200 million level. 
 
Does the minister have any comments as to the fact that 
SaskPower’s debt is — and there is some borrowing . . . or 
some lending here — but SaskPower’s debt is going up 
significantly this year, estimate in and around . . . over the $100 
million mark, while rumour is that there’s going to be a much 
larger dividend to GRF? And maybe the minister is able to let 
us know what will be in the annual report in a few weeks 
anyway, at least a general estimate on the dividends expected 
from SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, that’s information 
that we don’t have at this time that would be better put to the 
Minister of CIC. 
 
Certainly when we look at what we’re voting on here in interim 
supply, any of the amounts indicated, for example SaskPower, 
would be a statutory amount that has been taking off. So we’re 
not actually looking to vote in interim supply any dollars for 
SaskPower. So any of the questions related to SaskPower, what 
their potential dividend might be, what it might have been last 
year, all of those questions really would be better put to the 
Minister of CIC or in the Crown Corps Committee. That 
information isn’t available to my officials here at this point in 
time, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. You know, fair 
enough — I think we’re talking about expenditures of the 
government and interim supply is about taking care of those 
needs for at least two-twelfths of the year. And I think the 
question then that the minister has answered just begs is, the 
fact that when the budget’s presented, they clearly highlight the 
amount that they expect the Crown Investments Corporation 
will be providing as a transfer at $200 million. 
 
And I guess just on the minister’s answer, surely the department 
has a very clear estimate of the dividends that they’re going to 
be getting from individual Crowns that constitute the $200 
million. Is that not correct? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I think the 
member will recall that last year’s overall estimates indicated a 
dividend from Crown corporations of 300 million. That 300 
million included the base I . . . of the time of 200 plus a 
supplementary that had been deferred dividend from a previous 
year. The estimate for this year is back to the base dividend of 
200 million. 
 
So the expectation from the GRF to the Crown sector is that 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

 

they will meet their dividend targets of 200 million. And how 
they get into meeting that target is better addressed to the 
Crown Investments Corporation in terms of their estimates for 
the various Crowns. That information is not available to us at 
this time, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It seems 
passing strange, at least, that department officials, when they’re 
putting together the budget — or I should say even the cabinet 
— wouldn’t have a clear idea going in from the major Crowns 
as to what their dividends are forecast to be to the GRF. But I 
understand that the minister is asking us to wait for Crown 
Investments Corporation committee meetings, and we’ll 
certainly be asking those questions there. 
 
One final question, and again it is on the revenue side of the 
equation I guess, but I think relates directly not only to interim 
supply but just generally to the sustainability of the budget. And 
so perhaps the minister would clarify why, in terms of 
investment receipts, equity investment in Crown corporation, 
your Crown Investments Corporation, was forecast to generate 
receipts of $61.3 million in 2002-2003 and zero in 2003-2004? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, could we have the 
member opposite reference what page he’s referring to in the 
documents? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He says page 14? 
Okay. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the reference to page 14 with regard to the 
equity investment in Crown Investments Corporation, which is 
the schedule of lending and investment activities, indicates an 
estimate in ’02-03 of 60 million, a forecast in ’02-03 of 61.3; 
and basically that is the result of the equity repayment from the 
Cameco shares, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I notice that 
the two-thirds interim supply for the Agriculture department is 
just short of $42 million. 
 
Could the minister tell us what percentage of that is allocated 
for outstanding crop insurance claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member 
opposite, the two-twelfths which is the almost 42 million in the 
Ag, Food and Rural Revitalization would be the government’s 
contributions for things like crop insurance premiums and 
program support and things of that nature. Actual payments to 
producers from the crop insurance program would come out of 
the Crop Insurance Fund and has either been paid or is in the 
process of being paid. 
 
So what we are talking about in the two-twelfths is the 
allocation or the government’s contributions to the various 
programs within Ag, Food and Rural Revitalization for the 
’03-04 year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. My next question 
would be, would . . . is there an allocation in that amount of 
money for the crop insurance applications that will be coming 
in, for the government portion or will they be contributing their 
percentage of this year’s crop insurance at a later time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — What we’re voting on today, Mr. 

Deputy Chair, is the two-twelfths and that 42 million with . . . 
specifically for crop insurance. Basically the crop insurance’s 
purpose is that that two-twelfths vote today would be the 
government’s contribution to the Crop Insurance Fund, the 
provincial government’s contribution in terms of its percentage 
of premiums, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Can the minister tell us what 
percentage of that allocation the government estimates it will 
have to contribute to the Crop Insurance Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Of the 41.970 that . . . or almost 42 
million which is the two-twelfths interim supply, a little over 19 
million of that would be specifically targeted for crop insurance 
premiums from the provincial government, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, is 
any of that funding of the interim supply to be allocated to 
outstanding CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) claims or 
is there no longer any outstanding CFIP claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — No, Mr. Deputy Chair. The CFIP 
dollars have been accounted for in last year’s fiscal year. And of 
course the member opposite would be aware that the CFIP 
program ended at midnight March 31, so the dollars that were 
put into the CFIP fund were put in by the provincial 
government. 
 
That program is now basically eliminated. The agricultural 
policy framework is gearing up. 
 
Any of the dollars that were put aside for CFIP from last year’s 
allocation that need to be paid out will be paid out, probably 
mostly this year, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, the 
other program that I would like to ask about is the forage 
program. It was the program that paid $7 per acre up to 50 
acres. 
 
A lot of the people who applied for that program said they were 
paid the initial payment; the final payment is just coming 
through to some of them now. Has that been completed or is 
there some funds that need to still be paid out on that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, any of the detail 
with regard to the forage program would be better addressed to 
the Minister of Ag and Food. But I can say that, with regard to 
the ’02-03 fiscal year, that we will cover off claims right up till 
April 17 when . . . generally that’s when the fiscal year is closed 
off by the department. 
 
So I’m sure their processing is still occurring at this point in 
time. And of course anything regards an ’03-04 application, the 
Minister of Ag and Food would need to answer those questions, 
Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And to the 
minister, I’m sure you’re delighted to answer another question 
on education. 
 
And I just need clarification on the amount of money that the 
two-twelfths interim supply . . . I understand that the 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

two-twelfths is to be voted, two-twelfths of that plus the 
additional sixteen, nine nine seven. And I’m wondering why 
you’re asking for that additional amount of money at this time 
when this interim supply is probably for the months of April 
and May, and when you’re talking about the operating grant for 
school boards, who don’t get funding in July and August, why 
would you be requiring a sixteen, nine nine seven at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — When we’re looking at the allocation 
of dollars for the Department of Learning, because they operate 
on a . . . the school boards operate on a calendar year and they 
pay out in tenths as opposed to twelfths. Two-tenths of the 
amount required for April and May would be one-tenth each 
month. So the reality is, Mr. Deputy Chair, that we’re voting on 
two-tenths because the allocation is spread out over tenths as 
opposed to twelfths. 
 
So what we’re asking for in interim supply is the amount of 
dollars that would be provided for the months of April and 
May. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
Minister of Finance, and your officials. There is a few questions 
that I’d like to address related to the Department of Health 
which I think everybody acknowledges is the largest single 
department expenditures in the affairs of the government. 
 
Mr. Minister, of the approximately $2.5 billion budget, a 
number of about 1.7 billion is going to regional authorities, and 
in that includes capital projects. In your request for interim 
supply, you do a mathematical two-twelfths calculation on the 
global budget. 
 
And I would like to ask you, is it the experience of the 
Department of Finance that the funds for Health are expended 
on a uniform, consistent basis, or are there significant variances 
depending on what stages capital projects are underway or 
requests for capital equipment are brought forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, certainly in terms 
of the capital allocation from the Department of Health, the 
Minister of Health would be able to respond to the detail. 
 
What we have been told is that the two-twelfths that we’re 
asking for in terms of interim supply will meet the needs of the 
Department of Health in terms of their current allocation with 
regard to capital projects. And further details of course would 
be available from the Minister of Health, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m wondering, 
Minister, from the Department of Finance’s standpoint, where 
you would actually allocate the requisitions or the expenditures 
that would be at the request of the Department of Health. 
 
Is it the experience of the Finance department that these 
requests for Health expenditures are on a uniform average basis 
on a 12-month basis or are there periods of significant increase 
and then periods where the requirements are less? For example, 
you indicated in the Department of Learning in the summer 
season there are fewer requests for funding. Does that same 
pattern of expenditures occur in the Department of Health? 
 
(16:15) 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think the member opposite would 
be correct in his assumption that there is some volatility in 
terms of the timing when expenditures occur within regional 
health authorities and certainly within the Department of 
Health. That’s the sort of detail that the Finance department 
doesn’t get into. Certainly the Minister of Health would be in a 
better position to talk about that. 
 
But our allocation with regard to the interim supply of 
two-twelfths, we couldn’t say whether . . . our officials couldn’t 
say whether this is the exact, correct amount but it’s certainly 
the amount that the Department of Health recommends to us as 
being appropriate for their short-term needs, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I note 
that there are a number of significant capital projects. For 
example, in Melfort the Parkland Place project is scheduled to 
be completed, I believe, in August of this current year. So the 
expenditures on that project for example will end about halfway 
through this current fiscal year — a third way in. 
 
Does the department or does the Department of Finance make 
any alterations in their budgeting process for when projects like 
this end and other ones begin? Is it a continuous kind of a 
cycle? And I hear you say that the Department of Health has 
advised that two-twelfths will see them through in the short, 
you know, in this allocation. But I wonder if there are some 
significant projects that could skew this information for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly when you look 
at the capital requirements for the Department of Health and the 
allocation of those dollars, many of the larger projects 
obviously would have allocations over several budget years. 
Not that different than what is experienced in the Department of 
Learning, for example, where they might announce planning 
dollars in one budget year and then have that as part of the 
allocation in a subsequent year when the major construction 
would occur. 
 
But it’s our information from the Department of Health that at 
this point in time the two-twelfths interim supply meets the 
needs of the Department of Health. And there are no unforeseen 
circumstances that we’re aware of at this point in time, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I notice in the 
supplementary estimates that was tabled with this year’s budget 
that there is a figure of $1.6 million under the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. And the note that goes, that’s 
part of that estimate indicates that the funds are required to 
provide for costs reimbursed by the federal government under 
the strategic highway infrastructure program. 
 
I wonder if you could elaborate on the arrangement that your 
government has with the federal government under that 
particular program, the strategic highways infrastructure 
program; how the funds flow from the senior government to 
your government; and the need for this supplementary estimate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, when we talk about 
strategic highways infrastructure program or SHIP, the 
Department of Highways allocation of two-twelfths interim 
supply in the amount of a little over $49 million, any of the 



April 7, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

 

projects that would have been contractually agreed to with the 
federal government and have been subsequently paid by the 
provincial government, then a request to the federal government 
for reimbursement would occur. And it’s my understanding that 
these projects that have been contractually agreed to are on a 
50/50 basis. 
 
So the process involved is that the project, as it’s being 
completed or when it’s completed, a bill would be provided to 
the federal government for its 50 per cent allocation and the 
federal government would then repay the provincial 
government. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Minister, with that type of an 
arrangement and with those . . . with that particular program, 
and perhaps other programs, are you saying that the province 
pays the entire cost and then applies for a 50 per cent refund? 
And if that is the case — I see your deputy minister’s nodding, 
so I assume that is the case. 
 
Now how for accounting purposes and so on, the federal dollars 
that are received once the application has been made for 
reimbursement, how is that treated? Is that part of the highways 
and transportation budget then, when that income . . . or when 
those monies are received from the senior government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, what the department does 
is it gross budgets the estimates and then, when the revenues are 
received by the federal government, it would come in on the 
GRF side as revenue at that time, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Chair, Minister, then if I understand you 
correctly the Department of Highways estimates the cost, the 
entire cost. And then on the revenue side it would show up 
under that area of other transfers from the federal government. 
Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — That’s exactly correct, Mr. Chair. 
That’s where the other transfers from the federal government on 
the revenue side would come in at that time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair. So, Minister, would it be fair to say 
then when we look at the entire budget for this current fiscal 
year for Highways and Transportation of $296 million, that in 
actuality or in fact then some of those dollars would be federal 
government dollars then? Would that be a fair statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — That’s correct. The expenditures of 
296 million within Highways and Transportation would be for 
projects that are estimated to be completed with those dollars 
over that time frame, and they would include federal 
government revenue offsets, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Minister, could you tell us today how 
many of those $296 million are actually federal dollars in this 
year’s budget then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, it’s my information here 
that for the strategic highways infrastructure program, SHIP, in 
the budget estimate for ’03-04 is for receipt of $7.9 million on 
that program from the federal government for ’03-04. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Minister, I understand that there is 

also another federal program that is, I believe the funding 
arrangements under this, the other program — and I am sorry 
that I don’t have the exact name of it but I’m sure your officials 
know the program I am referring to — that there is also federal 
dollars for highway projects under another program besides the 
strategic . . . I believe it’s the . . . in the announcement I believe 
there was dollars indicated that there would be federal dollars 
flowing from the infrastructure program and if I understand the 
announcement correctly, I believe it was 50/50 dollars. 
 
And I am wondering how many federal dollars would be in the 
296 million from that particular program and any other 
particular program, federal program that would make up the 
highways budget. Could you provide those numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, under the new Canada 
Strategic Infrastructure Fund, which did not have any dollars 
allocated in ’02-03, the estimated federal government 
contribution for ’03-04 is slightly more than $6 million on the 
CSIF (Canada Strategic Infrastructure Fund). 
 
The National Safety Code had provided $193,000 in ’02-03 and 
the National Safety Code budget estimate for ’03-04 is 
$190,000 in the estimate for ’03-04 from the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, Minister, how are the funds that are 
. . . flow from the federal government under the Prairie Grain 
Roads Program, how are those funds treated? Are they treated 
in a similar fashion to say the SHIP program? And if so, could 
you tell us what the funds that were received under that 
program in the last fiscal year and the anticipated funds in the 
current fiscal year that we are talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, to the member opposite. 
Yes, the way that federal government offsets are provided for in 
each of . . . all of the departments across government is the 
same. So if there’s a federal-provincial program, there are other 
federal government sources that would come into that, and that 
would be included in the overall budgetary allocation. 
 
With the specific . . . with regard to the Prairie Grain Roads 
Program, last year’s forecast or budget estimate was 
14,686,000. The estimate this year is almost exactly the same of 
14.69 million. So that’s the budget estimate ’02-03 and ’03-04 
for that particular program, Mr. Chair. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I move that the committee rise and 
that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to certain 
resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. Oh, wrong one. 
 
I’d like to move resolution no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2004, the sum of $991,941,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2003 

 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I move that the resolutions be now 
read the first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 12, The Appropriation Act, 2003 (No. 1) be 
now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — By leave of the Assembly and under 
rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 16:38 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 12 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2004 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:39. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, leave of the House to 
introduce a motion regarding the sitting hours of the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(4) of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, that when this 
Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 17, 2003 it do stand 
adjourned until Wednesday, April 23 at 1:30 p.m. 

 

I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:41. 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................415 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................415 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................415 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................415 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................415 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................415 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................415 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................415 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................416 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................416 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................416 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Health Day 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................416 
 Saskatchewan Closes Tax Gap with Alberta 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................417 
 University of Saskatchewan College of Commerce Budgets 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................417 
 Saskatchewan Learning 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................417 
 World Senior Women’s Curling Championship 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................418 
 Saskatchewan Forest Centre Building 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................418 
 Regional Drama Festival 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................418 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................418 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................418 
 Financial Support for College of Medicine 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................421 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................421 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................421 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................422 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 9 – The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................423 
 Bill No. 10 – The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................423 
 Bill No. 11 – The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2003 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................423 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................423 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................423 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................424 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................424 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................424 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................424 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................424 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................424 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................424 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................432 



 

 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................434 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................435 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................436 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................436 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................438 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................438 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................438 
MOTIONS 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................438 
 


