















































Hansard: June 24, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1891 
 June 24, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents in the Cypress Hills 
area and other areas around the province pertaining to the 
renewal of Crown grazing leases. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Estevan, Glentworth, Kisbey, Swift Current, and Big Beaver. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Gravelbourg, Eastend, and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of the residents of, in this case, the city of Swift 
Current, who have a constructive alternative for the 
government’s plan to install a permanent CT (computerized 
tomography) scanner in Swift Current. And the prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider its plan to allocate the used CT scanner to Swift 
Current and instead provide a new CT scanner for the 
Southwest. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned all the petitioners today are from 
the frontier city, the city of Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition from people who’ve had the unfortunate 
experience of travelling on Highway 43. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 43 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed in total by citizens of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the high cost of prescription 
drugs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by citizens from Davidson, Hanley, Kenaston, and 
Imperial, Liberty. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on the concerns of Highway 14. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie and to take the necessary steps to 
reconstruct and repair this highway in order to address 
safety concerns and to facilitate economic growth in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by citizens of Wilkie and 
North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens that 
are very concerned about the inaction of this government in 
addressing the issue of the water level in the . . . of the lakes in 
the Qu’Appelle Valley. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to do everything in its power to work with the 
First Nations people and the federal government to bring a 
prompt end to the dispute so that the water levels of the 
Qu’Appelle River system can return to normal levels and 
end the economic harm and uncertainty that this dispute has 
caused. 
 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of White City and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens all over the province of Saskatchewan that are 
concerned with the education tax issue in the province. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Shellbrook, from Unity, from Regina, from P.A. (Prince 
Albert), Saskatoon, Mayfair, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people in my constituency who are 
concerned about the shape of Highway No. 23. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair to Highway No. 23 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth in Porcupine 
Plain and the surrounding areas. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Weekes, 
Chelan, Porcupine Plain, and Carrot River. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petition has been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12 is hereby read and received, 
and it is a petition regarding a request to the government to 
repair Highway 23 near Porcupine Plain. 
 
And a number of other petitions are received as addendums to 
previously tabled sessional papers no. 13, 18, 35, 100, 114, 116, 
120, 124, 140, and 141. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that on day no. 70 I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: what were all the dates 
for the meetings and/or correspondence between the 
minister and/or his officials and the federal government 
officials regarding the dispute involving water levels in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley lakes? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also have another question: 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs: what were all 
the dates for meetings and/or correspondence between the 
minister or his officials and the federal government 
officials regarding the dispute involving water levels in the 
Qu’Appelle Valley lakes? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in your 
gallery today, Mr. Speaker, is Mrs. Bernice MacDougall, 
widow of Ian MacDougall who passed away in April of this 
year. 
 
Bernice, Mr. Speaker, like Ian has been very active in the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party throughout the years. She has also 
been very active in the field of health care. While living in 
Estevan, she was a member of the South East Health District. 
After moving to Regina a few years ago, she became a member 
of the SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) board. 
 
We want to welcome Bernice to the legislature today and offer 
our sincere condolences to her and her family on the loss of her 
husband. 
 
And sitting with Mrs. MacDougall in the gallery is Irene 
Lamothe. Irene is a long-time friend of the MacDougall family, 
a friendship that goes back to the 60s when Irene worked in the 
Speaker’s office in this legislature and Ian was, of course, a 
member of the Legislative Assembly. Irene is now retired but I 
might mention her daughter, Michelle Kobayashi, is a 
ministerial assistant to my colleague, Minister Wartman. 
 
We welcome you both to the legislature this afternoon on this 
occasion and want to express again our grateful appreciation for 
the contribution Ian made, both in this legislature and 
throughout the great communities of this great province of ours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my colleague across the floor in welcoming Bernice 
MacDougall to the Assembly, and Mrs. Lamothe. 
 
I’ve known Bernice for quite a few years. Ian and I worked 
together for the same company for many years and we had 
many get-togethers at barbecues and such at the company 
picnics where we argued politics, of course — that and the 
Roughriders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, I would like to welcome 
Bernice and Mrs. Lamothe to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, a number of people who are present in your gallery 
from the Do It With Class Young People’s Theatre company. 
And if they would stand when I introduce them, then we can 
acknowledge them. 
 
First is Andorlie Hillstrom, who’s the artistic director for 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

 

musical theatre; Rob Ursan, who’s the music director; then 
students Amanda Gorchinski, Tess Degenstein, Michael Dorma, 
Benjamin Stueck, Jacqueline Burtney, and my daughter, Ingrid 
Nilson. And accompanying them is also Linda Tiefenbach, 
who’s a proud mother of one of the other participants who 
couldn’t be here today. 
 
Let’s all give them a warm welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
to all members of the Assembly, 12 grade 7 students seated in 
your gallery. They come from Lipton School. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Rebecca Gel, and chaperones 
Lynae Kuykendall and Bob Mitchell. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them after question period, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m sure they’ll find the proceedings very interesting. And I 
would ask all members to welcome them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you 
to all members of the Assembly, four guests covering three 
generations who are visiting us in the gallery, and seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, visiting us from Seattle, Washington. 
 
Seated in the top row of the gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have with 
us today Mr. Frank Walters, who is a former Moose Jaw 
resident. And he’s accompanied here today by his daughter, 
Sandra Walters, and her husband, Tobin Darrow. Sandra and 
Tobin, I’m told, are both public prosecutors for the state of 
Washington. And completing the group and bringing the third 
generation, their daughter, Tara Darrow. 
 
I would ask all hon. members to extend a warm welcome and 
welcome back to the group visiting us from Seattle, 
Washington. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I want to 
introduce to all members another person who is seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. The face will be familiar to many of the 
members because she served as a Page in the year 2000 here in 
the legislature. And I’m referring to Charla Borowski who is 
now in training for being a chiropractor in Portland, Oregon. 
And we welcome her back to her home city of Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

New Deputy Leader of Canada’s Official Opposition 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Upon reading 
the front-page headline in today’s StarPhoenix, I noticed that a 
constituent of mine was named as the deputy leader of Canada’s 
official opposition. Saskatoon-Rosetown-Biggar Member of 
Parliament Carol Skelton is a resident of Harris, Saskatchewan, 
and was elected to parliament in the year 2000. The former 

deputy Health critic stated that as a woman, grandmother, and 
mother, she has a vantage point that allows her to, and I quote: 
“look across our country and see a lot of things that I would like 
to have changed.” 
 
Before entering federal politics, Ms. Skelton was active on the 
family farm with her husband, Noel, and their children. Also 
among her many activities, she worked for the Red Cross. 
 
Carol Skelton was active in getting the Saskatchewan Party 
established because she believed provincial Liberals and 
Conservatives should join forces along with federal free 
enterprisers to replace the tired and failing NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government in Saskatchewan. To that end, 
she became the first Saskatchewan Party president in the 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency and played a major role in our 
victory in a riding held by an NDP cabinet minister. 
 
Now I know that that fact does not please my colleagues across 
the way, but I am sure that they are pleased that Carol Skelton 
has moved on to a successful federal political career and will 
join with us in congratulating her on her new role. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Do It With Class Young People’s Theatre 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to call attention 
to one of our city’s finest performing arts companies, Do It 
With Class Young People’s Theatre. This non-profit group of 
young singers, dancers, and actors was formed in 1993 by 
artistic director, Andorlie Hillstrom, who is well known for her 
work in drama and musical theatre. She is ably assisted by Rob 
Ursan as music director and Ana Maria Campos as dance 
director. 
 
The group was formed to give enhanced training and 
performing opportunities for young people, and I can speak 
from personal knowledge in saying that it has been a smashing 
success. It began with 12 students and now has grown to over 
90 young people from ages 8 to 19. It now has junior and senior 
musical theatre companies and junior and senior dance 
companies. 
 
Each year, Do It With Class stages a minimum of four major 
performances. Perhaps some of you were lucky enough to have 
seen The Nutcracker last Christmas or Les Miz in the winter. 
They have also performed at the Children’s Festival, the 
Cathedral Arts Festival, and the Teddy Bear Bash. This fall, I 
am told, they will recreate the ’60s musical Hair for which I am 
nostalgic in more ways than one. 
 
This is a great group of kids, Mr. Speaker — one of whom is 
my daughter, Ingrid — and I encourage all who are interested in 
the performing arts to offer their support. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

Swift Current Chapter of Students Against 
Drinking and Driving 

 
Mr. Wall: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to salute the 
hard work of the Students Against Drinking and Driving 
chapter in my hometown of Swift Current at the Swift Current 
Comprehensive High School. 
 
Back in May the provincial awards banquet was held in 
Weyburn, where three of the six RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) Leadership awards were won by students from 
the Swift Current Comp High School. Congratulations, Mr. 
Speaker, to Jenna Wanner, Nikita Horvey, and Brooke 
Gloeckler for receiving this award. And I’d also like to 
congratulate one of their teacher advisors, Mr. Speaker, Sarah 
McDonald, who is a co-recipient of the Stan Dyck Memorial 
Award, which acknowledges the advisor of the year. 
 
They put a lot of effort, Mr. Speaker — the SADD (Students 
Against Drinking and Driving) group does in Swift Current — 
into raising awareness on the issue of drinking and driving. 
They participate in various events, organizing them — such as 
the Red Ribbon campaigns at RCMP checkstops, staging mock 
crashes at the Comp High School, and volunteering their time to 
various charitable groups and non-profit associations. 
 
They’re currently involved in a letter-writing campaign which 
supports the changing of drinking and driving laws, such that it 
would be made easier for police to order blood samples in 
serious accidents where it’s believed alcohol may be a factor. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to be able to join every 
year as a judge in the mocktails competition that the group has 
at the Swift Current Comprehensive High School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Swift Current SADD group works tirelessly to 
promote such an important cause, not only just in Swift Current 
but across the province, and I’d ask all members to congratulate 
them on their achievement and encourage them in their 
continued efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Loon Lake Student Wins Scholarship 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased to take this opportunity to congratulate 
Michelle Corbeil, a grade 12 student from the Ernie Studer 
School in Loon Lake who was recently honoured with a local 
excellence award by the Canadian Millennium Scholarship 
Foundation. 
 
Ms. Corbeil was awarded the $4,000 scholarship for her 
academic achievements and for her leadership contributions to 
the community and her commitment to innovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well as being a very successful student, Ms. 
Corbeil has been extensively involved in her community and in 
her school. During her last year at Ernie Studer School she 
served as president of the Student Representative Council, was 
involved in the environment and the recreation club, 
volunteered for Meals on Wheels, Telemiracle, and World 
Vision, was also actively involved in the 4-H, and somewhere 

in there also had time to do some curling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, active, committed, caring people like Michelle 
Corbeil are a big reason why the future of this province is wide 
open, and I want to congratulate her on her achievement so far 
— and I emphasize so far — and I ask my colleagues on both 
sides of the Assembly to join me in wishing her every success 
in the future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Spirit Alive in Oxbow and Alida 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as you know over the last decade or so that the NDP 
have been in power, it’s been tough times across . . . in rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s been hard to keep community facilities 
open. 
 
Well on Saturday night a couple of the communities in my 
constituency decided to do something about it and so I had to 
spread myself a little thin. It didn’t work, Mr. Speaker, and that 
may have been because there was two suppers to go to. 
 
In Oxbow they put on a lobster supper, Mr. Speaker, lobster and 
steak for the community. They had to have good Canadian beef, 
and they raised $17,000, Mr. Speaker, for their new golf course 
at Alameda. 
 
The community of Alida, Mr. Speaker, not to be outdone by 
Oxbow, put on a supper as well where everyone in the 
community participated, and they had an auction as well as a 
supper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Alida community and area raised over $47,000 
for their new rink, Mr. Speaker. That, along with the 
contribution from the NHL (National Hockey League) Players’ 
Association of 55,000, means that the new floor, new boards, 
the fixing up of the rink is almost paid for, Mr. Speaker. And 
they haven’t yet played a hockey game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think both of those communities deserve a good 
round of congratulations and applause for the hard work and 
effort they’ve put into maintaining their communities. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship Regina 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Her Majesty’s Canadian 
Ship Regina is homeward bound from the Persian Gulf and due 
to arrive at Esquimalt, BC (British Columbia) on Canada Day. 
 
Throughout Regina’s time in the Gulf, she was a proud 
ambassador for our capital city. When allied nations’ 
helicopters landed on her flight deck, they saw the Regina 
International Airport sign. Visitors onboard walked the 
passageways and saw the street signs for Dewdney, Albert, and 
Victoria. 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

 

For those sailing past, the RCMP horse and rider emblem on 
Regina’s bridge wings spoke of the ship’s proud association 
with the city of Regina and the RCMP. Gunner the Gopher, 
Gainer’s seagoing cousin, and their call sign, Roughrider, used 
during operations further reinforced the close ties between the 
ship and her namesake city. 
 
Once home the crew will have the opportunity for some 
well-deserved leave. In August, Commander Bill Truelove will 
turn over command to Dan Sing, and a delegation of Regina’s 
crew will visit our city this fall to take part in Remembrance 
Day services as well as our Grey Cup festivities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in wishing HMCS 
(Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship) Regina fair winds as she 
continues her journey home. In the words of the ship’s official 
motto, Floreat Regina, Let Regina Flourish! 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan History Book 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
always known that Saskatchewan’s history is a rich and 
colourful one. There’s a new book out this month, Mr. Speaker, 
that serves up a series of vignettes from our past and 
demonstrates just how fascinating that history truly is. 
 
University of Saskatchewan historian, Bill Waiser, and CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) producer, Paul Dederick 
are in Regina tomorrow to promote their book, Looking Back: 
True Tales from Saskatchewan’s Past. Based on the popular 
five-minute history series created by the authors and broadcast 
on CBC for 60 episodes, the book brings to life little known and 
often bizarre stories that celebrate real people of our past. 
 
From the counts at Whitewood and their failed beet distillery, to 
the Willow Bunch giant and his tragic end, to the wonder of the 
Debden miracle, and even how Melville’s population jumped 
from 4,000 to 60,000 in a day during the royal tour of 1939, this 
book offers readers a taste of the smaller events, both 
lighthearted and heartbreaking that have shaped our past. 
 
Waiser and Dederick breathe colour and life into the pages of 
this book and encourage us to get in touch with the stories that 
have shaped us. I would encourage all members to pick up a 
copy of Looking Back: True Tales from Saskatchewan’s Past. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Beef Industry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are now 
beginning the sixth week of the BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy) crisis in Canada after the discovery of one cow 
in Alberta that had BSE, and that has virtually paralyzed the 
beef industry due to trade restrictions placed on Canadian beef. 

The media headlines today describe all too clearly the situation 
the industry finds itself in: “Future bleak for ranchers”; “Scare 
may cost more than $650 million”; “Alberta county dubbed 
feedlot alley declares economic disaster from mad cow.” 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, the minister yesterday said he intends to go 
out . . . he intends to out-and-out reject a Saskatchewan Party 
common sense motion that has been proposed to have the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture meet regularly this summer 
to monitor the situation and developing government 
contingency plans in the face of the worst-case scenario — 
continued trade restrictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister putting his own political 
interests above working together to help meet the beef industry 
in the province through this crisis time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I said yesterday and reiterate 
to this House again today that the Leader of the Opposition 
today asked the question himself, which is only to promote his 
own political interests. That’s the only reason why, Mr. 
Speaker, that he does. Because I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I 
said yesterday to the media and to this House that we have, we 
have connected today across Canada all of the players that are 
going to be involved and have been involved in finding a plan 
on various different fronts. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we decided across Canada that we 
needed to find the solution to first the BSE and the issue about 
where in fact the cow was sourced. We were able to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, collectively across Canada, not because the House was 
sitting, Mr. Speaker, because provincial governments, the 
industry, and the federal government worked closely together to 
develop a plan about how to do that. 
 
The second piece, Mr. Speaker, that we worked on collectively, 
not because the House was sitting, Mr. Speaker, or any help 
from the opposition across, was to deal, Mr. Speaker, with the 
compensation. And we found the compensation piece for 
Saskatchewan and Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The finest 
history of this place is when we come together to solve 
problems and to work together for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask members not to be 
throwing . . . Order. Order. I would ask members not to be 
throwing personal remarks across the floor. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I related earlier, the headline said that the future is bleak for 
ranchers. That’s the major story in today’s Leader-Post. 
Survival of the Canadian beef industry is a matter of weeks or 
days instead of months and weeks, industry leaders are now 
saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister told the media yesterday that he 
wouldn’t support having the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture meet as proposed by the Saskatchewan Party, but if 
the border isn’t opened way off in August or later, it might be 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

worth getting the committee together then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the story says and the industry knows that August 
will be too late to be working together to save the industry. The 
provincial government needs to be proactive and co-operative 
now and plan together and work together so that trade 
restrictions can be discontinued and this will happen more 
quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the beef industry and the people of this province 
expect members of the government and the opposition to work 
together. Why won’t the minister agree to have this committee 
of the legislature, the Agriculture Committee of all things, meet 
through July to deal with this crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this minister and this Premier 
and this government has in the past called the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture together on a variety of different 
fronts. And this is not one of the issues, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture in fact would have a great 
deal of benefit today immediately. 
 
And I said that yesterday, and I have not ruled out the notion 
that into the future we may need to call the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture together to deal with the broader issue if in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, the national plan that we have today and the 
national strategy that we have today doesn’t work and we all 
need to come together then as a Saskatchewan people, of which 
the standing committee I think might be an appropriate way of 
doing that. And I said that we would do that if we need to into 
the future. 
 
But I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. I have here two letters or 
two pieces of correspondence that I wrote back to the 
Saskatchewan Party way back in January, Mr. Speaker, January 
4, 2002 and then again on March 5, 2002. And on both of those 
occasions, Mr. Speaker, I asked the Saskatchewan Party to 
provide me with some information as it related to the impact . . . 
or to the improvement or enhancements to the APF (agricultural 
policy framework). 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I have not received one 
piece of correspondence or one iota from that party in better 
than two years, Mr. Speaker, and they want me to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
what the minister is talking about — something about 202. He 
needs to get back to agriculture 101. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — We’ve got a job to do, Mr. Speaker. We 
need to be working together on behalf of the beef industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the industry itself acknowledges that the crisis 
time is right now, and the Minister of Agriculture knows that 

the opposition critic for Agriculture, the member for Watrous, 
has been working diligently on this case, working with the 
industry, working with the government side, working on the 
national scope to try to bring resolution to the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have done our part and we will continue to do 
our part on this side of the House. But there is more work to be 
done and there is more work to be done together with the 
government. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Even the minister admits that if the US (United States) border 
isn’t open by August, the issue won’t be about compensation; 
he says it will be about rationalization. Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
want to get to that point. 
 
Will the minister and the NDP government agree to support the 
Saskatchewan Party’s motion for the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture to meet through July with the option of recalling the 
legislature in August if the situation is not resolved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I said yesterday to the media 
that that option remains open to this government into the future. 
The Premier can recall the legislature at any time, Mr. Speaker. 
He does not need the Standing Committee on Agriculture for a 
meeting. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying a minute ago, I have 
asked on two occasions, in writing, to the Saskatchewan Party 
to provide me with some options as it relates, Mr. Speaker, to 
enhancing the agricultural policy framework in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . and I’ve asked the Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker, on a number of occasions now. 
 
And I can table the two letters if the member from Rosetown 
doesn’t understand who got them or where they went to. But I 
have not received, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve said this on a 
number of occasions in this House — I have not received from 
those 25 men and women one scrap of paper, Mr. Speaker, that 
will give me any idea about what they believe in or they think 
in terms of developing agricultural policy in this province. 
 
And today the Leader of the Opposition stands in his place and 
says, please invite me to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture so I can be updated in terms of what’s happening in 
BSE in Canada over the next several months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Car Thefts in Regina 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s pretty 
clear that the Agriculture minister doesn’t know how to run the 
shop and if he wants advice from us, it’s very easy. All he has 
to do is talk to his seatmate to call an election and then we can 
provide our information to them. 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

 

Mr. Speaker, last month the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety made a statement bragging about his plan to fight car 
thefts in Regina. But according to new figures released today, it 
isn’t working. There were 330 cars stolen in Regina in May. 
That’s an increase of 6.5 per cent from last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina is once again the car theft capital of 
Canada with more than 10 cars being stolen every day. What is 
the NDP going to do to address the car theft epidemic in this 
city? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again the 
member opposite has it wrong. Regina’s not the car theft capital 
of Canada; it is not seeing an epidemic. What we are seeing is 
what I had indicated in the ministerial statement was the reason 
that we would embark on phase 2, which is that we have seen a 
small spike in the number of auto thefts largely related to the 
fact that we have moved from young offenders over to more 
adult offenders. 
 
This 6 per cent increase is there; we were aware of it. It’s one of 
the reasons that we have put into place the second phase of the 
program, and Mr. Speaker, I have every reasonable . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well that’s a shocking admission by 
the member from Watrous that she’s sitting there laughing at 
this situation and how this affects Regina people. 
 
I was interested to read a pamphlet from one of the Sask Party 
candidates here who says their solution is that they’re going to 
start up boot camps. Well, Mr. Speaker, our approach to dealing 
with young offenders, our approach to dealing with this has 
been much more effective. We’ve brought down the auto theft 
rate. That solution by that mean-spirited Sask Party does not 
work, will not work, and is not going to be implemented. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting 
to listen to the minister that a 6.5 per cent increase is actually 
bringing down the numbers, and that 330 car thefts is a small 
spike. I’m amazed that the minister would have the gall to say 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of the problem kind of alluded to by the 
minister is our revolving-door justice system for young 
offenders. Police report that the same 18 or 20 young offenders 
are responsible for most of these car thefts. The police catch 
them, lock them up; the car theft numbers go down. Then the 
justice system lets them out again; the car theft numbers go up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Young Offenders Act is not working. Mr. 
Speaker, what is the NDP government doing to change the 
Young Offenders Act so there are meaningful penalties for 
these repeat car offenders? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well typical of the Sask Party if you 

ask me, Mr. Speaker, that they have always got to go to the 
extreme solution. Their solution as put forward by their 
candidates, as put forward by their critic, is to do nothing more 
than get the youth together and yell at them. 
 
That might work at a caucus meeting, but that is not going to 
work in terms of how to deal with the auto theft strategy. And I 
think that’s what the members opposite need to understand, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is, is that the auto 
theft strategy has been very successful. There are a number of 
chronic repeat offenders that we have identified. They are in 
fact dealt with as according to the law. There’s a point at which 
they have gone through the system; they were released back to 
the public as the courts have ordered. 
 
Surely no member opposite, no member of the Sask Party, is 
suggesting that we should be intervening where the courts are 
clearly responsible. 
 
The programs we have in place are working with alternative 
measures. I had indicated there was only a 10 per cent 
recidivism rate which is a truly successful number if you think 
about it — that 90 per cent of the young people involved in auto 
theft that go through the alternative measures program do not 
reoffend. And that is something the members opposite should 
understand as we look at the overall numbers for auto theft 
declining in the city of Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s amazing the minister can stand up and say that 
their system is working. Why are we talking about a 6.5 per 
cent increase in car thefts over last year if it’s working? I’m 
amazed the minister will stand up and say that publicly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other part of the problem is the shortage of 
police officers on the street and the fact the NDP has broken its 
promise to hire 200 new police officers. Mr. Speaker, according 
to figures we’ve received from the Regina Police Service there 
are only 19 more police officers on the force today than there 
were in 1999. 
 
In fact, if you take the Regina police, Saskatoon police, and the 
RCMP combined, there are fewer than 80 new officers 
compared to 1999 — nowhere near the 200 new officers the 
NDP promised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fewer officers on the street means more cars are 
being stolen. Why has the NDP broken its promise to hire 200 
new police officers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — . . . interfering by hollering across the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

guess we could either take the word of the member opposite or 
we could take the word of the police chief here. 
 
We could listen to police officials across the province who say 
in fact the strategies that we have in place to fight crime — 
whether it’s in terms of SHOCAP (serious and habitual youth 
offender comprehensive action program) and the additional 
funding we provided there, the new strategy we’ve got in place 
in the Battlefords, the auto theft strategy that’s working here — 
we could take the word of the police chiefs and the police 
officers of this city or I guess we could take the word of the 
retired member or soon-to-be retired member from Wood River. 
That’s the option. 
 
For my purpose I’d just as soon trust the police, take their word. 
They indicate that the strategy is working. They appreciate the 
new resources that have been put in place and the numbers will 
demonstrate that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s just 
amazing that the minister can get up and answer in a puerile 
manner of how it’s working when in fact the numbers are going 
up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the NDP’s broken promise, the police 
just don’t have enough resources to deal with all the crime in 
Regina. It’s not just car thefts that are up, contrary to what the 
minister is just talking about. 
 
According to figures we received from the Regina Police 
Service — and who are we going to take the advice from now, 
or the numbers, Regina Police Service or the minister? — but 
break and enters were also up in May. The number of break and 
enters jumped by 38 per cent, from May, from 289 in May 2002 
to 400 in May 2003. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, a large part of the problem is the shortage 
of police officers on the street and the NDP’s broken promise to 
hire 200 new police officers. Why has the NDP broken this 
promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated this 
time and again, that with the approach that we are taking, it is a 
targeted approach dealing with crime. And I have here a 
statement, as we had indicated with phase 2 of the auto theft 
strategy, that we were continuing with a targeted approach, we 
were putting additional resources in, and it was working. 
 
Well the members opposite seem to know a lot more about 
policing than obviously the city police force do because here’s 
what Clive Weighill says, who is the deputy police chief of this 
city. He says — understanding that yes, there has been a bit of a 
blip of an increase; we indicated that, that’s why we 
implemented phase 2 — what does he say? It’s a concern but 
we’re making progress. 
 
Why won’t the members opposite support the Regina city 
police in recognizing we’re making progress, that we have an 
approach that’s worked between the province, the city, the 

police, the Justice officials, and continue with the progress 
that’s been made, rather than stand up and attempt their cheap 
partisanship, as they do, to promote their boot camps and other 
extreme views? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Investments 

 
Mr. Wall: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation. 
Will the minister confirm that a special committee over at the 
Crown Investments Corporation, including the president, Frank 
Hart, have met recently with two companies — one a 
Toronto-based company — to discuss the potential privatization 
of the management of the $900 million worth of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) investment 
portfolio, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well as I’ve indicated before in many of my answers, we are 
always exploring options, Mr. Speaker. But I can assure that 
member, Mr. Speaker, that we have no intention — if he’s 
referring to the CIC III (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Industrial Interests Inc.) portfolio again — of 
privatizing that whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Party has acquired a confidential NDP government document 
that recommends the privatization of the management of the 
Crown Investments Corporation investment portfolio. 
According to the report from CIC, entitled Portfolio 
Management Options and Conceptual Recommendations, 
privatizing the management of CIC’s money-losing investment 
portfolio would, quote: 
 

. . . improve clarity, transparency, accountability, 
organizational effectiveness, and investment performance 
(Mr. Speaker). 
 

It would pretty much fix everything that was wrong over at 
CIC. That’s what the report says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister agree with his own NDP 
government’s report that CIC’s management of more than $900 
million in taxpayers’ assets lacks clarity, transparency, 
accountability, organizational effectiveness, and investment 
performance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well first of all I would say that we have learned in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that we need to take what that member 
says with a grain of salt, first of all, to be sure that what he’s 
saying is correct. 
 
But let me say . . . And he holds the document up, Mr. Speaker, 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

 

he holds it up as if it’s some revelation, waving his arms 
around, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me say that it is absolutely consistent with what I have said 
every day that that member has asked the question. Obviously 
we have explored many, many options as it pertains to the CIC 
III portfolio investments, Mr. Speaker. And let me say that there 
have been over the years many recommendations. 
 
Let me be clear. Amongst those recommendations, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has no intention of privatizing the 
CIC III portfolio, unlike what is apparently the proposition of 
that Sask Party if they were ever to become government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What this report 
amounts to, Mr. Speaker, what it amounts to is a deathbed 
confession by the NDP that their Crown corporation policy has 
failed, Mr. Speaker. What does it recommend? It recommends 
the separation of the government from the management of CIC 
III’s investment portfolio. Because according to the NDP’s 
report, the CIC III portfolio needs better direction. 
 
It recommends replacing the current board of directors with, 
and I quote, “a competent and credible private sector board.” 
Who’s on the current board of directors, Mr. Speaker, for CIC 
III? The hand-picked president, Frank Hart, and the minister, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question to the minister is this: does he agree with his own 
report that the current board of CIC III is incompetent and lacks 
credibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all let 
me say that based on that member’s record in here, I wouldn’t 
trust him to quote anything accurately, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing, there is nothing — if the 
members opposite would listen, Mr. Speaker — there is nothing 
inconsistent in that question that he asked and in my reply, Mr. 
Speaker. Our government, our CIC officials have, over the 
years and will continue into the future, Mr. Speaker, continue to 
explore options as it pertains to the CIC III investment 
portfolio, as it pertains to our subsidiary Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the prudent thing to do to have continual 
ongoing analysis of all of our investments whether it’s CIC III 
or our subsidiary Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s still more. There is 
something called phase 1 which is the recommendation that 
says you ought to separate the management from the 
government, move it over to a private sector or at least separate 
it from the government . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, recommendation no. 7 under phase 
1 of the plan in the NDP’s report is called branding. The report 
tells the NDP government that they have to change the name of 
CIC III to something less associated with the NDP government 
and its dismal record, presumably. They want to separate the 
CIC III from its money-losing investments in SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), the 
movie business, and stock market gambles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister agree with the conclusion of his 
own report that there needs to be a rebranding of the NDP’s 
Crown corporation policy in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well unlike 
that Sask Party opposite, Mr. Speaker, we stand by our record, 
Mr. Speaker. Talk about rebranding. They might change their 
name to try and hide from the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They might try and rebrand themselves to hide from 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, after the by-election they 
may want to rebrand themselves one more time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing inconsistent in what I have said 
about this investment, none whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, it is the 
prudent thing to do. 
 
And on a fairly regular basis, Mr. Speaker, that Sask Party 
opposite says they want independent analysis because they 
don’t trust the officials, Mr. Speaker. They want independent 
analysis. Well he holds up an apparent document, Mr. Speaker, 
that has some independent analysis, apparently. What’s wrong 
with that? We will continue to explore options as it pertains to 
CIC III and our subsidiary Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What this report is, this 
is a deathbed confession, Mr. Speaker, by a government in its 
dying days that recognizes that its Crown corporation policy has 
been a dismal failure in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Let’s review what the report says. The internal 
report says, and I quote, there needs to be, quote: 
 

. . . improved clarity, transparency, accountability, 
organizational effectiveness, and investment performance. 

 
The NDP report says the current board, the minister, and Mr. 
Hart should be replaced by a competent, credible board, Mr. 
Speaker. And finally the report says that CIC will be best 
served if it is rebranded or disassociated from the NDP 
government. 
 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, it couldn’t be more clear. The only possible 
rebranding that will give this province solid Crown corporation 
policy is to switch from the NDP brand to the Sask Party brand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier . . . The Premier 
wants to get up. Will he stand to his feet today and announce 
the next election and let the rebranding begin, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am drawn into this debate 
by the discussion of rebranding and seeking new image and so 
on. A most amazing thing has appeared in the Tisdale Parkland 
Review, the weekly newspaper. It appeared on Friday, Mr. 
Speaker — an ad here that says the new Carrot River Valley 
constituency, the Sask Party will be holding its nominating 
meeting for the new Sask Party candidate in the Carrot River 
Valley constituency. 
 
Now listen to this. You want to talk about rebranding and 
switching? Here’s what it says. Mr. Richard . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order, now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite seem very interested to see what their own ad says. 
Their own ad says that Mr. Richard Hildebrand will be 
contesting this nomination. Now get this, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
got a candidate in the Carrot River Valley by-election 
promoting their doctrines of privatization. Already they want 
rid of the candidate before they’ve even . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You talk about rebranding selection, Mr. 
Speaker. We will stand behind the principles of public 
ownership, public utilities, and public investment in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, order. Why is the member from Regina Dewdney on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member . . . Order, please. Order please, 
members. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, 23 
wonderful students from W. F. Ready School in the 
constituency of Regina Wascana. 
 

I had the opportunity to meet with them earlier and they asked a 
number of questions about the legislature and they proved to 
me, Mr. Speaker, that they are by far the best students and the 
very best school anywhere in the province. They’re intelligent 
and very eager to be here today. And they have one or two more 
days of school left. So I’d like to introduce to all of you the 
wonderful students from W. F. Ready collegiate. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 
would ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion of 
condolence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, after a few brief remarks I 
would make the motion of condolence, seconded by the Leader 
of the Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar; a 
motion of condolence to recognize the passing of a former 
colleague of ours in this House, Mr. Ian Hugh MacDougall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many will remember that Ian MacDougall served 
this House for an extended period of time in the 1960s, in fact 
right from 1960 to 1971. Mr. MacDougall spent much of his 
private career working in the oil industry. He began as a 
supervisor with the Producers Pipeline Ltd. and later after 
leaving elected office, Mr. MacDougall again worked in the 
industry; worked as a land man and a consultant in the Estevan 
area until his retirement in 1998. 
 
In his private life, Mr. MacDougall was an active participant in 
his community. He devoted many years to working with 
children in the local air cadet squadron. He was instrumental in 
establishing the woodland regional . . . Woodlawn Regional 
Park in Estevan. Mr. MacDougall was also a dedicated lifelong 
supporter of the Saskatchewan Roughriders football team and 
served a considerable period of time on the Riders’ executive, 
and I’m sure would have been extremely pleased with the 
Riders’ performance in Toronto last week. 
 
He was involved with the Elks, the Canadian Legion, and the 
Knights of Columbus, all organizations in his community that 
benefited from his involvement and leadership. 
 
Ian MacDougall’s first foray into elected office was as an 
alderman in the city of Estevan. He was elected to this 
Assembly in the 1960 general election, retained his seat in the 
1964 and 1967 elections. 
 
Mr. MacDougall remained interested in politics after leaving 
this Assembly and continued to be involved in his local party 
activities. And as a former member of this House, many of us 
will remember that Ian MacDougall was a long-serving 
associate member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association. 
 
And in recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly will express its most sincere sympathy with 
members of his bereaved family. 
 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the Leader of 
the Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
So moved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s indeed 
an honour to rise and second this motion, which was put 
forward by the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Although I didn’t have the pleasure of knowing Mr. Ian Hugh 
MacDougall, I along, I believe, with all my colleagues in the 
legislature have the utmost respect for those men and women 
who are prepared to give service to their province by standing 
for election — whether it be local election as Mr. MacDougall 
did, or whether it be at the provincial level and which Mr. 
MacDougall served for three terms, or even should it be at the 
federal level. 
 
Obviously for Mr. MacDougall’s record of achievements he 
was involved in his community, and that has always been a 
tradition of Saskatchewan people, and Mr. MacDougall has 
held that tradition to its highest level. And the people of this 
province are indeed grateful, and the opposition is grateful, for 
the service that he provided to the people of Saskatchewan as an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the Estevan 
constituency from 1960 until 1971. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Premier mentioned, Mr. MacDougall 
worked with children. He worked and supported the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders, the team that all Saskatchewan 
people love dearly. He was involved with the Elks, the 
Canadian Legion, and the Knights of Columbus. 
 
Mr. MacDougall was also a working man and contributed to the 
economy in one of Saskatchewan’s brightest industry, that 
being the oil and gas industry, as a supervisor with Producers 
Pipelines Ltd. And, Mr. Speaker, in that regard his legacy also 
lives on as the oil and gas sector is performing in southeast 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also want to record our sense of sorrow at Ian 
MacDougall’s passing. We wish to express that sympathy and 
our best wishes to the family, particularly to Mrs. MacDougall 
who is present in the legislature today, and we want to assure 
the family that our prayers and best wishes are with them, and 
that we do truly stand in appreciation of the work that Mr. 
MacDougall has done for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a privilege 
and a pleasure for myself to join with my colleagues in 
honouring the memory of Ian Hugh MacDougall. 
 
It was a pleasure and a privilege for me to meet and know Mr. 
MacDougall, a man with a great sense of humour and a man 
with a great deal of devotion, not only for the Liberal Party here 

in this province, but for the people of Saskatchewan and our 
very, very own Saskatchewan Roughriders. 
 
Ian MacDougall was a man who was proud of his Scottish 
heritage and, according to his wife Bernice, counted among the 
great moments of his life a gathering of the clans for the 
MacDougalls at Grandfather Mountain in West Virginia, and I 
understand a good time was had by all. 
 
Senator Davey Steuart remembers when election day came 
around, Ian MacDougall would put on his kilt and his Scottish 
outfit and show up at the committee rooms to put in the hard 
work, but also to boost the morale of the troops and to help get 
everyone over the top. 
 
Senator Steuart remembers Ian as a good friend, a faithful 
attendee in the legislature, and a member who took part in many 
debates and more than held his own, putting his points across 
forcefully and with clarity. He worked hard for his constituents, 
and even after he had finished serving in the legislature, he took 
an active interest in politics and what was going on in his 
community and indeed in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Bernie Collins, former Liberal MP (Member of Parliament) for 
Souris-Moose Mountain, said Mr. MacDougall never forgot the 
people who supported him. Bernie remembers when Ian and his 
wife, Bernice, moved to Regina, Ian would call Bernie to let 
him know he was going to a funeral or an event for a friend or a 
former constituent wherever it was in southern Saskatchewan. 
He never forgot his roots or his friends. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Of all the people I came across in Estevan, Mr. Collins said, he 
is one of the five to whom I owe a tremendous debt of gratitude. 
He went out of his way for people and to help them in any way 
he could. Bernie said: as dedicated as Mr. MacDougall was to 
politics, he was equally as dedicated to the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders. If the Roughriders ever had to suit up another man 
to go in, Ian would volunteer to be that man, remembers Mr. 
Collins. Mr. MacDougall never got the chance to suit up but he 
did the next best thing and served with distinction on the 
Roughrider executive for many years. 
 
Mr. MacDougall’s greatest passion though was for his wife, 
Bernice. They loved to dance. So much so that they went on a 
cruise with the Emeralds band and ended up dancing, not only 
every night but sometimes twice during the day the entire 
cruise. 
 
Mr. MacDougall was a great family man and a man with a great 
sense of humour. Over 400 people attended his funeral in April 
with the eulogy given by Senator and former Saskatchewan 
lieutenant governor, Jack Wiebe. It is difficult to sum up the 
man with such a record of public service but perhaps it is best 
fitting to let Bernice have the last word — he had a great sense 
of humour, he had a great loyalty to the Liberals, and he was a 
great family man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he will be fondly remembered and sadly missed 
by all who knew him, and I wish to join with my colleagues in 
this Assembly in extending my sincere sympathy to his wife, 
Bernice, and his bereaved family. 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege as well to rise today to talk of Ian MacDougall. 
 
I first met Ian in 1977 when I went to work for, at the time, 
Dome Petroleum down in the Estevan and southeast area. Ian 
had started work many years before with the — you might say 
on the same job but with a different company because the name 
seemed to change quite often — and he started off with 
Producers Pipelines Ltd. which after Dome Petroleum became 
Producers Pipelines Inc. again, which was a Saskatchewan 
company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my first couple of days on the job I met Ian. I had to go 
into Estevan to do interviews and get all the paperwork done, 
and Ian was one of the people that I met with and talked on that 
particular day in April. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was . . . You found out very early about 
Ian’s political interests. He made no bones about it that he was a 
passionate Liberal and professed that and defended it as well. 
And you have to remember in 1977, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals 
were still in power in Ottawa and Mr. Trudeau was certainly a 
very controversial figure in Western Canada but Ian defended 
him nevertheless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ian’s job with Producers Pipelines was dealing with people. He 
went out and dealt with the farmers. He worked at consulting 
and supervising some of the construction projects. But he was 
always dealing with people, dealing with the people in the 
communities. And you could certainly tell that he had a very 
good rapport with all of those that he dealt with and that was of 
benefit to the company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we would go to a company function — be it a company 
meeting such as a safety meeting, or what was called the JIC, 
the Joint Industrial Council, which dealt with employees and 
management, Mr. Speaker — Ian was always there. And the 
discussion after the meeting was over always turned to either 
politics or to the Roughriders. 
 
And Ian worked for many, many years as a volunteer for the 
Roughriders; he served on the executive. But around Estevan, 
everyone knew if you wanted to talk about the Riders or you 
wanted to find out how to get tickets, Ian was the guy you 
talked to. And he worked extremely hard in southeast 
Saskatchewan to make the Roughriders a successful entity that 
people wanted to support, and was instrumental in bringing a lot 
of resources from southeast Saskatchewan in support of the 
Roughriders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I didn’t always — or hardly ever in fact — agree with 
Ian’s political views, we certainly had some good discussions 
around the table after our meetings or at the barbecues, Mr. 
Speaker. And they were always enjoyable, at least for myself 
and for Ian. We never changed each other’s minds but we 
certainly had an opportunity to express ourselves, and I think 
the rest of the people around sort of enjoyed the show as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to offer my condolences to Bernice and family on 
behalf of myself and my family as well as the member from 

Estevan, who today is doing business of the House in the cattle 
industry, Mr. Speaker. And she expressed her desires to offer 
her condolences as well. So on behalf of our members, Mr. 
Speaker, thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
would move and again seconded by the Opposition House 
Leader: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript of 
oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
stand on behalf of the government and table responses to 
written questions nos. 759 through 762 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — 759, 760, 761, and 762 have been submitted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 9 — Future Actions Relating to Occurrence of 
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a 
few remarks about the cattle industry in this province and then 
I’ll be moving a motion concerning the BSE crisis in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the beef industry is a leader among agricultural 
industries in Canada. In the past four years beef exports have 
increased by 55 per cent nationally from $2.7 billion in 1997 to 
4.2 billion in 2001. Canada is the third largest beef exporter in 
the world, with 76 per cent of our exports going to the United 
States. 
 
Since beef consumption in Canada is expected to remain 
relatively stable, the export market will become increasingly 
important to us if we are to continue to expand the industry, and 
Saskatchewan is the one province best equipped to expand our 
cattle sector. 
 
Beef is a regular part of the Canadian diet with 89 per cent of 
Canadian households purchasing beef. The average Canadian 
consumes 50 pounds of beef each year. 
 
Out of our total Canadian exports of beef, Mr. Speaker, 76 per 
cent go to the United States, 8.8 per cent to Mexico, 6.3 per cent 
to Japan, and 8.9 per cent to other destinations. 
 
Convenience is becoming a big market. Heat-and-serve beef 
entrees have grown to an $84 million category in just over three 
years, and this is an area where Western Canada is equipped to 
create some real value-added spinoffs. 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

 

Consumers are demanding safe, high quality, and consistent 
beef products that take the environment and animal welfare into 
consideration. Mr. Speaker, the industry’s responding to 
consumer concerns with on-farm quality assurance programs as 
well as branded, case-ready, and certified products. Emerging 
new markets like Japan, South Korea, and China, Mr. Speaker, 
offer new opportunities in retail food service and processed beef 
sectors. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the value of our Saskatchewan 
beef exports has grown from 58 million to almost $70 million 
over the last four years. These figures do not include the export 
of live beef cattle which are processed elsewhere. Saskatchewan 
does account for approximately 27 per cent of the beef cows in 
Canada, although only a portion are processed in the province. 
 
The value of Saskatchewan beef exports show an increase of 20 
per cent between 1998 and 2001, and an increase of 14 per cent 
from 2000 to 2001. In terms of processed beef products, Mr. 
Speaker, there was an increase of 35 per cent between 1998 and 
2001, and an increase of 123 per cent from 2000 to 2001. 
 
The majority of Saskatchewan beef processing companies 
acquire their carcasses locally, with a limited number coming 
from Alberta. Of Saskatchewan’s total beef exports, Mr. 
Speaker, 96.6 per cent go to the United States of America, with 
2.3 per cent going to Mexico, and 1.1 per cent to other 
destinations. There are eight federally inspected and seven 
provincially inspected beef processing plants in Saskatchewan 
as of January 2002. 
 
Statistics Canada semi-annual survey estimates the number of 
cattle and calves on Saskatchewan farms at 2.44 million head 
on January 1, 2003, up 1 per cent from January 1, 2002. 
 
Exports of Saskatchewan cattle were up 14 per cent in 2002 
compared to last year. Fewer animals were shipped to Alberta 
and more were moved into the United States due to feed 
shortages caused by the 2002 drought. And that market 
absorbed all of those cattle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The survey reported the number of beef cows in Saskatchewan 
at 1.25 million head, up 2 per cent from January a year earlier; 
beef herd replacement heifers at 160,000 head; heifers for 
slaughter at 47,000 head, up 104 per cent from 2002; steer 
inventories of 57,000 head, up 73 per cent from 2002; and the 
number of calves at 828,000 head. 
 
Western Canada’s total inventory of cattle and calves was 
estimated at 9.61 million head, January 1, 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the year 2002, the number of cattle and calves 
marketed through Saskatchewan auction markets and to 
Saskatchewan packing plants and abattoirs totalled 1.74 million 
head, 15.7 per cent above the previous year of 1.5 million head. 
Marketings were 24.3 per cent above the five-year average and 
31.3 per cent above the ten-year average, Mr. Speaker. 
 
373,580 head of cattle and calves were marketed for slaughter, 
9.1 per cent above the previous year. Slaughter cattle 
marketings were 14.4 per cent above the five-year average and 
9.7 per cent above the ten-year average. And cattle shipped to 
Saskatchewan plants totalled 166,860 head, 5 per cent above the 

previous year. 
 
Cattle shipments to Saskatchewan plants were 2.8 per cent 
above the five-year average and eight-tenths of a percent above 
the ten-year average. Slaughter cattle shipments out of province 
totalled 206,720 head, 12.6 per cent above the previous year. 
Slaughter cattle exports were 26 per cent above the five-year 
average and 11.4 per cent above the ten-year average. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, surely members of this Assembly — at least every 
member who is paying attention — can see from these industry 
statistics that the beef sector is one of the sectors in our 
economy that has actually been growing and one of the great 
engines for growth for the whole economy of this province, not 
just rural Saskatchewan. 
 
If something doesn’t happen to open the US border to trade in 
cattle and cattle products very soon, this government will 
preside over the demise of the beef industry in this province that 
we have come to know . . . (inaudible) . . . all members, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now for the representatives of the beef industry, Mr. Speaker, 
have described the current situation as the worst crisis to hit 
agriculture in our province’s history. Yet we hear those 
members over there acting as if there is nothing more important 
than their summer vacation plans. 
 
Last week we heard the Minister of Agriculture for 
Saskatchewan stand in this Assembly and decry the federal 
government and opposition for adjourning the House of 
Commons in the middle of the BSE crisis. And not more than 
five minutes later, Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader 
stood two feet away from him and demanded that this 
Assembly be shut down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this crisis began, we have heard our Ag 
minister declare on an almost daily basis that the border to the 
US is about to be opened — this despite precedent and evidence 
that suggests that it may be closed for some time to come, 
which would cripple our industry. The future of the industry is 
now measured in days and weeks — not months, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no time to waste. 
 
It is important that this Assembly and all members be seen to be 
. . . remain engaged on this issue. The entire beef industry 
remains at risk and I don’t believe it’s too much to ask that 
members of this Assembly — or at least members of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture — give up some of their 
summer to remain in touch with this issue on behalf of their 
constituents. We will be held to account by the industry and the 
people of Saskatchewan to do no less. 
 
I recognize that the official government agenda is almost 
complete. However the issue of BSE is so important, elected 
members in this province simply cannot turn our backs on the 
ranchers and feedlot operators as well as other sectors of the 
industry that are adversely affected by this crisis just simply 
because of a weak government legislative agenda. 
 
If this Assembly is to adjourn in the next week or two, it is 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

incumbent upon the Minister of Agriculture to keep all 
legislators informed through the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture. That is his job and it is our job. 
 
There’s great concern that Japanese and Korean worries about 
BSE may cause the US to close its border to Canadian beef for 
the foreseeable future. The US exports much beef to Japan and 
Korea and may not be willing to risk that market by reopening 
the border. The US government is taking comments on the 
current border closure until July 28 and rarely do they ever 
waive the period of comment. It is imperative that we are seen 
by our neighbours to the south to be doing everything possible 
to solve this problem, and it is even more important that we do 
everything possible to solve this problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, the leadership shown by Ralph Klein 
will pay off. But in case it doesn’t, I think this legislature has to 
be prepared to come together to discuss the issue and to 
question the minister further. 
 
Further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that if the borders are 
not reopened by August 5 it is our responsibility to reconvene. 
Again it may put a crimp in the member from Regina Victoria’s 
summer vacation and other members’ on that side of the floor 
summer vacations, but it is our job. 
 
All members, Mr. Speaker, as government members and 
opposition members, must be seen to be proactive in this issue. 
We must be seen to be doing all that we can to help the 
situation. It doesn’t seem too much to ask to direct the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture to meet weekly throughout the 
month of July to monitor the issues related to BSE. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it is the very least that the industry should be able to 
expect from this government and from us as their elected 
representatives in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost every rural seat in this province is 
represented by a member from this side of the floor. And since 
the official opposition has standing on the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, it is only proper that this be the tool to monitor 
the BSE crisis in this province, at least through the critical 
month of July. 
 
I truly hope, Mr. Speaker, that this government will do the right 
thing for the cattle industry and the people of Saskatchewan and 
support this motion. It really is the very least that we can do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move this motion and I 
anticipate the full support of the government in this endeavour. 
Mr. Speaker, the motion reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly directs the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture to meet weekly throughout the month of July, 
2003 to monitor issues related to BSE, should the 
Assembly stand adjourned at that time, and that, if the US 
border is not reopened to Canadian beef exports by August 
1, 2003, that this Assembly reconvene on August 5, 2003 to 
receive a report on the BSE issue from the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion will be seconded by the 
member from Watrous. 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
closure of the US border to Canadian beef due to only one 
reported case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy has the 
potential to very quickly become the largest economic disaster 
that this country has ever seen. 
 
I was reading last night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the June 16 issue 
of the Canadian . . . or Cattle Buyers Weekly. And I was 
particularly impacted by an article entitled “BSE uncertainty 
weighs on market.” And the article states, and I quote: 
 

The longer the ban continues, the more desperate the 
financial crisis becomes for the Canadian industry. One 
Canadian analysis says that a one-month ban will cost the 
industry $550 million. A four-month ban will cost it $2.5 
billion. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the border has been closed for six weeks 
now and even though the minister has stated week after week 
that he believes that it will be opening very soon, the reality is 
that there has been absolutely no evidence that the border will 
be opened any time soon. 
 
The science has been completed and the US doesn’t appear to 
be any closer to opening the border because the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no political will on their 
part to lift the ban. Their cattle producers, the cattle producers 
in the US, are quite gleeful by this closure because they’re 
receiving a better price for their beef than they have for some 
time. 
 
Furthermore Japan and Korea’s position on Canadian beef 
makes the situation even more alarming. They have not only 
banned the import of cattle and beef products from Canada, but 
they have also stated that they will not accept US exports unless 
it is certified that it did not originate from Canadian cattle. 
 
Japan was the largest export market for the US in 2002 and 
Korea was the third largest export market for the US. Combined 
they are a crucial trading partner for the US and worth 2.5 
billion to $3 billion per year. If both Korea and Japan stay firm 
on this decision, one option for the US is to segregate Canadian 
cattle which will be costly and cumbersome; and the other 
option, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not to lift the ban on the border. 
 
There are reports that say Japan has given the US a July 1 
deadline to provide a proposal as to what the US will do or 
Japan will come up with its own proposal. It’s ironic, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s ironic that the Japanese parliament has just 
extended its session for another month so that gives it plenty of 
time to put forward proposals of its own. We need to be very, 
very concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to what those 
proposals will be. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this brings me to the response by our 
Agriculture minister yesterday when he was asked if he would 
support our motion. And his response was absolutely ludicrous 
and unbelievably hypocritical. He told the reporters yesterday 
that he would not support the calling of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture to meet weekly throughout the month of July 
because he couldn’t trust the opposition. I don’t understand, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what he’s been afraid of. 
 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

 

Since the one case of BSE has been reported, every single 
member of the Saskatchewan Party has been extremely careful 
not to make this a political issue. On this side of the House, we 
have all . . . every one of us has recognized that there is 
absolutely nothing to be gained by making this issue political. 
And there is an incredible amount to lose for the producers of 
this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we don’t handle this 
whole situation very, very carefully. 
 
If there has ever been a political spin been put on this issue, it’s 
been made by that Agriculture minister and that NDP 
government who just finished having a good chuckle. Well 
maybe they should go back in Hansard and check to see how 
his minister has answered some very serious questions that 
we’ve asked that have not been political in nature. We have 
asked questions about the BSE most days and they have always 
been carefully worded, only asking for information and an 
update on the investigation. 
 
The questions have given our Agriculture minister the golden 
opportunity, day after day, to update and reassure the public 
that everything that was being done . . . or that could be done 
was being done. That gave him the opportunity to do that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has always felt that keeping the public 
informed and reassuring them is far more important than any 
political games that that minister may want to play. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what evidence, what evidence does anyone on that 
side of the House have that we’re going to make this a political 
issue? 
 
We supported, we supported the CFIA (Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency) investigation and complimented the 
province’s co-operation with that investigation. 
 
We supported the minister’s decision to put together an industry 
advisory committee and complimented him on that decision. 
 
We supported the government’s position that the federal 
government should waive the two-week waiting period on 
Employment Insurance applications for workers affected by the 
slowdown and the beef industry. 
 
We supported the provincial government’s position that the 
federal government . . . with the federal government that a 
compensation package should be separate and distinct from the 
agriculture policy framework, and we even passed an 
emergency motion to that effect. 
 
We supported the Premier when he stated that just a loan 
guarantee from the federal government would not be 
acceptable. 
 
We supported the Premier’s proposal for a cattle recovery 
program. And in fact, we have been far more supportive of the 
Premier’s proposal than the actual program that’s being forced 
upon this province by the federal government. 
 
So I have no idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where this minister’s 
coming from in trying to make it a political issue now. 
 
If this Assembly and the legislative committees serve no 

meaningful purpose and the . . . then the minister should let the 
public know that he doesn’t think there’s any purpose to this 
Assembly, that he doesn’t think that there’s any purpose to the 
Legislative Assembly or the legislative committees, or anything 
that’s done in the legislature. He should be telling the public 
that he has no respect for that process whatsoever. The 
hypocrisy of this position is so obvious, I don’t even know how 
he’s going to defend his position. 
 
(15:00) 
 
This is the minister who criticized the federal government for 
adjourning when such a critical issue was still unresolved. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a quote from Hansard dated June 20 — this 
was a comment by our Agriculture minister in reference to the 
federal government adjourning: 
 

And what have they done, Mr. Speaker? They’ve adjourned 
and agreed to adjourn the national government House right 
in the middle of one of the biggest issues that’s facing 
Canada today. 

 
He was appalled. He was appalled. And yet he can’t even call 
together a committee. That’s our deputy . . . or that’s our 
Deputy Premier. That’s our Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder who said on June 19, who said 
on June 19, and again I’m quoting from Hansard: 
 

Has the Liberal member of this legislature participated in 
any meaningful way to assist the people of Saskatchewan 
as . . . (we move) through the BSE crisis? He says we have 
work yet to do. He’s right we have work left to do. 

 
And do you know who said that in Hansard? Our Premier, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That’s a quote from our Premier. He knows 
that there’s work left to do on this extremely important issue. 
This is a minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a Premier, whose 
government wants to reconstruct or restructure the legislative 
proceedings so that more government business will be 
conducted in committee. And they . . . The member from 
Regina Dewdney spoke to . . . in quite length to that particular 
issue. And I would like to quote from him in Hansard of May 
13 . . . On May 15 the member from Regina Dewdney, who 
says it was an extremely good speech, said: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the advancements that this 
government has initiated with democratic reform of the 
legislature, reforms that bring the people of Saskatchewan 
closer to government. 

 
Further along in his speech he stated: 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk about the new 
opening . . . the opening up of the committee structure in 
the legislature that’s been proposed by this government. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s going to have citizens and 
stakeholders being able to go before (the) committees of 
the legislature — all-party committees of the legislature — 
to talk about proposed legislation, to put forward ideas, 
amendments, concerns, so that all members of the . . . 
committee from all parties of the legislature have an 
opportunity to hear from those stakeholders firsthand. It’s 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

(an) opening up democracy so that the citizens of this 
province have a greater say in the future of our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are significant steps forward. 
That’s talking about valuing the opinions of others. It’s 
talking about listening to the opinions of all. It’s talking 
about working with all people to make the province a better 
place. 

 
Further along, he stated: 
 

That’s what democracy is about. It’s about being able to 
speak freely about your concerns. And at the end of the 
day, democracy says that the minority have the say and the 
majority, through voting, get their way. Well on this side 
of the House, (he stated) we believe very strongly in that 
principle. We believe . . . that. 

 
That’s rather interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But this Agriculture minister doesn’t see any purpose in a 
legislative Agriculture Committee meeting just once a week to 
discuss what has the potential to be the most important 
agriculture crisis that this province has ever seen. 
 
If the Deputy Premier of this province — and we’ll assume that 
the Premier supports his position — believes that the legislative 
committees are that ineffective and that useless, then why in the 
world is this Assembly going to the expense of putting in all the 
necessary infrastructure to room 110 so that the two committees 
can be run congruently and then telecasted? Why are we going 
to that expense if legislative committees are simply not that 
important? What is the point to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
The truth of the matter is if this Agriculture minister can’t make 
political hay for himself, then he doesn’t know what to do. He 
does not have a clue what to do. He has no idea how to 
co-operate. He doesn’t believe in anything that his colleague 
from Regina . . . or Regina Dewdney said on May 13. He would 
call that just simply rhetoric. He obviously doesn’t believe in a 
word that was said by his own member, his own colleague. 
 
A reporter asked me yesterday why I felt the need to have the 
committee sit once a week. And she suggested that I should just 
pick up the phone and phone the minister each week and get an 
update. Well that would be a really novel thought, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. If we had a minister that I could count on to return 
those calls, that would be a real novel treat. But we simply 
don’t have a minister that’s going to do that. 
 
I represent the constituency that has the largest feedlot in this 
province. Brad Wildeman of Poundmaker is on the minister’s 
advisory team and he couldn’t get a better man to do the job. 
Brad and I talk fairly regularly but, in all fairness to Brad, his 
plate is full and he has a lot of concerns and a lot of people that 
he is very concerned about. He is giving more of his time than 
anyone will ever know or can even imagine the amount of time 
that that man has committed to this situation and to the industry. 
 
He has made more than one trip to Ottawa. He has been to 
Alberta numerous times since the BSE case was reported. He’s 
been to Vancouver. He’s made the two-hour drive to Regina 
any time the minister needs him. He is taking a lot of calls from 

other producers who want some answers or just some 
reassurance, and he has spent hours and hours on conference 
calls with industry stakeholders, and with the federal 
government, and he’s taking most of the media calls on behalf 
of the industry. 
 
And it would be nice, it would be very, very nice, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if he didn’t have me also making demands on his time 
to get updates because our minister, our Agriculture minister, 
wants to play political games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Agriculture minister is more concerned about 
his political behind than he has . . . than he is about any issue to 
deal with agriculture in this province. Every chance that he can 
possibly get, every chance that he can possibly get, he tries to 
answer all questions with the same old political rhetoric. He 
continuously accuses myself and the Leader of the Opposition 
of not having any agriculture policy, of not having any 
suggestions, and he has two favourite quotes of myself that he 
has used continuously and continuously because he can’t come 
up with anything new. And he uses these repeatedly to avoid 
addressing or answering to any real issues on the agriculture 
front, his portfolio, his responsibility. He’s the government, 
he’s the minister, and he’s the one that is simply falling back, 
time and time again, on the same old tired quotes — one of 
which is from two years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my political background, I will willingly admit, is 
pretty shallow. In fact I was told by one seasoned politician — 
one that I respect very much — that I am very politically naive. 
And I know that that minister has a fairly lengthy political 
background. He’s been at this for a while. 
 
So it’s with great humour that I listen to that minister 
continually use the same old quotes and the same old 
accusations because even I know, with my inexperience, even I 
know it’s not giving him any political mileage. It’s transparent 
rhetoric and no one is listening to him, and no one is taking 
these cute little quotes seriously. And do you know what? He’s 
still — he can use them all he wants — he’s still going to lose 
in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I am requesting leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the east 
gallery, there is a number of students, 27 to be exact, grades 5 
and 6 from the school of Lucky Lake. I wish to welcome them 
here. They are here with their teacher Audrey Weir, chaperones 
Terry Hall, Sonny Luchenski, Lyndon Simonson, Lloyd 
Simonson, Laurie Kelk, Bonnie Petrie, and Carrie Overlid. 
 
I hope they enjoy the proceedings here. We’re doing a private 
member’s motion right now. And if I have time I will visit with 
you after your visit. 
 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

 

So I would ask all members to welcome you here to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 9 — Future Actions Relating to Occurrence of 
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 

(continued) 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s 
nice to see the classroom here. 
 
And it was interesting in the bit of a break that we had for the 
introduction, we had the member for Saskatoon Eastview 
chanting away, “And that’s not political?” Of course it’s 
political right now. Of course it is. The minister has used 
political excuses for not addressing a really serious issue. Yes, I 
am going to push back. Is that such a surprise? Of course I’m 
going to push back. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the excuses that the minister gives 
for not supporting our motion is that the Saskatchewan Party 
never has any solutions. Well let’s just take a quick review of 
the last two years, and I was time limited so I am sure there’s 
many things that I have missed. 
 
But let’s go back to September 19, 2001 when we laid out our 
ethanol policy prior to that government having a clue what their 
policy was going to be at. 
 
Let’s go to May 3, 2002. We called for a conference of the 
Western provinces to come to . . . come together to develop a 
united position in response to the US trade attacks on 
agriculture and softwood lumber. It’s something we called for I 
believe three times before the Premier caught on and decided 
hey, maybe it’s a good idea, maybe it would be more effective 
than a strongly worded letter, and did actually have that 
conference. 
 
On May 23, 2002 we proposed a $10 million program to assist 
drought-stricken livestock producers, and July 22, 2002 we 
proposed a six-point plan that could help address the serious 
drought situation in this province. 
 
On August 14, 2002 we called on the provincial government to 
allow cutting of more than 2,500 acres of Crown owned hay 
land next to the Rafferty-Alameda dam so as much as 4,000 
tonnes of feed could be provided for the struggling cattle 
producers. 
 
On August 30, 2002 we called on the provincial government to 
change their crop insurance policy so that it did not force 
farmers to go to the expense of spraying for grasshoppers when 
the crop was already a complete write-off. 
 
On November 6, 2002 we called on the federal government to 
remove the CWB (Canadian Wheat Board) monopoly on the 
marketing of wheat and barley and to make legislative changes 
to ensure that producers were not jailed for the simple act of 
marketing his or her own grain. 
 

On December 19, 2002 we suggested that, due to the severe 
provincial-wide drought of 2002, farmers should be given the 
option of excluding the 2002 yields from their long-term 
average for the purpose of calculating crop insurance coverage 
levels. 
 
On May 6, 2002 we called the surcharge on crop insurance 
premiums to be waived in light of the fact that it is a very unfair 
change when the producers have just faced two years of severe 
drought. And I’ll change the date of that; I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That was 2003. 
 
And just last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we suggested that the 
province should be asking the federal government if we could 
have the same grasshopper program that’s been given to 
Alberta. 
 
We have continually pressured the minister to be an active 
voice at the table when the risk management program is being 
designed by the federal government and all the other provinces 
except for ours and Quebec. 
 
So now, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I’m sure I missed a few things 
— but now let’s review the minister’s accomplishments. He’s 
so quick to answer our questions by saying we have no 
suggestions; there’s no point calling the committee together 
because we need to . . . you know, we have no ideas. Well let’s 
check his record out since he’s been minister. 
 
For two consecutive years he’s cut the Agriculture budget by 
$40 million. Two years in a row he’s cut the Agriculture 
budget. For two years in a row that Agriculture minister has 
increased crop insurance premiums and he’s cut, he’s gutted the 
crop insurance program. 
 
Do you know what he did last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker? He 
tried to sell the producers that he was only increasing it by 7 per 
cent. But unfortunately they can do their math a little better than 
that minister can do his math because when they did the 
calculations, he had to backtrack and say, whoops it’s a little bit 
more than 7 per cent. It certainly was. Some producers were 
faced with a 60 per cent increase on their crop insurance 
premiums. At least this year he came clean and said that the 
average increase would be 52 per cent. 
 
He said that our six-point plan to address the drought issue 
wasn’t possible because the federal government wouldn’t allow 
it. And at the same time as those words were almost leaving his 
lips, Ralph Goodale was downtown in Regina saying the federal 
government would do whatever it could to the crop insurance 
program to make it flexible, to address the extreme drought 
condition that was happening in our province at the time. He 
said it wasn’t . . . that Agriculture minister said it wasn’t 
possible. This how great his ideas are. 
 
(15:15) 
 
He is sure very, very quick to cast a stone, but let him defend 
this particular record. He said that our suggestion for money for 
water infrastructure — something that is not ad hoc; something 
that would be there for a long time to address drought issues for 
many years to come — was just a dumb idea. 
 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

He did, their government did finally come out with an ethanol 
strategy but it was after we’d already announced our own. So I 
don’t see how he can claim it as only their idea and suggest that 
we have had no suggestions. 
 
He made welcome changes to The Farm Land Security Act, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but that’s quite a hoot too because that has 
been the Saskatchewan Party policy since its inception, was 
changes to The Farm Land Security Act. So how the . . . 
whatever could he claim that to be his own idea and that the 
Saskatchewan Party is void of ideas? 
 
He announced, he announced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a $220 
million drought assistance package which only took less than 
five minutes for everyone to do the math and figure out that it 
only amounted to $20 million of new money for any of the 
producers in the province. 
 
He announced a hog loan program, one which the 
Saskatchewan Party supported, we supported. But it wasn’t a 
new program; it’s one that they used in the past and they just 
resurrected it at the time of need, and we support that. 
 
He announced a conservation cover program which only covers 
a maximum of 50 acres when the average Saskatchewan farm, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is around 1,600 acres. 
 
He announced a loopy little rainfall lottery which was supposed 
to be the big enhancement to crop insurance, but it did nothing 
to identify where there was a need for assistance and it was 
restricted, very restricted, to how many producers could 
participate. 
 
He announced the Farm Families Opportunities Initiative and 
again that’s something we supported. But again, it has very 
narrow limitations as to who can participate. 
 
So where is this minister’s ideas? He will answer questions on 
accusing the Saskatchewan Party of not having ideas, not 
having solutions, not having suggestions. Where is his grand 
solutions here? 
 
Isn’t it annoying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the facts keep 
getting in the way of the good little NDP spin that he wants to 
put on everything, when the list of what’s been done gets in the 
way of how he wants to spin it? 
 
This minister so wants the public and the media to believe that 
they have all the answers. Then why are so many producers in 
this province struggling, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
There is no vision in anything that this Agriculture minister has 
accomplished; there has been no long-term planning. It’s crisis 
management and it’s weak crisis management at that because 
this NDP government has run this province’s finances so far 
into the ditch that they can’t implement anything that’s 
meaningful to the agriculture industry in this province. 
 
The minister needs to come clean. He needs to stop playing 
games and he needs to come clean. 
 
What exactly is his agriculture policy? What exactly is his 
agriculture policy? Because I’ve never heard him state it. I have 

never heard any member on that side of the House state what 
their agriculture policy is. They like to accuse us of not having 
an agriculture policy; let’s hear what theirs is. And if he has 
one, if he has an agriculture policy that’s more than two lines 
long, let’s hear him lay it out when he addresses this motion. 
 
I challenge him to put his money where his mouth is and lay out 
the agriculture policy, his agriculture policy. He can chirp all he 
wants about the Saskatchewan Party’s agriculture policy but his 
record as Agriculture minister speaks for itself. He has done 
nothing for the producers of this province. 
 
And this NDP government is going to be voted into oblivion if 
they ever get up enough courage to call an election. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to be supporting the motion put 
forward by the member from Thunder Creek. Almost all of the 
rural . . . of rural Saskatchewan is represented by Saskatchewan 
Party MLAs. Some of us even own cows. We need to be 
informed. We need to have the opportunity to bring forward our 
constituents’ suggestions, ideas, and concerns so they can be 
discussed and considered. 
 
There needs to be — this is getting critical — there needs to be 
a 30-day strategy, a 60-day strategy, a 90-day strategy if the US 
border remains closed. The committee can meet with the 
industry and listen to their suggestions. The minister and his 
officials could meet with the committee and brief them on their 
updates. The committee could, if the minister would allow it, 
set aside political differences and treat this crisis with the 
seriousness that the beef industry deserves. 
 
This finding of one case of BSE has indeed put our 
governments and our cattle industry into an ocean of uncharted 
territory. This is our Agriculture minister’s opportunity to prove 
that he can swim. 
 
I will be supporting the motion put forward by the member 
from Thunder Creek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m interested in getting into briefly speaking to the 
resolution that’s been put forward today by the Saskatchewan 
Party. But only, Mr. Speaker, from the point of view of 
providing some factual information to the House, Mr. Speaker, 
and then proceeding to a vote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say on the onset, Mr. Speaker, that when the members 
opposite stand on their feet and talk about this particular issue, 
never mind the other issues around agriculture, but just, let’s 
just take some time to speak about this very issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When in fact it was first announced that there was BSE in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, the very first thing that we did is that we 
contacted the industry immediately, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
what we did is we got the industry into Regina immediately, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and organized a process for which we 
could have contact throughout the province with all of the 
industry. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, what we did immediately is that we 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

 

contacted all of the Agriculture ministers across the country and 
very quickly then called an emergency meeting of Agriculture 
ministers; simultaneously the premiers across the country in 
Western Canada too were having a conversation. So 
immediately within short order what happened is that the 
industry, the governments at both the national and the 
provincial level, came together immediately and began to put 
together a strategy for which we would be working on this 
particular issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we went through the process, both at the provincial 
level and at the national level, the idea here, Mr. Speaker, was 
to develop a plan of which we would be able to manage this 
particular issue over a period of time. And the strategy, Mr. 
Speaker, was that we would develop a plan that would take us 
through right until the end of August of this given year, 
knowing full well that there will be a variety of different issues 
that will transpire between now and the end of August, and that 
in order to get there we need a number of commitments from a 
variety of different people — both from the industry, both from 
the federal government, both from the provincial government 
— and accordingly develop the plan for the next three months, 
Mr. Speaker, or for three months that would include three 
things. 
 
First of all we decided, Mr. Speaker, that one of the first issues 
that we needed to do is get the whole issue around food safety 
off the table and support CFIA in their work to get there. And 
accordingly every day for the period of four weeks we had a 
press conference here in Saskatchewan; there was a national 
press conference that was done in Ottawa. And each of the 
provinces across the country did the very same thing to ensure 
that all Canadians were fully aware of what happened, Mr. 
Speaker, on a daily basis as it related to the science. 
 
And interestingly enough I listened carefully to what the 
member from Watrous said, Mr. Speaker, and where she said 
that, on a daily basis they’d come in here and they’d ask 
questions and what it would do is to provide additional 
information to Saskatchewan people. What really happened, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we would do our press conference 
downstairs in the morning; the member from Watrous would be 
there along with her aide who would . . . or someone from the 
caucus office, and the translator from their office would assist 
them in getting the questions. They’d come up into question 
period, Mr. Speaker, and ask me the very same questions that I 
just finished answering in the press statements in the morning. 
 
So what we did for four weeks in the House is respond to the 
Saskatchewan Party to questions that they put to me that we’d 
already answered nationally, either through my officials or that 
I personally answered, Mr. Speaker. Hardly an inquisitive or an 
additional question that was asked by the Saskatchewan Party 
that wasn’t already completely, wasn’t already completely 
responded to either by me personally on behalf of the provincial 
government or by CFIA as it relates to what was happening on 
the national scene, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the entire piece as it relates to the BSE and in terms of 
managing the science, we provided full, and we’ll continue to 
provide full detail as it proceeds along the way. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we said we needed to deal with the 

compensation piece for producers. And what we did is we 
gathered, as you know, in Kelowna, the premiers did; from 
Kelowna came the meeting in Vancouver; and from Vancouver, 
Mr. Speaker, came the package that we are now working with 
today with the industry and other provinces and the federal 
government. And we’ll stay abreast of that compensation 
package. 
 
In fact as late as today, Western ministers had yet another 
conversation about how in fact the movement of livestock is 
working across the country, whether or not packers are moving 
livestock today, what’s happening at the auction marts and at 
the auction barns. Our officials are communicating with each 
other on a daily basis to try and get the movement of livestock 
moving across the country, both in Eastern and Western 
Canada. And so that process, in my view, has been slower than 
what we’d like to see it happen, but the reality is, is that it’s 
moving. 
 
Now the other bigger piece of course that we’re working on 
today is the whole area of opening the border. This is a far more 
difficult issue given that it lies solely in the purview of the 
federal government. And we have a strategy and a plan in terms 
of how the industry will be working closely with the American 
industry, how the provinces through the premiers will be 
working closely with the US government, and how Mr. 
Vanclief and the officials . . . and other elected officials from 
the federal government will be working closely to move this 
whole process along. 
 
And the strategy that we built, Mr. Speaker, nationally is for a 
period of about 30 . . . or for about 90 days. And it is that 
strategy that we’ve tied our working processes around, that 
officials from all of the provinces are currently being guided by, 
that the work of the federal government and the US government 
are closely guided by, and that . . . And all of the work that 
we’ve talked about and put together over the several, the last 
several weeks is guided by those, by those directives. And we 
have a process of having regular contacts with one another to 
make sure that in fact we get through the piece in the way in 
which we hope to. 
 
Now the biggest issue of course will be the opening of the 
border. Both the member from Thunder Creek and the member 
from Watrous who stand up and talk about the fact that this is a 
most serious issue facing Saskatchewan people and Canadians, 
has been stated numerous times in this Assembly and across 
Canada by everyone and all who know the impact of this 
particular issue, and so to make the statement that somehow 
someone’s unaware of this issue would be totally inappropriate, 
Mr. Speaker, and to some degree misleading. Because not only 
have we been leading the campaign on many fronts, but have 
also . . . but also designed a package to, or a strategy in terms of 
how we’re going to deal with the issue over this period of time. 
And so nobody for a minute is downplaying this particular issue 
at the national stage. 
 
Now to suggest today that somehow a standing committee of 
agriculture, our provincial Standing Committee on Agriculture 
would have some greater impact today on the decision-making 
process, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 
absolutely, totally ludicrous and only has one particular benefit 
for the Saskatchewan Party and that’s to try to assert themselves 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

into the political process because for the last several weeks, Mr. 
Speaker, they have been void from the television cameras. They 
have been void from the media. And so today they’re putting 
this particular issue forward because they believe that somehow 
they could interject themselves, Mr. Speaker, and try to get 
some political visibility. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I can understand, Mr. Speaker, why it is that they chirp 
from their chairs about not having any exposure on agriculture 
because the reality is, Mr. Speaker, they have been void on this 
issue, irrespective of what the member from Watrous says, 
where she stands up on her feet and says that these are all the 
things that we propose and we’re taking credit for all of them. 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that for 25 or 26 men and women 
who sit on that side of the House, you haven’t seen anything of 
any productivity on agriculture at all anywhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member from Saltcoats, and the member from 
Saltcoats who’s travelled, Mr. Speaker, a number of political 
parties, Mr. Speaker, and I hear him chirping from his chair and 
he tried, I think, to develop policy for Liberals and he tried to 
develop policy for the Saskatchewan Alliance and he tried to 
develop policy for Grant Schmidt. And what we’ll find, Mr. 
Speaker, is that he’ll be out working on his farm after the next 
provincial election because he hasn’t been able to deliver any 
policy from his own constituency or from his own party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about . . . And I heard 
the member from Watrous say, you know, we’ve developed all 
of these wonderful strategies as a political party and this is all 
the things that we are going to do as a political party, as the 
Saskatchewan Party, in terms of building an agricultural 
strategy. 
 
Well I have here, Mr. Speaker, today . . . I have here, Mr. 
Speaker, today the campaign literature that’s being circulated 
by the Saskatchewan candidate, Saskatchewan Party candidate, 
Michelle Hunter from Regina Lakeview, Mr. Speaker. And this 
is her literature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they have . . . And she has on her campaign literature three 
individual bullets of what the Saskatchewan Party is going to be 
doing, and one of them . . . right downtown Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. They have agriculture identified as one of their 
platform planks that they’re going to be working on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well let me just review for you what it is that Ms. Hunter is 
circulating on behalf of her party and her leader and their . . . in 
terms of agricultural policy for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, let’s just review it. 
 
Well the first thing that she says under agriculture is that we’re 
going to do this first. We’re going to: 
 

Negotiate a new long-term safety net to stabilize farm 
businesses and protect farm families from international 
commodity . . . wars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what they’re going to do. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve just finished negotiating in Canada 
one of the most comprehensive agricultural farm policies by not 
only one province but by 10 provinces and the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve been working at it for 
two and a half years. And it addresses itself to commodity 
prices, it addresses itself to disaster, and it decides itself to 
insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party candidate and their platform says 
you know what, what we’re going to do is we’re going to wake 
up, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to develop a brand-new 
policy on our own. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is about as achievable, as achievable, 
Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the Opposition ever being the 
premier in this province, because it’ll never happen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One individual party is going to try and develop a plan for 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, to deal with commodity prices, Mr. 
Speaker, when in fact on a regular basis on that side of the 
House you hear the Leader of the Opposition or other members 
stand up and say they don’t even support a subsidy program, 
Mr. Speaker, don’t even support it, don’t even support 
compensation on trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have the Leader of the Opposition on record and 
they’ve got it in their campaign literature that they’re going to 
undo a national plan over the next five years — that we’re 
going to be signing, Mr. Speaker — how ridiculous could your 
literature be, Mr. Speaker, on the very first bullet that they put 
forward? 
 
The second bullet that they have, Mr. Speaker, in their 
campaign literature is they’re going to introduce an enhanced 
crop insurance program to strengthen protection against — and 
take this, Mr. Speaker — against weather-induced yield 
reduction. Could you believe it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We introduced in our crop insurance program over the last 
couple of years enhanced programs for weather programs, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve taken our crop insurance program today 
where we have a premium of $250 million in a crop insurance, 
Mr. Speaker — the highest premiums that are provided today 
by the federal and the provincial government. 
 
And the member from Watrous stood on her feet and ridiculed 
our program, Mr. Speaker. Today they have it in their platform 
of something they’re thinking of doing when we’ve already 
completed it, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to proceed with their 
agricultural policy to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how about this, Mr. Speaker, their third bullet that they’re 
going to do is they’re going to reduce the burden on education 
property tax on farm land, is their third bullet, Mr. Speaker. 
Well we already have a committee in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s reviewing this piece. They’re going to be 
providing that information not only to the Saskatchewan people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that the member, I know that the member, I know 
that the member, Mr. Speaker, from Canora-Pelly is going to 
take the education property tax and he’s going to take it off 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

 

completely, Mr. Speaker, and I know that as the critic of 
Finance he’s going to reduce the taxes in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, because I hear him on a regular basis. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the process already is under way to look at the whole 
farm-land issue and what happens is that they’ve got it in their 
platform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now they do have one original idea in their platform, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is their original idea that they’re saying, Mr. 
Speaker — fourthly what they’re going to do in their campaign, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re going to support producer choices of grain 
marketing and we know what that means, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
going to whack the Wheat Board, that’s what that is. This is 
about getting ready to whack the old Wheat Board and they’ve 
got it in their campaign platform, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when they stand up and say, you know we’re . . . have this 
wonderful platform here that we’re developing today in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, four are already done and one is the 
privatization agenda, Mr. Speaker, and whacking the old 
Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say when you examine the record of this party, Mr. Speaker, 
when you examine the record of this party, there is absolutely 
no evidence for any reason for bringing them together for any 
public debate, Mr. Speaker, because there isn’t any evidence of 
ability to provide, Mr. Speaker, any kind of support or any kind 
of recognition to what needs to be done in agriculture because 
they haven’t provided one solid idea on one front — not one 
solid idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when in fact they have spoken out on what you should do 
on agriculture, along with what they said, Mr. Speaker, today in 
their platform campaign from Ms. Hunter . . . I heard the 
member yesterday, I heard the member yesterday in a media 
scrum, from Watrous, say, they say, well why is it that they 
don’t listen to you? And she says, well when we talk they 
mock. 
 
Well of course, Mr. Speaker, when she talks we mock. Because 
when you make ridiculous statements like this, Mr. Speaker — 
that you should be taking the crop insurance debt that we have 
in the province today and not leaving it at 15 years and reducing 
it to 8 or 9 years and planting that hardship on the producers’ 
backs, Mr. Speaker — what kind of an agricultural policy 
would that be from a farm group of men and women today who 
would bring that forward, Mr. Speaker? Who would say that? 
 
Well it would be the same party, Mr. Speaker, who would bring 
forth the resolutions as they have in their campaign literature 
today about issues that are already completed. 
 
What kind of, what kind of party, Mr. Speaker, who represents 
rural Saskatchewan today, would say that what we should be 
doing is we should be paying the NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) accounts to the provincial government 
first and the NISA accounts should be paid to the producers, 
when in fact the NISA accounts are paid directly to the 
producers, Mr. Speaker? We know how that works, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What kind of a political party, Mr. Speaker, today, what kind of 
a political party today, Mr. Speaker, in Canada or in 

Saskatchewan, who say today, that we should be matching our 
$600 million that is paid by the federal government for trade 
compensation at 40 per cent? Who would suggest that, Mr. 
Speaker? Other than the Saskatchewan Party? Taking money 
out of the pockets of producers who are already in hardship, Mr. 
Speaker, and producing additional hardship for them? 
 
And so when they come forward with a resolution like they put 
forward today, Mr. Speaker — that we should be participating 
in a month of sitting about listening, so that they could listen to 
what’s happening about . . . on the BSE in Saskatchewan, in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker — what we say to them is that this is 
nothing but a political grandstand for the Saskatchewan Party 
because they’re a party that’s void of any new ideas, Mr. 
Speaker, and any of the new ideas that they had left with them 
when Mr. Boyd left a year and a half ago, Mr. Speaker, back to 
his farm. Not one new idea from one of those members on that 
side of the House on agricultural farm policy. 
 
And when we get into the agricultural debate, Mr. Speaker, 
when we get into the agricultural debate into the future and we 
line up what this government has done and what the initiatives 
of the future will be for this government versus the kinds of 
campaign that will be on with the Saskatchewan Party, people 
will see and recognize that over there there isn’t much, there is 
not much to offer in terms of agricultural policy. On this side of 
the, on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, growth and 
innovation and delivery on agricultural policy on a regular 
basis. 
 
And that’s why I’ve said on this motion, Mr. Speaker, that 
when we get into the month of August, if in fact we require, and 
we’re not . . . we do not see the borders open in this province in 
the way . . . in this country in the way in which we hope they 
would be, we would be looking, Mr. Speaker, then to 
incorporate the political party in some discussion with us from 
the other side. 
 
But we’ll be doing a tremendous amount of work before then, 
Mr. Speaker, with the industry, with the federal government, 
with other provinces, and the bureaucracy. And hopefully, Mr. 
Speaker, that through that process the Saskatchewan Party will 
be able to keep up. And they’ll be able to make some of their 
own inquiries and be able to do some of their own research, and 
be able to do some of their own work so they’ll be able to 
understand what’s happening in agriculture — not only on this 
particular file but on others across the province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely not supporting this 
particular motion because it is only about politics, Mr. Speaker, 
and has absolutely nothing to do with bringing about the growth 
and the improvement of what needs to happen in agricultural 
policy in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request the leave of the 
House to proceed to motions for returns (debatable). 
 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 1 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move item no. 1, seconded by 
the member from Wood River: 
 

That an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 1. 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. I would just ask the member to 
read the full return into the record . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The entire question, yes. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move item no. 1, seconded by 
the member from Wood River, to move that order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 1 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: (1) the policy of SaskPower regarding the 
policy for fighting fires caused by the failure of power 
transformers, power lines, power poles, and related 
equipment; (2) whether these costs are the responsibility of 
SaskPower where it’s clear its equipment has caused the 
blaze; (3) further to that, in 2002, the number of claims that 
were made against SaskPower and whether the claims were 
honoured. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 5 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave of the 
Assembly that returns no. 5 to no. 47 be deemed as moved, 
seconded, and ordered. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Canora-Pelly, that the Assembly do issue for return 
no. 5 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: during 
the fiscal year 2002-2003, the amount of money 
SaskEnergy spent on television ads aired on Global TV in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
The Speaker: — Seconded by? The seconder is? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Seconded by the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Returns No. 6 — 47 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the Assembly 
that returns no. 6 through and including no. 47 be deemed as 
moved, seconded, and ordered. 

Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
House to proceed to Committee of Finance. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce the deputy minister of Highways and Transportation, 
Harvey Brooks, who is sitting on my left. And on my right is 
Barry Martin, the associate deputy minister of policy and 
programs. Fred Antunes, director of operations and planning 
and business support, is sitting on my right directly behind 
associate deputy minister, Barry Martin. 
 
Immediately behind me is Don Wincherauk, assistant deputy 
minister of corporate services. And next to Don is Stu 
Armstrong, assistant deputy minister of operations. And Terry 
Blomme is sitting directly behind Don Wincherauk and he is 
the executive director of the southern region. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, we will 
continue on this afternoon where we left off last night when we 
were so abruptly . . . terminated our discussions due to some 
indiscretions. But I will . . . At that point in time my colleague, 
the member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood, was asking the 
minister some questions that . . . of some concerns in his 
constituency so I, what I will do at this time is let that member 
ask the questions that he had intended to ask last night, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials again today. At the questioning that I 
was asking last night, was regarding the railways in 
Saskatchewan and in the Duck Lake area specifically because 
of a letter I received from Raymond Blanchard, from a 
councillor at Duck Lake, regarding the fencing of railways in 
that area. 
 
And my last question to the minister was under the Railway 
Act, the Railway Act states that the government, the federal 
government, has a responsibility to the landowners for fencing 
and to municipalities for additional crossing responsibility. And 
according to your final question, Mr. Minister, there was some 
concern that under the short-line railway Act that has somewhat 
changed. Can you point out to me the differences between that 
in Saskatchewan now as versus what it used to be under the 
federal Railway Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As I was saying last night, there is, 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

 

there is . . . And we need to emphasize the clear distinction 
between the federal railroad Act and the provincial Railway 
Act. And in the federal Railway Act there is, again I’ll repeat, 
there is no obligation in the Act upon the federally regulated 
railroads to look after the fencing. However, the class 1 
railroads, CN (Canadian National) and CP (Canadian Pacific), 
voluntarily do look after the fencing. But when they sell those 
lines to short-line and they come under the provincial Act, they 
do not . . . that obligation that they have taken on to do fencing 
does not move with it. In our provincial Act, there is no 
obligation for them to look after fencing. 
 
As I mentioned, it could place undue burden on the short-line 
rails. And the short-line rails operating in any of the 
jurisdictions that they are operating in really are dependent on 
the people in that area, the producers in that area, and their 
margins are not high and so they don’t need excess burden. 
 
However there are two Acts under which fencing can be looked 
at and that would be under The Line Fence Act and The Stray 
Animals Act and . . . But yet under our railways Act, there is no 
obligation under the provincial Railway Act for the rail lines, 
the short-line rails, the provincially regulated rails to look after 
it. 
 
Within the federal system under their Railway Act, it is my 
understanding that there is no obligation but that the class 1 
railways have taken that upon themselves to look after fencing. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to re-read because I read it last night, a 
portion out of the Railway Safety Act of July 1988. And I still 
believe that this part of the Act is still in place . . . and you’re 
saying it’s not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 
 
In 1995 did they change this portion of the Act because in 1998 
. . . or 1988, pardon me, it said the Canadian National and 
Canadian Pacific submitted written commitments that they 
would continue to maintain fences under the Railway Act. So 
what you’re saying is that in 1995 that was changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In 1995 the Railways Safety Act of 
Canada was implemented. It replaced the old Railway Act, the 
Railway Act of Canada. And the Railways Safety Act does not 
require — does not require — a railway to provide the, or 
maintain livestock fencing. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. 
In regards to the short-line railways that we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan, is there anything in that Act or 
anything that I could pass on to my constituents of Duck Lake 
regarding fencing of railways that states that they are 
responsible for the fencing themselves? Or is there a joint 
venture between the province and the individuals in regarding 
the fencing of such railways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s important to note that our 
department has been in contact with people in the, it’s Duck 
Lake area I understand, and they’ve been in contact with them. 
They have looked at this issue and are trying to work out some 
kind of a compromise solution. But I need to again make clear 
that under The Stray Animals Act, it is the owner’s, the 
landowner’s obligation to look after fencing. 

Under The Line Fence Act, though there is no obligation under 
the provincial Railway Act, the issues around fencing could be 
negotiated or indeed could be taken for arbitration. But at this 
point we’re still trying to work out something that will be of 
mutual benefit. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regarding a letter of response that your department sent to Mr. 
Neal Hardy, president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) dated May 14, I just want to read an 
excerpt out of that letter, and it says: 
 

With respect to your concerns regarding the shifting of 
additional responsibilities for crossing maintenance to 
municipalities, our view is that maintenance costs should 
be shared through negotiated agreements between the 
municipalities and the provincial (government or 
provincial) railway (pardon me). 

 
From that I take it that there can be agreements made between 
the government and certain landowners in regarding that. Can 
you give some comment on that? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s important to note that it is 
not the province. It’s not the province’s interest or ownership 
that is of issue here. The province regulates the short-line rails 
and the role that we are trying to take is as a facilitator between 
the two interests — between the landowner and the provincially 
regulated rail — to help facilitate the process to get some 
acceptable resolution. 
 
We have also been involving the RMs (rural municipality) 
because it’s very important if we can find some way of 
resolving this, if we can facilitate that, that there be 
commonality across the RM and the other RMs as well. So 
we’re still running at a fairly new provincial Railway Act, and 
we’re looking at ways that we can make this work successfully. 
But our role is as a facilitator between the two interests — the 
provincially regulated rail and the landowner themselves. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, earlier this 
month during Committee of Finance I raised the issue with you 
over dealing with highway traffic officers and their section 23 
action under The Occupational Health and Safety Act, unsafe 
workplace. And you’d indicated that a consultant had been 
engaged to do a risk assessment on that whole issue. And at that 
time, you’d also mentioned that the report was due June 23. 
Minister, my question is have you received that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think at this point what has happened 
is that the draft report has come back to the health and safety 
committee. The committee gets a week to review the draft 
report — I have not received the report at this point — and the 
draft report will then be worked on for a couple of weeks and 
I’ll get the report after that. 
 
In the meantime, I mean, safety of course is always an issue for 
us. We look forward to getting the report and to working out 
what our responses are, but to this point I have not received a 
copy. That is the process that will be followed. 
 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

Mr. Hart: — Minister, I would think that members of your, 
members of your department make up or are at least represented 
on that committee. And if that in fact is the case, they would 
have then have seen the draft report. And if so, can you tell us 
from . . . Even though you may not have seen the report 
yourself, I would suspect that senior managers within the 
department have a copy of that report, and can you tell us what 
the report says or can you have your officials advise you as to 
the main recommendations of that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is very important in an issue as 
sensitive as this, I believe, that we follow due process in terms 
of working through to our final report. This draft report, which 
the consultant has been working on, has been presented to the 
health and safety committee which has both management and 
traffic officer representation on it. When they have gone 
through the report with the consultant, the consultant will take it 
back and we will get the final report which we’ll work with. 
 
I think it’s important to note again, regardless of what the report 
comes out saying, that it is very clear for the department that the 
safety of our employees is paramount. Specifically this is true 
of our traffic officers who are out on the highway who face a 
number of challenges in their daily work. I think it’s very 
important to note that for safety reasons we have outfitted our 
traffic officers with the latest in safety equipment including — 
and the practices including — body armour, pepper spray, 
collapsible batons, a 24/7 communications centre linked to the 
Canadian Police Information Centre, video and audio cameras 
for their cars. And in addition to the physical protection, our 
officers have regular training and they have access to the 
majority of the RCMP protocols, procedures, and 
safety-training techniques. 
 
So given all that, I’m confident that the work our government 
and our department has done, that we are following 
occupational health and safety guidelines. And until we get that 
report, we will not be taking further action and I’m not prepared 
to prejudice our response to that report at all by commenting on 
it further. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. So I understand from 
your comments then that the occupational health and safety 
committee — as you had indicated, made up of both 
management and employees, the highway traffic officers — 
they have seen the draft, first draft of the report. 
 
I understand the process was that the consultant was hired to do 
a risk assessment of the duties of the officers. In fact, I 
understand that the consultant was, has . . . did some 
ride-alongs. Minister, what is going to change in the 
consultant’s recommendations? 
 
It seems to me that the work has been done in assessing risk and 
now it needs to be discussed with both management and the 
employees. Are you going to send the consultant back out into 
the field again? Is the consultant going to do more consultation 
and more . . . a further investigation? Has the consultant not 
completed that part of his work? If not, why has the consultant 
issued a draft report? 
 
It’s not as if the consultant is doing this report in a consultative 
process with management and the employees. It seems to me 

the consultant was hired as an independent third party to 
provide a third-party perspective on this whole issue. 
 
So it seems to me there seems to be an unwillingness to make a 
decision in this sort of thing. I don’t see anything really 
changing from the first draft to the final draft. I sense that 
perhaps there’s an unwillingness to openly discuss this issue, 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The process was agreed to originally 
by the committee, and I think it is very important for us to 
respect the process, also to respect the fact that the consultant is 
independent and is doing this assessment and reporting in an 
independent way. 
 
In this intervening period now from the draft report and the time 
when the consultant is working with the occupational health and 
safety committee, it is our estimation that what is going on is 
clarification. If there are any concerns, those things will be 
addressed in the work between the consultant and the health and 
safety committee. 
 
Any assumptions that would be made about motives around the 
process, I think, would be in error. And I think I would like to 
just very clearly say again that we are not prejudging. We don’t 
anticipate that there will be significant changes between the 
draft report and the final report. But we are respecting the 
process as was put forward by the committee which has being 
looking into this. 
 
And again I will say that we will . . . We await the report and 
we will then work with the report and come up with our final 
recommendations. 
 
At this point I am not going to speculate and I’m not going to 
engage in a speculation across the floor. Since we do not have 
the report, we do not have the advantage of the information that 
was there. And so there is very little else that I can say other 
than we will deal with the report when it comes through the 
process that was agreed upon. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Minister, how can you 
say you don’t have the report? You have the first draft of the 
report and, as you yourself said, you don’t anticipate a whole lot 
of changes. If you personally do not have the report, you 
certainly . . . the management within the transport compliance 
branch and the representatives on that committee have the 
report. And I’m sure the officials or at least some of the 
officials that are surrounding you have seen the report and read 
the report. 
 
So it would . . . I would suspect that the report, as I’d indicated 
when we previously discussed this . . . And it seems to me that 
there’s basically two, two conclusions that the consultant can 
come to. 
 
And I would suggest that perhaps the consultant has come to 
these two conclusions. That is one, one is either you remove 
those duties that put the highway traffic officers in greater risk 
and thereby there is no need to issue them side arms, or, 
secondly, if the department doesn’t do that and the consultant 
has identified the risk, then the highway traffic officers need to 
be issued with side arms. 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

 

You mentioned in your earlier comments that the highway 
traffic officers have a complete array of protection equipment 
including, as I understand, fully equipped police cars. So that 
would tell anyone that looks at the situation that the department 
has identified a certain amount of risk and has provided that 
equipment and training to those officers. 
 
So it seems to me that this is a fairly straightforward situation. 
If the risk is there and the consultant said the risk is there, as I 
suspect he, the consultant has said, then a decision needs to be 
made by yourself and your government as to whether those 
duties that put highway traffic officers in harm’s way, where 
they need to have a side arm to protect them, either those duties 
need to be withdrawn or perhaps they . . . if those duties are 
deemed essential then they need to have the side arms issued to 
them with proper training and proper policies and guidelines in 
place so that the general public is protected as well as the 
highway traffic officers. 
 
It seems to me that is the situation, Minister, and it seems to me 
that there’s a reluctance on your part and your department’s part 
to discuss this issue. And it seems to me . . . I wonder if it isn’t 
because of the lateness of the session and it is . . . Is there 
reluctance, Minister, to just deal with this issue and drag it on 
so that it cannot be raised during the session? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, I think it’s important to 
note that the member opposite can speculate, suggest, imagine, 
posit, proclaim anything he wants about what he thinks the 
report might be. Anybody could do that. He can posit his ideas 
about the department and what they have or have not seen. 
 
I have no indication from any of my senior officials here that 
they have copies or have seen copies of the draft report. I have 
explained the process that was agreed to, the process that has 
been undertaken, and a process which we do respect and which 
we will follow. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, at this point I can only say again that given the 
process, given the work that we have already done, we will 
work with the health and safety committee. We will work with 
the consultant’s report. And many of the speculations that have 
been raised I would imagine will probably be looked at. 
 
But at this point, Mr. Speaker, I am not . . . or, Mr. Chair, I am 
not going to prejudice or prejudge the report and how we will 
respond to it. So speculating about it, suggesting about it really 
is not getting us anywhere in terms of dealing with department 
estimates. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. When do you 
anticipate that this process will be completed and a decision 
will be made on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, the process . . . There’ll 
probably be about a couple of weeks before we get the final 
draft of the report. And then we will go through a process where 
we are communicating with all of the employees what the 
report indicates. And we will also then be looking at our 
decisions and our implementation plans for bringing into effect 
the decisions that we make around that final report. 

But we should have, in our hands, a copy of the final draft, we 
guess, we expect because of what has been laid out, within a 
couple of weeks. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. So you have said that 
you expect to have a copy of the final report in your hands 
within two weeks. At what time will you then make the 
decisions as to the following the recommendations of the 
report? 
 
I would assume that the report will make some 
recommendations to deal with this issue. I’m assuming that it’ll 
be, as I laid them out previously, be either one or the other or 
perhaps something in-between. 
 
My question is, when will this whole issue that started back in 
December and actually has had some, I suspect, some negative 
impact on enforcement because of the restrictions placed on 
highway traffic officers — and we have seen the breakup of our 
highways and I would assume that perhaps the lack of 
enforcement played a part of a role in that sort of thing — and 
I’m asking when is this whole issue going to be resolved, 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, there may be a number of 
decisions that we’re called upon to make. Those decisions 
might be made at several different levels. 
 
The member is asking for the timeline. Well as we work 
through the process we will . . . I mean, I’d love to be able to 
tell you on July 15 at 4:10 we’ll have it sorted, but because of 
the human dynamics that are involved, because we are 
concerned about the well-being of our workforce including our 
highway traffic officers, that we need to make sure that we 
work through the process with them. 
 
We need to make sure that the decisions we’re making are the 
best, most responsible decisions that we can make to make sure 
that our highway traffic regulations are managed properly and 
to make sure that our employees are safe. And so the process 
will unfold after we get that report. There will be a series . . . I 
anticipate a series of decisions that will have to be made and 
implemented. 
 
And as far as I’m concerned, and I think as far as I hear from 
the senior management of the department, there is no will 
within us to delay this in any way. We want to move ahead in as 
timely a manner as we can so that our regulations are enforced 
appropriately and our traffic officers and other employees are 
safe. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, further to this issue or at least to 
highway traffic compliance, the last time we discussed that, I 
had asked you as to whether the director of the highway 
transport compliance branch had a background in the law and in 
enforcement, and you had indicated that that person didn’t. 
 
And also I had asked if there was anyone within your 
department that had some background in law and enforcement, 
and you had said, I believe your answer was that you don’t have 
anyone within the department but you have people to advise 
your department people. 
 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

I’m wondering if that in itself isn’t an issue in this whole, or a 
problem in this whole issue, in that you have directors of 
branches who I would think have vast experience and training 
in the engineering field but really don’t have any enforcement 
experience. And I’m wondering if that is part of why this issue 
hasn’t been resolved quite some time ago. And I would 
speculate that perhaps . . . I’m wondering . . . Or was that part 
of the scope of the consultant’s report, to review management’s 
input on this whole issue? 
 
And I wonder if you could comment as to who is advising your 
managers and directors on enforcement issues and legal issues 
when . . . because I’m sure in this latest issue, latest . . . The last 
few months I understand that directives were issued to highway 
traffic officers to disengage and to ignore highway violations 
and that sort of thing. And I understand that there was a concern 
from the highway traffic officers whether they would held liable 
for inaction and that sort of thing. 
 
Who is providing advice to the director of the transport 
compliance branch, Minister, on these legal issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, the regulations that we are 
asking to be enforced are transport regulations. They are put 
together by officials who have a long history in transport 
compliance; they understand what those issues are. The former 
director, who had a similar background in government and 
engineering to the current director, just for the edification of the 
legislature, is now advising the US federal government on 
transport compliance and safety. 
 
So it is very important that the member not diminish the skills, 
the knowledge, and the ability of the people who are in these 
positions, because they do know what they are doing, they do 
know what is needed in transport compliance. And they would 
not have that kind of record and would not be moved to that 
kind of status position if they were held in low disregard or low 
regard by others. So they know what is needed in transport 
compliance. 
 
We do not have and we are not trying to create a provincial 
police force. What we want is good transport compliance 
officers that deal with our regulations. That’s all we’ve asked 
for. That’s what we’re looking for. 
 
We have policy managers who understand what the issues are 
in transport compliance and are putting the regulations together 
in order to meet those needs. And I can tell you clearly that I 
have the highest regard for our people who are engaged in that 
area. 
 
The work that they are doing is excellent and when they need to 
consult they consult widely. Whether that’s with Justice, 
whether it’s with other branches of the trucking industry, 
whether it is with people from all across Canada, whether it is 
outside of Canada, they consult in terms of the regulations and 
the enforcement and get the very best of information. 
 
These people, some of them have a long history of being good 
solid bureaucrats, making very good solid decisions, and that’s 
why they’re in place. They consult well, they understand the 
issues, and I just think that it would not be an appropriate place 
to go to diminish their skills, abilities, and to show any lack of 

respect for the work that they are doing. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, by my question I certainly wasn’t 
implying that these people weren’t capable of conducting the 
affairs of the province and doing their jobs. I simply asked the 
question as to, if you don’t have a background and training in 
education in the law and enforcement and all your training is in 
engineering, that there will come such a time, particularly when 
you’re dealing with transport compliance and enforcement of 
Criminal Code and moving violations and so on, that areas of 
justice will come up. 
 
And my question simply was to the minister, you know, who do 
these people consult with when they get into a situation where 
their training and background and experience perhaps hasn’t 
taken them into these areas. And I was happy to hear the 
minister say that they do consult with the Department of Justice 
and those sorts of things. So I was simply asking for 
clarification, Mr. Chair. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Minister, when we discussed this issue the last time I had asked 
whether you had any statistics that would indicate the level of 
enforcement in the last few months of this year since this whole 
section 23 action has been in place, and comparing that to a 
similar period a year ago just to get some sort of an indication 
as to the . . . whether there in fact has been a decreased level of 
enforcement. 
 
And you said you would provide some information on that and 
to this point in time I haven’t received that. I was wondering 
whether you have some information dealing with that situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes we do, Mr. Chair. I have that 
information here available for the member. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Looking at this very 
quickly it appears that there has been a decrease in activity of 
enforcement if you want to gauge that by the number of tickets 
written. 
 
The period December 1, 2001 to March 31, ’02, we had 1,212 
tickets; for the year December 1, ’02 to March 31,’03, we only 
had 474. And I would suggest that this has been a direct result 
of reduced enforcement activities due to the filing of section 23 
action by a number of highway traffic officers and the resulting 
directives to those officers to work in pairs rather than singly, to 
spend more time at the weigh scales, to not engage and stop 
suspected violators if they feel they are unsafe. 
 
Would that be a fair summary of that, of this whole situation, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There are a number of things that I 
would like to draw to the member’s attention in this regard. 
First of all, I think it’s very, very important — and the member 
may want to make note of this or follow up in Hansard — but 
there’s a very, very clear distinction to be made. 
 
It has been said, and I believe the member indicated, that 
officers were directed to disengage. That is absolutely not the 
case. The officers were not directed to disengage. But in 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

 

contrast to that, they were allowed to disengage if they felt 
threatened. So they were not directed to. 
 
Okay, now if we go to a number of the items in the information 
that we have passed on to the members opposite, I think if you 
look at the issue of the numbers of tickets, you’ll see that there 
is, as you’ve indicated, a drop there. I would like to believe — 
and I wasn’t born yesterday — but I would like to believe that 
some of that has to do with an increasing compliance. And the 
evidence that would help us to believe that that in fact may be 
the case would be, if you look at the next line on the paper that 
was handed over and you look at the number of commercial 
vehicle inspections that happened, safety inspections, and what 
you will see is a significant increase in the number of 
inspections that were made. And with that increase in 
inspections we still have less tickets issued. 
 
So first of all I want to indicate that the possibility is there that 
the trucking industry realizes that, with so many trucks on the 
road, that they need to be more compliant. And that’s what our 
hope is, that they are working in that direction as well. We have 
spoken to them; we’ve worked with them to try and encourage 
that. 
 
We also would think it’s important to note that the number of 
tickets and revenue issued in ’02-03 is slightly less than tickets 
and revenue issued in ’01-02. And total revenue so far collected 
in ’02-03 is still higher than what was collected in ’99-2000. 
 
The department will continue to maintain its priority on safety. 
And in ’02-03, traffic officers significantly increased, as I’ve 
indicated, the number of commercial vehicle Safety Alliance 
inspections. This has been a significant part of our program in 
encouraging the trucking industry to comply to the regulations. 
So we’ll say that, very clearly, the decrease in number of tickets 
isn’t solely due to the department’s directive that allows officers 
to disengage if they feel unsafe. 
 
In the fall of ’02, the transport compliance branch altered their 
business practices so that traffic officers will receive any 
necessary training. During the winter months, this reduces the 
number of officers there. At a minimum, this represents about 
eight days per officer for training, and this maximizes the traffic 
officers’ time on the road during the spring and summer when 
our highways are in their weakest state. 
 
And I just want to re-emphasize, as I’ve done many times in the 
House to the member opposite, that you’ve talked about the 
increasing damage that there seems to be this year. Well if you 
compare to the last couple of years, that would be so. If you 
went to another year where we had similar moisture conditions, 
I think that you would find the concerns would be very close to 
the same. 
 
So I think the biggest impact that we’re seeing, particularly on 
our thin membrane roads, is because of the change in the 
weather which does have a fairly significant impact on our 
highways. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I fail to really see the difference. You 
say that the officers were directed by the department to 
disengage if they feel unsafe. They weren’t directed to 
disengage. I mean really, what is the difference? 

It says here, and I quote: 
 

The decrease in number of tickets is not solely due to the 
department’s directive to have traffic officers disengage if 
they feel unsafe.  

 
Is that not directing officers to disengage? You know, somehow 
I don’t, I don’t really see the difference in saying, well you just 
don’t do . . . you don’t stop anybody. You know, it’s . . . I think 
that the result of this whole issue and the length of time that it’s 
taken to resolve it has had a fairly significant effect on the 
enforcement activities, and if we want to use revenue generated 
from tickets as an indicator, minister, I would ask . . . I’ve been 
told that the revenue generated in this fiscal year from April 1 
to June 10 is only $47,000, whereas if you compared that for 
April 1 to June 10 of last year it was $260,000. 
 
Some 100 . . . 1,043 tickets were issued in last year in that time 
frame; this year only 184. So if in fact those numbers are 
correct, Minister, how do you explain such a significant 
difference in number of tickets issued and revenue generated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, I am assuming at this point 
that the member opposite got his statistics from the member 
from Swift Current, but I don’t know that for sure. All I can tell 
you is the statistics that he just put out are not statistics that we 
have. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m not so sure that the minister 
. . . Perhaps it’s like this report. It may be somewhere in the 
department but he hasn’t seen it. But I would suggest perhaps 
that those numbers are quite accurate, and I think if the minister 
does further investigation he will find that the numbers are 
exactly as I have stated in the House. 
 
But nonetheless it seems to me, it seems to me that, it seems to 
me that those issues . . . this issue we won’t resolve here today, 
Mr. Chair, and I think it’s time that we do move on to another 
issue within the department, Mr. Chair. 
 
Minister, I’m looking at a headline in today’s paper where it 
says, “Trans-Canada bypass likely,” and the article quotes the 
minister, Mr. Chair, and he says that it’s time that we look very 
close . . . or that this government looks very closely at building 
a bypass to solve the problem of traffic congestion in the east 
side of Regina, Mr. Chair. And in fact, the article goes on to say 
that there will be a open house held later this day where 
location and plan designs will be on display. 
 
And I guess my question, Minister, to you is, I have raised this 
issue with you in the past and it seemed like there really was no 
great hurry to bring this bypass issue forward. And I’m 
wondering what has changed that this action — welcome 
action, I might add — is happening today and in the days ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, the member, when raising 
the question earlier and quoting some statistics, was reading 
from a document. And I would ask that the document be tabled, 
Mr. Chair. I would ask that the document be tabled so that we 
can, we can review those statistics and verify the numbers and 
then we’ll be able to follow up from there. So I would formally 
ask that that document be tabled. 
 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, in answering the last question with 
regard to the bypass, southeast bypass, I think it’s very essential 
that as a department we engage in long-term planning — not 
just around Regina, but in all of our work. And when we’re 
looking at the situation in southeast Regina, we have seen 
tremendous growth in the city of Regina, I think an indication 
of how hot the economy of Saskatchewan is. That growth is 
pushing the demands on some of our roads and we in our 
planning are working with the city to find a resolution to a 
number of issues that challenge us. One of those will be around 
the corridor, Victoria East and Ring Road.  
 
And we are working with the city to find a good solution to the 
problems there of congestion. And as we’re working on that, we 
are also recognizing that the public is asking clear questions 
about, well what does the further future bring? And we think as 
people are planning their businesses, their lives, their work, that 
we need to be able to work with the public. We also need to, 
when we’re planning out 10, 15, 20 years, we need to make sure 
that we have in place the resources and the infrastructure that is 
necessary in order to meet those demands. 
 
So when we’re talking about the southeast bypass, we definitely 
are planning and doing some more clear, step-by-step planning 
so that at such a time as the fixes that are going to be engaged in 
on Victoria East are reaching their capacity that we will in fact 
have in place the plans and the resources to meet the needs that 
occur on that day. 
 
(16:45) 
 
I think we will also, just in noting that, we will also see 
continued expansion around the city and that growth will 
continue. And we will be planning for the outer years on 
different portions of the city to make sure that we have a proper 
traffic management for the city of Regina, for the city . . . for all 
of the cities in the province. And I think that is our 
responsibility to make sure that we have done good forward 
planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was . . . Mr. Chair, there was also a question 
that was asked by the member from Swift Current. And I would 
like to pass this folder over to the member and ask if he would 
kindly deliver it to the member from Swift Current, please. 
 
And as we are close to our wrap-up time now, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to take a few moments to thank the members 
opposite for their diligence in questioning. I would like to thank 
the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s got more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I understood that you were preparing 
to shut down right . . . A couple of minutes yet? Okay, I’ll 
reserve my remarks then until questions are completed. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister indicated that when I 
asked the question and quoted statistics that I was reading from 
a document. I was; I was reading from my notes. Now if the 
minister would like a copy of my notes that I had written in 
preparation for these estimates, I’d be most happy to provide 
him with that as soon as I have the opportunity to photocopy 

them. I must say, Mr. Chair, that my handwriting certainly is 
not that legible. It’s a trait that I developed so that it’s a bit of a 
code. But if the minister wants my personal notes, I’d be most 
happy to provide him with a copy of that, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now on the issue of the sudden emergence of this bypass for 
east Regina, something that wasn’t even on the radar screen 
with this minister and this government until a few days ago, at 
least in the public, the question I would have, Mr. Chair, is: did 
the NDP do another poll? And I would suspect that if they did 
they see that their ratings have dropped again and that they are 
grabbing at whatever issues that are out there that they feel will 
raise their re-election chances, Mr. Chair. 
 
It’s not unlike the speed limits on our twinned highways. I 
would suggest, Mr. Chair, that because this minister, back in 
December, said that he certainly was not open to increasing the 
speed limits on our twinned highways, and the NDP had a 
convention which voted down the idea of increasing the speed 
limits. And then all of a sudden here in April this minister has a 
change of heart. 
 
Well I suggest this is the same situation here, Mr. Chair, where 
the NDP’s acceptance and ratings by the voting public is 
dropping and I would suggest, Mr. Chair, that at some recent 
cabinet meeting the Premier asked his colleagues, or perhaps it 
was a caucus meeting, asked, okay, who’s got an idea that can 
help us and get our polling numbers up? And I would suggest, 
Mr. Chair, that perhaps the Minister of Highways like little 
Johnny in the back seat waved his hand and said, I’ve got some 
ideas; we can take that Saskatchewan Party idea of increasing 
the speed limits and we can claim it as our own. 
 
And you know what? The city of Regina has been asking for a 
solution to this congestion on the east side for quite some time 
and maybe we should move that up on the back burner. Maybe 
we can have an open house and we can show the plans that the 
city and ourselves have designed and we can make the people 
of Regina think that we’re going to fix their problems, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Well I’m going to tell you, Mr. Chair, that I don’t think this 
government’s going to have time to fix those problems because 
sooner or later this Premier’s going to have to call an election 
and we will, there will be a change of government and those 
highway congestion problems will be addressed in the very near 
future by a new Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Chair, I see our time is coming short 
and the member from Moosomin has one or two questions for 
the minister, follow-up questions that he discussed with the 
minister in estimates earlier this session. So I would turn the 
questions over to that member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, I have some responses to 
the statements that the member made. I think, as was indicated 
earlier on in the member’s discussions around highway traffic 
officers, he is prone to positing, suggesting, imagining, 
dreaming, making up — all of those terms are there in his 
questions and his statements. And I find myself being just 
slightly put off by some of the suggestions that the member 
opposite made, and I think that I would like to clarify in terms 
of the department because I think the kind of statement that was 



June 24, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

 

made really does go after the department’s credibility. 
 
In 1996 the department was engaged in a Regina region 
highway planning study and in that study looked at the . . . 
began the process of looking at what would make near-term 
fixes and what would make long-term fixes for the Regina 
Southeast area. And in that work part of that was looking at the 
southeast bypass. So all the speculation and imagination and the 
dreaming that somebody just wakes up and has really doesn’t 
count for much when way back in ’96 we were already doing 
the planning, working with the city, and making clear that we 
had a plan and a direction for the development of this city. 
 
And I would say that we have the same with other cities around 
this province and with the highways of this province. So the 
speculation and imagining — all of that that the member goes 
through — really is relatively meaningless. 
 
I would also, Mr. Chair, like to put a little bit of flesh on the 
bones of his dreams around what happened with 110 and to 
clarify some of the facts around that. I indicated in the winter 
that, given the facts that we had, I was not prepared to 
recommend to cabinet that we go ahead with the 110 at that 
point. But I was directing the department and others to do 
research to make sure that we had the best information. And 
during the interim I was engaged in many discussions with the 
public through radio, in many other ways, engaged with the 
public about what the issues were around safety and about what 
the issues were around moving the speed limit to 110. 
 
During that time period we got significant information, which I 
have subsequently named, which then enabled me to make a 
recommendation to cabinet which led to our decision to move 
to 110. 
 
So the Sask Party can go on dreaming all they want about how 
we steal their ideas. But while they’re sleeping, we’re planning. 
When they wake up and see those ideas and claim them as their 
dream, well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t . . . responsible for their 
dreams. I’m only responsible for the solid planning and the 
decision making that this government is doing and will continue 
to do as we build this province for many years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a quick follow-up . 
Mr. Minister, the other day we were talking about Highway 47. 
And I’m not sure . . . I had mentioned about waiting for a report 
that was supposed to be sent to me. It was done by Trialpha 
Consulting Ltd. on the 47 Highway between No. 1 and No. 48. 
And the consultant basically pointed out a number of concerns 
that were raised at that time. 
 
They did a study, I believe, on August 29, 2001 where they did 
a survey and out of that survey they determined we’ll have 
more than 50 per cent of the vehicles using 616, would use 47 if 
it was in proper condition. And in their study it also reflected 
that the use of 616, for most people they used it because of the 
condition of 47 but they would prefer 47 because it actually 
made their trip shorter. 
 
So just a quick question, Mr. Minister. Have you seen the 
survey and looked at it thoroughly, and how are you using this 

survey to address the condition of 47 between No. 1 and No. 
48? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think if you’ll take a look at the 
information you’ll find that that is really a part of our normal 
information collecting that goes on. 
 
And one of the things that has been happening there is that with 
that information we have been able to work closer with the RMs 
in looking at 616 as a possibility. Some of the other RMs don’t 
see things quite the same way, and so what we’re doing is 
continuing to work with them to try and build a consensus as to 
how that roadway should be developed. 
 
But the study itself was a study that was jointly worked out with 
the RMs and jointly funded and so we . . . That’s just part of our 
ongoing collection of data as we try and work with the RMs to 
find the most acceptable solution to all of them. And that’s the 
direction we’re headed in. 
 
At this point I would like to thank my officials for all of the 
work that they’ve done. Not just in preparing and answering the 
questions, but in the long-range planning which . . . I appreciate 
the kind of thinking that this department has engaged in over 
many years and the good work that they are continuing to do. 
 
And I think that we have as a government enabled them to 
really move forward with a lot of the program of building 
Saskatchewan with a three-year plan of $900 million over those 
three years. We have done tremendous work on building up the 
highways infrastructure and really rebuilding our provincial 
highways. And I want to thank and commend the department 
for doing that. 
 
I want to thank my officials for their diligent work in being 
prepared for this question period and in providing clear and 
concise answers to clear and concise questions. 
 
I want to also say that this year my government proudly goes on 
record as having the second largest highways transportation 
budget in the history of the province — in the last four years 
more than a billion dollars invested in our transportation 
network. We’ve built new bridges like the one in North 
Battleford. We’ve been out there working with RMs 
co-operatively all across the province rebuilding roads. We 
have been working . . . hiring students; we hired more than 140 
students this year alone. And we hire people with disabilities. 
And we know that throughout our work safety is absolutely 
vitally important and we continue . . . encourage best safety 
practices. 
 
Mr. Chair, this government has a plan; we’re on track. We have 
been meeting and exceeding the commitments that we have 
made and we will continue to do that. This year marks the final 
phase of our $900 million investment in our roads and our 
transportation infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Chair, this province is wide open to the future, to many 
opportunities. And I want to thank my department for their hard 
work in helping open up the future for all Saskatchewan people 
and for those who see this as a destiny. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2003 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to take this opportunity to 
thank the minister and his officials for the answers they 
provided during question period, and certainly the information 
provided has been very useful to the members on this side of 
the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the 
committee rise and report an awful lot of progress this 
afternoon and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1891 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1892 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1892 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1893 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1893 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1893 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1900 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1906 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Deputy Leader of Canada’s Official Opposition 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1893 
 Do It With Class Young People’s Theatre 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1893 
 Swift Current Chapter of Students Against Drinking and Driving 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1894 
 Loon Lake Student Wins Scholarship 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1894 
 Community Spirit Alive in Oxbow and Alida 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1894 
 Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship Regina 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1894 
 Saskatchewan History Book 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1895 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support for Beef Industry 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1895 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1895 
 Car Thefts in Regina 
  Huyghebaert............................................................................................................................................................................1896 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1897 
 Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan Investments 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1898 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1898 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1900 
CONDOLENCES 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1900 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1901 
  Melenchuk ...............................................................................................................................................................................1901 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1902 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1902 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 9 — Future Actions Relating to Occurrence of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1902 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1904 



 

 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1908 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 Return No. 1 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1912 
 Return No. 5 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1912 
 Returns No. 6 — 47 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1912 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1912 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1912 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1912 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1919 
 


	Do It With Class Young People’s Theatre
	Do It With Class Young People’s Theatre

