















































Hansard: April 25, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 713 
 April 25, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency who are concerned about education tax on 
property. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Spalding, 
Wadena, and Hendon. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again the issue 
of Crown grazing lease renewals has prompted a number of 
citizens from the area of Eastend, Frontier, and Claydon to sign 
a petition. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Citizens of the Battlefords 
area concerned about the threatened closure of the historic and 
scenic old bridges have signed the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Minister 
of Highways preserve the old bridges between Battleford 
and North Battleford. 

 
Your petitioners come from the town of Battleford and Glaslyn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
unacceptable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose 
Jaw. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from 
the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people from my 
constituency very concerned about the condition of Highway 47 
between Estevan and Boundary dam resort. And the prayer 
reads as follow: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Estevan, 
Gladmar, and even Saskatoon realizes how bad it is. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
their highways. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highways 13, 35, 18, 28, 6, 34 334, 
and 36 in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency in order to 
prevent injury or loss of life and to prevent the loss of 
economic opportunity in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Leroy, 
Tribune, Estevan, and Lampman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today with a petition from citizens of rural Saskatchewan 
that are extremely concerned about the lack of health care 
services out in the country. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the proper steps to cause adequate medical services, 
including a physician, be provided in Rockglen and to 
cause Five Hills Health Region to provide better 
information to the citizens of Rockglen. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of 
Killdeer and Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition with people concerned about the sharp 
increases in the crop insurance premiums. And the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increase and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 

 
And this, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good 
people of Kindersley, Glidden, and even Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Central Butte and Riverhurst. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have yet 
another petition dealing with the concerns about the condition 
of Highway 22. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs on Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey and Swan River, Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned with the 
2003 premium increases to crop insurance. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2003 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever prayer. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Leoville, Medstead, and Milden. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 

addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 13, 18, 19, 27, 35, 36, 40, 41, and 42. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 31 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Environment minister: what is your department’s 
policy regarding the tendering process for tree seedlings for 
reforestation; and further to that, are these policies always 
followed? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Tuesday next move first reading of The Oil and Gas 
Industry Recognition Week Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, a person who will be a constituent of mine after the 
new boundaries here. He presently, and his family, live in the 
constituency of Regina Centre, but in the west gallery is Terry 
White and his son Nathan White who is working on a project 
around government, and with them is a special guest that we 
should all welcome to Saskatchewan from Berlin, Germany. 
Johanna Kuchling is an exchange student studying in grade 11 
at Luther College here in Regina, and we welcome them and I 
ask all members to welcome them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Legislative Assembly, two individuals seated in the western 
gallery, one Walter Logan and Tom Brown. Walter, I have the 
great honour and privilege as representing as his MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly). Walter was a long-time 
United Church minister at St. John’s United, right in the heart 
of Regina-Elphinstone, and is still very active in the Regina 
presbytery and in the Regina Anti Poverty Ministry and in a 
great number of other projects. He gives me good counsel and 
good guidance. And it’s a pleasure to see you here today, 
Walter. 
 
And Tom, I understand, is from Kelowna, so I hope you enjoy 
the proceedings. Anyway, please welcome Walter and Tom. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all of my colleagues here as well — I 
don’t know if he knew what I was going to do — but seated in 
the west gallery is a long-time, family friend of mine, and from 
our hometown actually, up in Goodsoil, Saskatchewan, Miles 
Nachbaur. 
 
Miles worked here in the Legislative Building for a very brief 
period of time and is now employed in Regina at Dale’s House. 
And I’d appreciate if everybody would give Miles a warm 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

 

welcome to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Enhancement of Disability Allowances 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, our government is committed to advancing the full 
citizenship of people with disabilities, and the provincial budget 
announcements this week reflect that commitment. 
 
An additional $1 million per year has been allocated in the 
provincial budget to improve the disability allowance for 
persons on social assistance. This will provide for a $10 per 
month increase in the disability allowance. To address needs 
around accessibility and transportation, our government will 
invest $1 million in capital projects to improve accessibility of 
government buildings, and will invest $715,000 in new 
paratransit vehicles. 
 
This week, Mr. Speaker, our minister of Social Services 
announced $1.85 million in new funding for enhanced, 
individualized, employment supports to assist persons with 
disabilities to move from social assistance to employment — 
supports such as job training, mentoring, and coaching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the highlights of a solid plan 
that provides a total of $6 million in new funding to enhance the 
lives of persons with disabilities in Saskatchewan. It reflects 
this government’s belief in an economy and a future that is wide 
open to everyone in our province. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Volunteer Week 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
coming week, April 27 to May 3, is National Volunteer Week 
across Canada. And here in Saskatchewan we are well-known 
for our large and talented pool of volunteers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first National Volunteer Week took place in 
1943, and it’s no surprise that 60 years later we are still saying a 
heartfelt thanks for a job well done to the hundreds of thousands 
Canadians who take time out of their busy lives to help . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members, I wonder if the two 
members could just provide time for the member from Estevan 
so we could hear her statement in full. And I thank the members 
for their co-operation. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, we are still saying a heartfelt 
thanks for a job well done to the hundreds of thousands of 
Canadians who take time out of their busy lives to help out with 
whatever cause or event may need their assistance. 
 
The two main objectives, Mr. Speaker, of National Volunteer 
Week are to raise awareness about the many important 
contributions that volunteers bring to our communities and also 
to thank all those past and present who have assisted various 

businesses and organizations with their events throughout the 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some facts about volunteering. One in four of us is 
involved in volunteer work. Volunteers come from all walks of 
life. The rates and numbers of hours spent in volunteering often 
increase with the levels of education. Young people volunteer 
to gain valuable work-related skills and level of participation is 
highest amongst those aged 35 to 54. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the envy of the rest of Canada 
when it comes to volunteering since we have one of the highest 
rates of volunteerism in the country. For those of us who have 
lived here for many years, this comes as no surprise since we’ve 
all been privileged at one time or another to experience 
first-hand just how generous and giving Saskatchewan people 
really are and to appreciate their many contributions that have 
resulted from their tireless efforts and hard work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join with me in 
recognizing all volunteers during National Volunteer Week, and 
more importantly to give special thanks to all those 
Saskatchewan individuals who have volunteered over the years. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Small Business Loans Association 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The details of the Sask 
Party’s hidden agenda remain murky and their definition of a 
mess is obviously based on self-reflection. But one of the things 
they have said loud and clear is that, as a government, the Sask 
Party would provide no support to small business. Their 
position is one of no help to no one no way, and every person 
for themselves, and the devil take the hindmost, Mr. Speaker. 
Well that’s one approach, and we’ve seen the devastation 
caused in jurisdictions where that kind of simplistic right-wing 
ideology has been attempted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government believes in investing in the 
future of this province and that is why we have a 
government-administered, community-run Small Business 
Loans Association, Mr. Speaker. Since the inception of the 
SBLA program, more than $42.5 million have been loaned to 
over 8,000 businesses creating and maintaining over 18,000 
jobs. 
 
This year more than 3.5 million was loaned to almost 500 
businesses, Mr. Speaker. This resulted in the creation or 
maintenance of over 1,100 jobs, primarily in rural communities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:15) 
 
The Sask Party believes in a dog-eat-dog economy. We believe 
in supporting small business, helping to create jobs and new 
services that will result in strong communities with sustainable 
economies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With this government, the future for small business is wide 
open. We have a plan, Mr. Speaker, and it is working. 
 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lifetime Achievement Award to Spiritwood Man 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 14 here 
in Regina, Tourism Saskatchewan proudly celebrated the 
Tourism Awards of Excellence. At the event, a gentleman from 
Spiritwood, my hometown, was the winner of the Chairman’s 
Lifetime Achievement Award. 
 
This award was given for a person who has provided 
long-standing and exceptional service, has demonstrated 
leadership and integrity, has left a strong legacy, and has gained 
the respect of those in the tourism industry. The award recipient 
was Mr. Clarence Martodam of Spiritwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this award to Mr. Martodam was a long time 
coming. Mr. Martodam’s love of Spiritwood and enthusiasm for 
the success of everyone in this community is incredibly 
infectious. In fact, I would say that we all walk with a little bit 
more bounce in our step after running into him. Most people in 
the community know him as Mr. Ambassador of Spiritwood. 
On April 16 the Chamber of Commerce of Spiritwood helped 
celebrate this award with a supper put on in his honour. 
 
Congratulations, Clarence. Your dedication and promotion to 
our community is indeed an inspiration to all. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly today to help me say 
congratulations to Clarence Martodam on this special award 
and to his Lifetime Achievement Award that he won. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Implementation of SchoolPLUS 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this government is 
committed to building for the future of this province, and that 
means investing to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people and 
building programs that support them. 
 
In keeping with that commitment, Mr. Speaker, this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government is implementing SchoolPLUS. The 
SchoolPLUS model was recommended by the Role of the School 
Task Force and recognizes that schools must have two primary 
functions — to educate children, developing the whole child 
intellectually, socially, emotionally, spiritually, and physically; 
and to serve as centres of the community for delivery of 
services to children, youth, and their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SchoolPLUS is a priority for this government 
because it will help to ensure that all children and youth have 
access to the supports they need to take full advantage of 
Saskatchewan’s quality education system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that the MLA for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld has been appointed as Legislative Secretary to the 
Premier to oversee the implementation of SchoolPLUS. As a 
teacher he knows first-hand what an improvement community 
support makes in a child’s education. He’s also a great 
seatmate, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all the members of this Assembly will 
join with me in supporting the implementation of SchoolPLUS as 
an investment in the future of this province’s children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Broncos Win Anavet Cup 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, there 
is much excitement in Humboldt today. The Humboldt Broncos 
are on their way to the national junior hockey championship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the Broncos earned this trip last 
evening by defeating the OCN (Opaskwayak Cree Nation) 
Blizzards 8 to 1 before a packed crowd at the Elgar Petersen 
Arena in Humboldt. The Broncos took the series four games to 
one, winning the Anavet Cup. The Humboldt Broncos now 
advance to the Royal Bank Cup junior A national tournament, 
May 3 to 11 in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt won the first two games of the series in 
The Pas and lost the third game on home ice in Humboldt. They 
came back in the fourth game soundly defeating the Blizzard 5 
to 3, and they really poured it on in the fifth game with an 8 to 1 
win. Humboldt outshot OCN in the fifth game 54 to 24. 
 
Congratulations to the coaches, Bob Beatty and Dean 
Brockman, and to the players for a job well done and some 
superb entertainment. Good luck, Broncos, in the Royal Bank 
Cup tournament. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legislative Committees 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, Mr. Speaker, besides 
question period there are other forums where members can raise 
questions. 
 
Members will know there are at least two committees of this 
Assembly, the Crown Corporations Committee and the Public 
Accounts Committee, that provide members with opportunities 
to put questions directly to officials with the hands-on 
responsibility of running various agencies and corporations. 
Here members have opportunities to ask questions to which 
they may not know the answers, because it is a rule, Mr. 
Speaker, in question period — and at least I learned this in 
opposition — that you don’t ask questions to which you don’t 
already know the answers. If you don’t already know the 
answer to your question you may get blindsided and 
embarrassed by an answer you weren’t expecting. 
 
The committees with their informal settings provide the 
opportunities for members to ask questions without fear of this 
embarrassment. Therefore I would commend to all members of 
the House these committees as a forum for them to ask 
questions, and especially to the member for Swift Current who 
criticized the government yesterday in Crown . . . in question 
period for some Crown undertaking in which the Crown had no 
involvement whatsoever. 
 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

 

In a manner of speaking, Mr. Speaker, he misled the House. I’m 
sure it was again inadvertent but surely embarrassing. Therefore 
I suggest to him, to avoid future embarrassment in question 
period don’t hesitate to stop first by your local Crown 
Corporations Committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Mega Bingo 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago the Saskatchewan Party revealed 
that Liquor and Gaming lost $6.2 million on its failed mega 
bingo project. The Saskatchewan Party has now learned that the 
total losses on mega bingo were more than $6.2 million. Will 
the minister please tell the people of Saskatchewan what was 
the total amount lost by the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
on mega bingo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, when that issue was raised 
— and the figures that were indicated during the Crown 
Corporations meeting was in the vicinity of $6.2 million, as the 
member will recall — when that issue was raised, I asked 
officials at SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority) to immediately do a review of that and any related 
projects to this entire issue. And when that review is completed, 
I’ll be happy to report back to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, according to the information we 
have received, the total losses on mega bingo were about $2 
million more than the $6.2 million the minister originally 
reported. Can the minister confirm this? Was the total lost on 
mega bingo more than $6.2 million? Was it an additional $2 
million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out when this 
issue was raised, the questions were raised about the projects, I 
did in fact immediately ask SLGA officials to review not only 
that particular project but any projects that were related to that 
particular exercise. Mr. Speaker, that was an attempt by SLGA 
and this government to assist some of the 1,500 charities and 
assist people in this community and the communities of this 
great province. 
 
One thing that the member fails to recognize or acknowledge is 
the fact that SLGA, SLGA very . . . is very much committed to 
helping charities in communities — in the last three years, Mr. 
Speaker, contributing almost $1 billion to the General Revenue 
Fund and to the people of this province and the communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the issue is that if this 

government was accountable they would have spent . . . had 
$6.2 million more to spend on charities than they have to give 
to charities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government negligently spent more than $6.2 
million on mega bingo with no business plan, no cabinet 
approval, no ministerial approval, no due diligence, and with no 
ceiling. This is exactly what we asked the minister about a 
couple weeks ago: what was the ceiling on mega bingo? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: who gave approval for this 
expenditure? Who gave approval to spend even more than $6.2 
million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the government made this 
decision based on the best information it had available. It was 
part of a gaming strategy that asked SLGA, based on requests 
from the bingo industry, based on requests from charities . . . 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, there are 1,500 charities that 
count on the proceeds of the bingo industry to help them 
provide important services to people across this province. 
 
When that project failed, it was cancelled, Mr. Speaker. And as 
I indicated, I have asked officials to review all the details of that 
and any related project. When I have that total information I 
will happily supply that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this brings into question for the 
people of Saskatchewan: why would the minister assume that 
more than $6.2 million was spent on mega bingo? Why would 
he ask if more had been spent? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this review be done and when will the 
results be released to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I have every confidence in 
the competency of the executives at the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority to thoroughly review, at my request, all 
the information related to this project. And I will be happy to 
present it — all the details — when it becomes available to me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for 
Liquor and Gaming ordered this review. Will the minister 
please tell the people of Saskatchewan when this review will be 
completed and when will he release the results? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, not unlike the Saskatchewan 
Party and the critics in the Saskatchewan Party, who share 
half-truths about the information they present to this House and 
the people of Saskatchewan, I will present all the details when 
they become available to me, and I will present them on the 
certainty that they are fact. 
 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, here’s another example of the Saskatchewan 
Party’s motive to discredit Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority which contributes over $300 million a year to the 
General Revenue Fund. The members opposite, the member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy, is attempting to discredit SLGA 
with the motives that they have to privatize that organization, as 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is this NDP 
government and this minister that are unaccountable and have 
caused all the mistrust within Liquor and Gaming for the people 
of Saskatchewan. It is because they have failed to be 
accountable and they have allowed misappropriation of funds 
and misspending to go on in the Liquor and Gaming 
department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when will this review be 
completed and when will the results be known by the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, let me point out once again 
that SLGA is an active participant in the business of gaming. As 
with any business, there are investment risks associated with 
those decisions. We are reviewing the details of that and any 
related projects to make sure that that information is accurately 
reported. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if there’s any concern by members opposite 
with respect to any of the details or information, the Crown 
Corporations Committee, the Public Accounts Committee 
allows access, detailed access, and access to the officials that 
deal with any matters related to incidents such as the member is 
questioning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, in 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 
annual reports, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming paid over 
$400,000 to Wascana Gaming incorporated. Last week I 
submitted a written question asking what services were 
provided by Wascana Gaming and whether the work was 
tendered, and the government refused to answer this question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP refusing to answer this question? 
What are they hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, the matter is 
being reviewed. All the specific details will be released. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. I would like 
to be able to hear the response in total. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, the 
review is being undertaken. All the answers will be supplied 
when they are received, to be totally accurate. And, Mr. 

Speaker, once again I can’t help but believe that the only 
purpose that this continues to be raised by the members 
opposite when they can raise it in other forums, is that they’re 
trying to discredit, trying to discredit the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority which in the last three years has 
contributed almost 1 billion — $1 billion — to the General 
Revenue Fund for health, education, highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, over $400,000 were paid to 
Wascana Gaming, a company that has clear connections to the 
NDP, and this was after — may I repeat, after — the mega 
bingo scandal. The Saskatchewan Party wants to know what 
services did Wascana Gaming provide and were these contracts 
tendered. Mr. Speaker, will the minister answer these 
questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, this whole 
issue is under review at my request and when I have the 
answers to those questions I’ll happily reveal them. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s my intention, that’s the reason I asked for the 
thorough review. It’s not to try and elude whatever took place. 
We will provide the answers when I’m satisfied that they are all 
the answers to that project and any related projects involved in 
that mega bingo. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, again we have no answers from 
the minister of Liquor and Gaming. The people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know how the dollars in Liquor 
and Gaming are spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister indicating that Wascana Gaming, 
the payments in 2000-2001, 2001-2002 are directly related to 
the mega bingo scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out previously, 
the Western Canada Lottery Corporation acted as the agent for 
SLGA in these matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, I’ve asked for a review of the 
participation of that particular project and any related projects. 
And when that information is made thoroughly available to me, 
I’ll be more than happy to present it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask one more time on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan. Are the payments made to 
Wascana Gaming in year 2001 and 2002 directly related to the 
mega bingo scandal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, this was a major undertaking 
and a major project. That’s one of the reasons that SLGA 
engaged the Western Canada Lottery Corporation — which I 
hope the member opposite is not trying to discredit, or any other 
legitimate business that that member may be trying to discredit 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

 

and starting . . . or at least alluding to the fact that only people 
. . . not everybody can be involved in a business to provide 
services to the people of this province. When I have that 
information it will be happily supplied, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment in Retx.com 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — It’s okay, Mr. Speaker. It’s okay; they can’t help 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, between May 2000 and March 2002, SaskTel 
gambled at least 24.7 million taxpayer dollars to buy 90 per 
cent of an Internet company in Atlanta, Georgia called 
Retx.com. And over that period of time the NDP has lost at 
least $10 million on its Retx business gamble. Unfortunately for 
taxpayers, the NDP has now decided to hide Retx.com’s 
financial results so it’s impossible for taxpayers to find out 
where they really stand with this particular investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister come clean today? How much 
money, how much money has the NDP gambled in total on 
Retx.com in Atlanta, Georgia? And how much money has the 
NDP lost so far on its business gamble in Atlanta, Georgia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, you had to know I was going to do this. I looked up 
two Hawaiian words, Mr. Speaker. It’s called hewa and mihi, 
Mr. Speaker. They mean wrong, blunder, mistake, offence, 
apologize, confess, regret, repent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this member from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, this 
member has no credibility on this issue or any issue. Why 
should we or the people of Saskatchewan believe this member 
on this issue or any issue, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very 
important to note that on the issue the minister’s referring to, 
officials at the company that SaskTel has invested in has 
confirmed, Mr. Speaker, on two occasions that a subsidiary that 
they would also be vested in has invested in Honolulu. 
 
And so there will be more answers needed on this one, Mr. 
Speaker. There are going to be a lot more answers from that 
minister and from officials who were also denying yesterday 
that they were involved in their Palm Springs cable TV 
company which — believe it or not, Mr. Speaker — is reported 
in SaskTel’s annual report, Mr. Speaker, if you can believe it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is on Retx. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, members. 
Order. The member has a strong voice but there’s just a limit to 

how much one person can holler out. So I would just ask all 
members on the government side, on the opposition side to 
allow the question to be put. 
 
Mr. Wall: — We know that SaskTel has gambled at least 24.7 
million on Retx.com in Atlanta, Georgia. It looks like they’ve 
lost over $10 million. The question was simple. What is the 
status of the taxpayers’ investment in this Atlanta-based 
dot-com? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ve not 
seen this for some time — where the member from the 
opposition from the Sask Party asks the questions yesterday and 
then starts to answer his own questions today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, at least that member, that member 
from Swift Current, at least he could . . . the least he could do 
would be to apologize to the officials at SaskTel that he so 
discredited yesterday, Mr. Speaker. At least to the officials he 
could do that, Mr. Speaker. Would he stand in his place and 
apologize to the officials, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if there are any apologies due to 
anyone, it would be an apology needed by the NDP opposite for 
wasting $85 million on out-of-province investments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s who should stand and apologize today in 
this legislature to the voters. And it won’t make much 
difference, Mr. Speaker. The voters may even forgive him, but 
they will never re-elect a government with that kind of 
misplaced priorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Never, Mr. Speaker. And part of the reason they 
won’t re-elect him is that the minister will not answer questions. 
He didn’t yesterday on Craig Wireless; he’s not today on Retx. 
 
The question’s simple. The government has invested $24 
million in this dot-com in Georgia. Taxpayers have lost 10 
million more. What is the status of the taxpayers’ investment in 
this Atlanta-based dot-com? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I will again answer the 
question as I’ve done 100 times before, Mr. Speaker, and as I 
did yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on all of these investments, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel 
and our Crown corporations over the last 10 years have returned 
to the people of Saskatchewan, to the taxpayers, $1.6 billion, 
Mr. Speaker — 1.6 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Last year alone — last year alone — 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

$300 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that member and those members from the Sask Party day 
after day pick out investments, Mr. Speaker, that are largely 
start-up — pick out investments that are largely start-up — that 
had been predicted to lose money in the first few years. I say, 
what portfolio can’t they pick where there are investments in 
the last two or three years that haven’t lost money? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t anybody in the public sector or private 
sector who, if they could, would not invest in Crown 
corporations if it were traded publicly, Mr. Speaker because it 
has returned huge dividends to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How much more money 
would the taxpayers be enjoying today — how much more — 
were it not for the squandering of $28 million on SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), were it 
not for the squandering of 85 million-plus in one year alone on 
out-of-province investments by the Crown corporations? 
 
And that is precisely the point. And that’s why Saskatchewan 
people are responding to this party’s plan to focus those Crowns 
on their market here; to focus them on their core function where 
they have success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier set a standard a couple of months ago 
with his SPUDCO review on accountability. He said his 
government would be coming clean on these kinds of deals. 
 
The question to the minister is simple: what is the status of the 
taxpayers’ investment in the Atlanta-based dot-com, Retx.com? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered that 
question many times and I’m going to ask again for that 
member to answer this question: what does he and what do the 
Sask Party mean by core functions? What do they mean by core 
functions, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you exactly what they mean. It means that 
they can’t compete in the lucrative markets like Saskatoon and 
Regina and maybe some of the larger urban centres. 
 
What that Sask Party wants our Crowns to do is to provide 
services in rural Saskatchewan, areas that they largely represent, 
Mr. Speaker, provide services at the lowest, lowest possible 
rates, Mr. Speaker. They can’t do it unless they make 
investments, Mr. Speaker, that can earn revenues from other 
places. They can’t do it. It means privatization, that’s what it 
means. It means privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it was the Premier of this province, 
not more than two months ago, who told the people of 
Saskatchewan in the wake of the SPUDCO scandal, he told the 
people of the province that his government pledged to the 
taxpayers to be more accountable with their money, to let them 
know about what was happening with the NDP’s investments. 

And the last two days in this legislature, the Minister of Crown 
Investments Corporation has completely contradicted by his 
action the Premier’s words. 
 
So maybe this question is to the Premier. Does the Premier 
believe it acceptable, does he believe it acceptable that a 
minister of the Crown who has authorized the investment of 25 
million taxpayer dollars in Georgia, the loss of another $10 
million, does he believe it acceptable for that minister to refuse 
to answer questions to the taxpayers of this province about that 
investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, after the display that we 
saw in this Assembly yesterday by that member from the Sask 
Party from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, why should the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, believe anything that that 
member says, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I could 
read the quote from Grant Schmidt again, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think they know it fairly well, Mr. Speaker. The point is, Mr. 
Speaker, that that Sask Party opposite has one agenda. Their 
agenda is to discredit our Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they would put borders up around Saskatchewan 
so that they don’t allow them to invest outside, invest in 
companies that have potential to bring revenues back into the 
province. They don’t want them to compete in the marketplaces 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want them to 
survive, Mr. Speaker. That’s their agenda. They want to sell 
them, as the member from Arm River says, when they get the 
best bang for the buck, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, this is the 
same minister that characterized the loss of $28 million in 
SPUDCO as a success. So, Mr. Speaker, the loss of 85 million 
and up . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well they must be ecstatic, Mr. Speaker, that they 
managed to lose $85 million on out-of-province investments, 
Mr. Speaker, in 2002. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in Janice MacKinnon’s book, she 
highlights some of the reasons why she wanted to leave the 
government. She points to the wheeler-dealers on the 
government side that she couldn’t abide any longer, Mr. 
Speaker. I wonder if that’s the definition of a wheeler-dealer — 
somebody that would authorize the expenditure of the 
investment of taxpayers’ money, $25 million, incur $10 million 
in losses on the part of the taxpayers, and then not answer a 
single question about it. 
 
The question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, is this. The 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

 

minister’s own annual report says the company will not be cash 
flow positive until 2004. How much more money will taxpayers 
lose on this risky dot-com investment they have made on behalf 
of taxpayers in Atlanta, Georgia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ecstatic? Well 
I ask that member from Swift Current from the Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker, how ecstatic he was as the ministerial adviser to the 
minister of privatization when they lost, Mr. Speaker, $2 
million a day on interest alone, $1 billion a year over 10 years, 
Mr. Speaker. He must have been ecstatic every single day that 
he worked in this building, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the point that I make again 
for the people of Saskatchewan — the point that I make again, 
Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan — they can pick 
any number of investments, Mr. Speaker, any number of 
investments, where there were losses. Absolutely, they can do 
it. But they can go to the private sector and they can do that as 
well. 
 
The point is that SaskTel and all of our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, as 
a result largely of deregulation in competition, have been forced 
to look to other marketplaces for sources of revenue. That’s 
what they’re doing and they’ve been hugely successful — $1.6 
billion, 300 million alone last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 
of the day, I ask leave to introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to my 
colleagues opposite and on our side as well. I appreciate the 
opportunity that you give me leave. 
 
I would like to introduce in the Speaker’s gallery today, Mr. 
Speaker, some guests that have just joined us: Rod Gopher, and 
Joe Gopher who is actually the acting chief at the Saulteaux 
First Nation. If we would please . . . if you would please join 
me in welcoming these guests to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Humboldt on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly and would 

join with the minister in introducing and welcoming Rod and 
Joe Gopher to the Assembly today. And I understand that Chief 
Brian Moccasin is with us also. 
 
Rod Gopher is a consultant on FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) 
and FAE (fetal alcohol effects), also of the Saulteaux First 
Nation. And we look forward to meeting with you a little bit 
later on and talking about your concerns. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Swift Current on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to you 
to my colleagues in the legislature, it’s a pleasure to introduce 
in the east gallery some fine young gentlemen who are no doubt 
visiting Regina from Caronport. And one of them is my 
nephew, Justin Wall, who’s currently enrolled at Briercrest 
there in Caronport. 
 
And he’s joined, I know, by two colleagues from the school 
whose names escape me — although I met one of them and I 
apologize for that — but I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that all 
members would join me in welcoming Justin and his friends 
here from Caronport today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a written 
response to question no. 148. 
 
The Speaker: — A response to question 148 has been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 19 — The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to stand here today to speak on this legislation to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. I would ask the members to . . . 
 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. And as I was 
saying, I’m very pleased today to stand to speak on this 
legislation to establish two new provincial honours, namely the 
Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal and the Saskatchewan 
Centennial Medal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regarding the Saskatchewan Protective Services 
Medal, I think this is something that is long overdue in this 
province. In fact the minister has stated that this particular 
award has been requested by police forces in the province for 
some time now. And I just think it would be very interesting for 
us to know how much time has elapsed since these requests 
were being made. You know, we don’t know if it was two 
years, whether it’s been five years, or perhaps even ten years. 
And we all realize that this kind of legislation isn’t that difficult 
to introduce. So I would just like to know how much time is 
involved between the initial request and this Bill being brought 
forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re all very aware of the government’s 
commitment, of this NDP government’s commitment to — or 
lack of commitment — to the police, provincial police forces. 
In the 1999 election, this NDP government promised to hire an 
additional 200 police officers, and of course we all know that 
that was a commitment that has not been kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Protective Services Medal is not limited to 
police officers. It also involves firefighters, emergency medical 
personnel, conservation officers, highway traffic compliance 
officers, correction personnel, customs and immigration 
officers, and members of the Canadian Forces are also eligible 
for this. And, Mr. Speaker, the professions that I have just 
mentioned are all very worthy as we all know. We all remember 
the terrorist attack of September 11 in the United States and, 
incidentally, this announcement of this Saskatchewan Protective 
Services Medal was made on the first anniversary of that 
devastating attack that we’ll all have a . . . that has an indelible 
part in all of our minds forever. 
 
We remember the firefighters and the police and their 
involvement in that event, Mr. Speaker. And I have family that 
are in the police force. I have a brother, a brother-in-law, and a 
nephew, and I also have many friends on the local police force 
and, you know, they are the brunt of much ridicule. We all 
know that the little jokes that they all are forced to put up with 
and, you know, but in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, they do a 
wonderful job and they just don’t know what they are going to 
face on their next trip outside, and that is also the case with all 
the aforementioned professions. 
 
And I think after the 9/11 attacks, we all have a greater 
appreciation for these people. And, you know, the volunteer fire 
departments and everything like that, I think that we should all 
hold them in very high esteem and, you know, the things, the 
community events they take part in, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today 
I did a statement on this being volunteerism week and we all are 
associated with volunteer firefighters, and we remember their 
involvement in charitable events. The police are involved in 
torch runs for the mentally challenged and Cops for Cancer. We 
know of the police that go out and have their heads shaved and 
just to help with charities such as that. 
 
Mr. Chair, like a lot of this . . . or, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry, a lot 

of this is . . . the details of this are in Regulations but it is my 
understanding that this award is for 25 years of exemplary 
service, but it can also be given out to anyone that is involved in 
situations — and I’ll use 9/11 as an example — within the 
25-year period. We also note that the Government of Canada 
has awards for RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 
long-service, good-conduct medals, the police exemplary medal 
of Canada, as well as other similar medals for corrections and 
emergency medical services. 
 
And these awards recognize 20 years of service or more which 
differentiates them from the award proposed in this legislation 
which will recognize 25 years of service. 
 
This proposed legislation that deals directly with the Protective 
Service Medal also makes mention that it is distinctive in 
Canada because it includes such a wide range of protective 
services and, Mr. Speaker, that is something we support. 
 
During her second reading speech, the minister also mentioned 
that because this was the first year of the award — since 
eligibility was effective as of January 1 this year — she expects 
that there will be a number of presentations, followed by one 
annually. And, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House 
certainly hope that those presentations will be spread out 
throughout the people deserving it throughout the province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Centennial Medal, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
medal that will be awarded in honour of our province’s 100th 
anniversary to citizens who have made exceptional 
contributions to the province. And at this time we just aren’t 
sure who does qualify to receive this medal, Mr. Speaker. We 
know it is for exceptional contributions for this province. So in 
my view, and I’m sure I speak for all members on this side of 
the House, we feel that every member of this province, every 
citizen of this province, should receive a medal. 
 
While it will be an honour to receive the Centennial Medal, it is 
a one-time award and in all honesty I’m a bit concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, with this medal. This medal seems to be close in 
criteria to the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and so that makes 
it somewhat . . . seem somewhat redundant, time-consuming, 
and maybe costly to maybe duplicate something that’s already 
in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also very concerned about the details of this 
— who is eligible, on what basis will it be handed out, how 
many participants? There are no details on this and of course 
this is very typical of this NDP government, they leave 
everything to regulations. And we all know that the devil is in 
the details, and this indicates to me once again that the NDP has 
not done its homework; and that in turn, Mr. Speaker, means a 
lack of clarity and confusion for the people and organizations 
that are at the other end of these regulations. 
 
The nature behind this legislation is good, so I encourage the 
government members to do proper consultation in working out 
the specifics. 
 
Mr. Chair, I know any person — Mr. Speaker, I keep saying, 
Mr. Chair — Mr. Speaker, I know any person who receives the 
Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal and the Saskatchewan 
Centennial Medal will appreciate that this is an official honour 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

 

of the Crown and they will also appreciate the fact that they will 
be presented with this by the Lieutenant Governor or her 
designate. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are generally supportive of these amendments 
proposed in this Bill and any concerns we do have, we will do 
in Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise today and to speak on Bill No. 6, the Bill 
respecting the profession of podiatry and making consequential 
amendments to The Medical Professional Act, 1981. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is important, and needed, and very 
much appreciated by practitioners of podiatry in Saskatchewan 
because it updates and modernizes their legislation and the 
whole framework for their governing council and the way they 
conduct themselves. 
 
Currently the practice of podiatry is undertaken under the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiropodists and this is now 
bringing that legislation into symmetry, if you like, with the 
new structures of independent councils and colleges in terms of 
self-regulating bodies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, chiropodists and podiatrists in the province have 
been operating under some restraints and difficulties in that 
many times, working completely within their scopes of practice, 
they’ve been unable to call for needed tests or imaging 
procedures, etc., that would be very beneficial in the practise of 
their profession. And so, Mr. Speaker, this legislation does 
create the framework whereby they can, independent of other 
medical professionals, call for these needed services and 
operate in a much more professional and effective way. 
 
There are a great deal of antiquated housekeeping items that are 
updated, as I mentioned, in this Bill, moving it to the practice of 
podiatry and updating the old chiropodist legislation that has 
been antiquated. 
 
The association of podiatrists, we’ve communicated with them, 
and when the Bill was presented and when we adjourned it last 
we asked that we would have some time in order to 
communicate with the people that have been affected by this 
legislation. And I’m pleased to say that we’ve been in 
communication with the Saskatchewan association of 
podiatrists and they have indicated to us that they have been 
pressing the government for some time for this much needed 
legislation. And they are very pleased to see that finally the 
government has seen fit to bring forward this legislation. 
 
They also indicated to us that while passage of the legislation is 

certainly a very important part, they also are very much anxious 
that the government will commit to proclaiming the 
administrative sections, at least of this legislation, as early as 
possible so that they can actually begin the restructuring of their 
association in a timely fashion. 
 
So I certainly would echo that concern and put it on the public 
record that we believe that this legislation is worthwhile and 
that the government should, at the earliest possible moment, 
proclaim those essential sections at least so that the association 
can move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our pleasure to support this piece of legislation 
and any detailed questions that we have we can certainly deal 
with in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 7 — The 
Occupational Therapists Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 7, the Act to amend The Occupational Therapists 
Amendment Act, 1997 is largely a Bill that is of . . . I could 
refer to it as a housekeeping nature. There are one and a half 
pages of clauses and they refer primarily to deleting this phrase 
and inserting that sort of phrase. And they believe that what this 
will do will update their legislation and make it more 
appropriate for their profession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two main areas that are dealt with in this 
legislation that amends The Occupational Therapists Act and it 
deals with housekeeping amendments and it also deals with 
clarifying and strengthening the relationship between this health 
care profession and information that may be required from 
regional health authorities. 
 
So when the government has moved to the regional health 
authorities, some of these housekeeping amendments were 
required in order to make the transition between the new 
designations of district health boards and regional authorities 
apply to various medical professions, and this is the case. 
 
We have been in contact with the occupational therapists in the 
province and they support the housekeeping nature of this 
legislation and urge speedy passage of it. And therefore, we can 
ask any detailed questions in the committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 14 — The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again it’s a pleasure to speak on a Bill that has significant 
impact on a very critical component of our health care system, 
the registered nurses of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years the registered nurses have 
expressed a very strong commitment not only to improving the 
quality of nurses graduating from an educational program and 
moving from a diploma-prepared profession to a 
degree-required profession, they also have made ongoing and 
very significant commitments to continuing education and 
continued improvement of the competencies to make sure that 
the people of Saskatchewan are served in a very appropriate 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been always some concerns expressed 
about saying why would the registered nursing profession want 
to improve their educational requirements, would want to 
improve their competencies on an ongoing basis. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it speaks volumes of the commitment that 
registered nurses have to the health care profession in 
Saskatchewan. And it is so important that we, as legislators in 
the province, do everything we can to encourage this ongoing 
commitment to education and skills development that the 
registered nurses of Saskatchewan have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those in the province that would say that 
as long as you can train someone to do the minimum 
requirements, that that’s all we really need. And in essence that 
we will come to an attitude that I kind of worry about with this 
government with their reluctance to increase the number of 
funded education training seats in the province, that we’re 
coming to a time where we say, well almost anybody can do 
these critical medical kinds of procedures. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the registered nurses of 
Saskatchewan have to be commended and need to be supported 
by their commitment to continuing education and improved 
standards of education in this province. 
 
And rather than looking at the registered nurse profession as 
sort of an expense base, we should look at it in the much more 
broad way where we say the results, the medical outcomes, the 
evidence of what actually happens when we have 
degree-prepared people and people who have an ongoing 
commitment to improving their competencies, the results are so 
much superior to the cheapened-down alternative that I think 
that registered nurses need to be commended and encouraged to 
continue this direction that they have of expanding and 
increasing their competencies and their role and involvement in 
the health care system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments to the legislation assist the 
Registered Nurses’ Association to have an ongoing program of 
improving competencies, and an ongoing procedure for nurses 
to be involved and involving themselves in improving their 
skills through an ongoing program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have certainly commended the 
Registered Nurses’ Association. We’ve communicated with 
them about the details of this legislation to see that we wanted 
to make sure it was going to meet their needs, and making sure 
that they were satisfied that this legislation was giving them the 

tools they needed to meet the high standards and the challenges 
of the health care profession that they have committed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re assured by the Registered Nurses’ 
Association that this legislation meets those requirements, and 
therefore we will support this legislation and ask any detailed 
questions in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 10 — The 
Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Amendment Act, 2003 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s an honour to speak to this Bill. I don’t think . . . A lot of us 
don’t think about the 4-H Club where we don’t get a warm 
feeling about the club we’ve been involved with. And I was a 
member for a number of years when I was younger. 
 
And it’s funny how things get indoctrined in your mind, 
because I’ll never forget the pledge where we pledge our heart 
to . . . or our head to clearer thinking, our heart to greater 
loyalty, our hands to larger service for our health, and our 
community, and our clubs. 
 
And I was a member for a lot of years. Actually I even know 
the song. Our club had a song and I offered to sing it to our 
caucus. They wouldn’t let me sing it. And I don’t know if it was 
with all the clubs, but I know that song off by heart as well. It’s 
really stuck with me. So at any rate . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The members opposite seem to want me to sing it but I 
don’t think they . . . You want to be careful what you wish for, 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes. But at any rate . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, you haven’t heard me sing. 
 
I was a member for a number of years and I really appreciated 
what the 4-H Club did for me and it was . . . There were many 
skills that I learned that I used throughout my entire life, quite 
frankly, and I didn’t have involvement for a number of years. 
 
And of course I always take the opportunity whenever I can to 
talk about my own children, and all three of my daughters 
became members of the 4-H Club. They were in a different club 
in a different program than I was in because they all chose light 
horse and of course that wasn’t something I could teach them, 
although I owned a horse. They needed training other than 
myself in teaching them about horse and horse riding skills. So 
it’s something that I think is so important to the youth of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
For the most part this Bill, Mr. Speaker, appears to be 
housekeeping in nature. The most significant change is a 
change to the board of trustees. I notice that the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, who used to be quite a significant donator to the 
4-H clubs, no longer is. They also were no longer attending the 
meetings so therefore they will be dropped from the board as a 
member. And I understand it’s by request. 
 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

 

So it’s not surprising to see that changes have to be made to this 
piece of legislation periodically, simply because the 4-H Club is 
Canada’s longest running rural-based youth development 
organization. 
 
And it’s quite exciting, but it’ll be celebrating its 90th 
anniversary in the year 2003. So I think that’s quite a milestone 
and it says a lot for the organization — how well it’s been run 
and the value that it has to not only our province but for the 
entire country. 
 
Although the 4-H program originated for the purpose of 
improving agriculture and enriching rural life, it’s expanded 
quite a great deal, Mr. Speaker, into other areas that will benefit 
all youth in the province, not just those that are from farm 
origin. 
 
The Saskatchewan 4-H Council has listed four goals, Mr. 
Speaker, for its members and I would like to just state what 
those are. 
 
And the first is to gain knowledge and skills in areas that are 
interesting and useful to them. The second is to develop 
leadership skills, health, lifestyles, decision-making skills, and 
self-confidence. The third is to learn how to work together. And 
the fourth is to understand and appreciate the natural 
environment. 
 
And from my personal experience with the 4-H organization, 
both myself personally and my children later on, I think that the 
4-H organization not only meets these goals but exceeds them 
by far. They do an exceptional job in working with our youth. 
 
(11:15) 
 
The Governor General, Adrienne Clarkson, once commented, 
and I would like to quote what her comments were: 
 

The simple ideals of responsibilities, skillfulness and 
compassion towards others have been the . . . (cornerstone) 
of the Canadian 4-H community since its inception in 1913. 
Through the program’s . . . (agriculture) competitions, 
cultural exchanges and public speaking events, young 
people from across the country are not only gaining 
essential skills to become the leaders of tomorrow, but they 
are also making friends and building memories that will 
last a lifetime. 

 
And I think that’s very well said, Mr. Speaker, because I know 
that that is indeed what the 4-H organization strives to do. 
 
The focus of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, is really, 
truly on our youth. We feel that the youth of this province are 
so important, and I know on a personal level I cannot express 
enough how important I feel our youth are. We want to look at 
policies and things that we can do within our province that will 
help the development of our youth, that will help to educate our 
youth, and will help to brighten the futures for our youth. 
 
The 4-H organization has been a major player for many, many 
years in shaping our youth and in teaching them valuable skills 
— skills that they can use for many years throughout their lives. 
And I have no doubt that the 4-H organization will continue to 

do such a great job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has said a number of 
times that our goal is to grow the province by 100,000 people in 
10 years. And quite frankly it is a modest goal, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is only the average of other Canadian provinces. 
 
If — when, I should say, Mr. Speaker — when we become 
government and we set that goal into motion and we do start to 
grow this province, it’ll be . . . there will be a greater demand, 
quite frankly, for the 4-H organization. There will be a demand 
for them to expand their programs, there will be a demand for 
them to meet the needs of more and more youth within our 
province, and I have no doubt that they will meet those 
challenges and do an extremely good job of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that that’s an exciting prospect — a prospect of a youth 
organization needing to expand because of more youth within 
our province. 
 
Unlike the NDP government which keeps on predicting gloom 
and doom for our province, who are planning for 35,000 less 
students by the end of the decade, unlike that government, Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s going to grow this province. 
And in growing this province, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have 
more youth. And we’re going to have more youth that are going 
to need more programs. And that’s exciting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party finds that planning for a reduction of 
youth in our province is totally, absolutely unacceptable. We 
know that as our province grows we will have a stronger 
economy, we will have a brighter future for our youth, and we 
will be able to see more of our youth choosing to stay in our 
province because of that bright future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It’s quite sad, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve had a 
government that so long . . . that seems convinced that the 
province can’t grow, that the economy can only grow if the 
government invests taxpayers’ dollars to compete and to drive 
away, quite frankly, the private sector investment. And that 
they’re so convinced that we can’t grow, that there’s going to 
be a population demand, that they plan for a reduction of the 
youth of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m excited about the province’s future, and our 
youth are absolutely a vital, key component to that bright 
future. As our youth increase, organizations that work with the 
youths . . . youth will become more and more critical and more 
and more important for our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with a future Saskatchewan Party government we 
will rid the province of the NDP-mediocre gloom and doom 
attitude that the province cannot grow. 
 
We will be supporting this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
and we will have a few questions to ask when it goes into 
committee. I thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s very good to 
be here this morning to answer questions that the opposition 
may have. And first I would like to introduce the people from 
the department that are here. 
 
To my left is Christine Tanner, deputy minister of Labour. 
Directly behind myself is Jim Nicol, assistant deputy minister. 
Directly behind Christine is John Boyd, executive director of 
planning and policy division. Next, across the aisle from Jim is 
Sharon Ackerman, manager of budget and operations. And 
sitting directly behind Jim is Peter Federko, chief executive 
officer of the Workers’ Compensation Board. And behind the 
board, kind of scattered amongst members, we have Allan 
Walker, executive director, occupational health and safety 
division; Corrine Bokitch, director, Status of Women office; 
and Eric Greene, director of labour standards. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of all, thank 
you to the minister and welcome her officials here today. 
 
This is the first time we’ve had an opportunity to dive into the 
Labour estimates, but it’s also the first time that I’ve been in 
charge of . . . or overseeing any one department as far as a critic 
so it’s a bit of a learning experience as we go through it today 
for myself. 
 
I have the globals here that I’ll pass over right off the bat if you 
can give me some sort of an estimate and how long it will take 
to fill these out. This is a yearly event and that type of thing. So 
I’ll pass those over right now. 
 
But before I get into the budget or the estimates specifically, I 
would ask the minister, are there any new programs? What is 
the direction for the Department of Labour going forward? Are 
there new programs, new initiatives, that type of thing? So I’d 
just ask the minister that to begin with. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — For the members opposite, basically the 
Department of Labour, we are not looking at any brand new 
programs for this year, enhancing some of the current programs 
of course — the Ready for Work, working with young workers 
— enhancing and working on the programs that are established 
within the department. But there’s no new major focus that 
we’re addressing this year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When I look 
at the estimates here in the budget book, in the first . . . and I’m 
just going to go through it really kind of line by line and get you 
to explain some of the differences from last year to this year’s 
estimates, from the 2002-03 estimates to the 2003-04 estimates. 
 
And the first one is a variance of $110,000 increase under 

administration. I would ask the minister, why the increase of 
110,000 through administration? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the member was asking about 
the administration line in the vote 20. What it is, is an 
adjustment in some of the accounting to better account for the 
staff that we have. And it also takes into account salary 
increment adjustments and also some dollars that were set aside 
for staff training were put into the administration line to do 
more central training for staff within the department. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Could the minister explain, maybe 
elaborate a little bit more on keeping track of staff? I know she 
certainly had mentioned about more training. I can understand 
that and increase in wages. But the first reason, I wasn’t quite 
clear on and if she could maybe elaborate on that a little bit 
more please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The minister’s office is taken into 
account in the administration cost, also the deputy minister’s 
office, the assistance deputy minister, human resources, 
administration, and information technology. Those were all put 
into one line, whereas before they had been accounted for in 
different lines, not all, but it’s clearer for the administration 
costs within the department. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — As we go down through the vote 20 of the 
estimates on Labour, we get to the labour support services and I 
see a variance of about 60, $70,000 there. Could you please 
explain the difference there, an increase of roughly about 60 to 
$70,000? 
 
(11:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Support services entails a number of 
projects and services that are provided throughout the 
department. But the main increase would be a communications 
person designated to the Status of Women office and the 
changes that were made a little less than a year ago. So that’s 
where that new position shows up. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — When I was looking at the staffing 
complement, there really is, I guess, there is a bit of an increase 
of staffing of about a half a person. Is that correct? And would 
that then be what you’re explaining as far as the 
communications person for the Status of Women’s office and it 
would fall under there? Is that how that all works together then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now I apologize to the member opposite 
for taking so long. I was listening to the page ask a question. 
Yes, the point four does have to do with the Status of Women 
office and the changes that were made a year ago. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The largest increase as we go through the 
votes is under labour standards, and it’s an increase of $193,000 
with labour standards —an increase. We realized last year that 
. . . Last session we went through the whole changing of the 
legislation to include hog operations and labour standards in 
that area. When I look at the budget and its increase of 193,000, 
would that be where it’s targeted to? Or what would the 
increase under labour standards of 193,000 be all about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member may 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

 

have done some calculations and when you look at the total 
increases to the Department of Labour budget, it ends up being 
$412,000 was our total increase right across the board: 193,000 
of that goes to salary increases and increments through 
contracts and negotiations; 182,000 went to the readjustments 
and changes within the Status of Women office. 
 
And also there’s an extra 37,000 that is in the labour standards 
division. What we are doing is looking at a type of program — 
we’re going through some consultations currently — to try and 
have an effect on repeat offenders with offences as far as labour 
standards go. So we’re looking at some way of accomplishing 
that, so that’s really what the extra funds is designated towards. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So the majority of the increase in the 
department then is really increments and increasing in the 
staffing. And there is some portion of it going towards what you 
had just mentioned, a bit of a study. 
 
I think I’d just . . . Unless there is something else the minister 
wants to say on that, I have a couple of questions on the Labour 
Relations Board. I see that the estimate has dropped down a 
slight bit — I think $14,000 or $15,000 — so that really is not 
much of a variance. But could you . . . I guess what I would like 
to hear from the minister is kind of an explanation on how the 
Labour Relations Board works, who’s on the Labour Relations 
Board, and what is the mandate of the Labour Relations Board. 
 
We certainly hear on this side of the House an awful lot about 
the Labour Relations Board, whether it’s through some of the 
businesses that we’ve talked to and even some of the members 
of different unions that have been in front of the Labour 
Relations Board. So could I get you to give me kind of a 
broad-brush explanation on what the Labour Relations Board is 
all about, who makes it up, and what is their mandate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, in regards to the questions 
concerning the Labour Relations Board and its composition, the 
board is really a quasi-judicial administrative tribunal that’s 
independent of government. The board is composed of equal 
members of representatives from business and labour that we 
seek nominations from the various groups, whether it be labour 
groups or business groups — chamber of commerce is one that 
pops to mind right away. They put forward representatives and 
what we do is make a special attempt to be representative of all 
the industries and areas and various sectors throughout the 
province. 
 
So there is a good cross-section of knowledge of industry and 
business throughout the province and a good base of knowledge 
from workers and working people throughout the province in 
various sectors, so that the board has a balance. The board 
members are appointed. Some of the terms alternate so that you 
don’t have a total change of the board all in one swoop or all of 
the terms expiring all at once. 
 
But the Labour Relations Board, as I say it’s arm’s length from 
government and it is established under and also administers The 
Trade Union Act. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess my other question then is the 
mandate of what . . . I mean, I realize that if there’s a labour 
dispute, either business or labour can bring it in front of the 

Labour Relations Board to be ruled on. What is the whole 
mandate? What are some of the issues that the Labour Relations 
Board would deal with? What is its mandate, I guess? Is it just 
strictly dispute resolution or what is the mandate of the Labour 
Relations Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The Labour Relations Board has, as I 
say, it is established under and administers a piece of legislation 
that we refer to as The Trade Union Act, so it has a variety of 
powers. It can certify trade unions, require persons to refrain 
from unfair labour practices, reinstate, compensate employees 
that have been discharged contrary to the Act. There’s also 
provisions with technological change. Its boundaries are The 
Trade Union Act. 
 
The number of applications that can go to the board can cover a 
wide range of issues, but it is empowered by The Trade Union 
Act and that’s what it administers. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So if an employee or a business or whatever 
had a discrepancy with, you know, employee to business or vice 
versa, union to business owner, they would take the dispute to 
the Labour Relations Board and have the Labour Relations 
Board rule on whatever that dispute may be. In other words, 
they go in front of the Labour Relations Board. 
 
I guess either party can initiate that process. And roughly how 
many disputes have been in front of the Labour Relations Board 
in the past year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, when you get 
into a unionized workplace there is a collective agreement that 
would be in place. Collective agreements quite often have 
procedures built into the agreement that will address a 
grievance process, depending . . . it will have various time lines 
but there will be a grievance process that will be addressed 
within the agreement. Those steps would be gone through or 
dispute resolution would be established within the collective 
agreement. Those steps would be gone through before there 
would be an application to the board. But it is still within the 
bounds of The Trade Union Act that the board has any 
jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Could the minister then please give me like, 
just an example then, of a case that would go in front of the 
Labour Relations Board? I believe there’s hoops to go through 
then to get to the Labour Relations Board, but just a generic 
case that would be heard by the Labour Relations Board. I 
mean, they have already gone through the dispute resolution 
and it hasn’t been resolved. That’s why they would carry on up 
to the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Could you give me an example of a case that would be in front 
of the Labour Relations Board. And I don’t want specifics at all 
— I’m not asking for that — but just the type of a case that the 
Labour Relations Board would be ruling on. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Just as an example: first collective 
agreements, reinstatements, monetary loss, certification orders, 
unfair labour practice applications, or duty and fair 
representation applications. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I would appreciate if I could see that list 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

that you just read off there. I have a couple of questions on that. 
 
You were saying about certification. How does decertification 
. . . If a union, for example, the members of a union, of a 
particular union, wanted to decertify, would they then go in 
front of the Labour Relations Board and that’s how that process 
would work? And if the majority, for example, 90 per cent of 
the employees in a certain business say that they want to 
decertify and they go in front of the Labour Relations Board, 
then the Labour Relations Board would allow them to decertify 
or maintain the certification that they are already in? Is that how 
the process works? Or would that be one of the examples too? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes. A decertification would be heard in 
front of the Labour Relations Board in basically the process that 
you laid out. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So roughly . . . I ask the question just kind 
of right at the end of another question. How many cases then 
would the Labour Relations Board hear in a year, for example? 
And I would be also very interested to hear how many cases 
regarding decertification the Labour Relations Board has heard 
in the past year and how many it has granted. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — For the member opposite, in the year 
2001-2002 there was a total of 336 cases heard before . . . or by 
the board. So that would cover the whole scope of the cases that 
they hear. 
 
And preliminary numbers that I have, were 14 rescission note 
applications. Nine were granted, four dismissed, and one was 
withdrawn last year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Could you just repeat that last number? You 
said 14 were heard by the Labour Relations Board as far as 
decertification — nine were granted, four dismissed? Okay. 
 
I think I’ll turn it over to my colleague from Kindersley to ask a 
few questions . . . some more generic questions on labour. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — . . . Mr. Chair. I thank . . . I’d like to begin 
by thanking the minister and her officials, and I hope she will 
have some leniency with me. This is my first participation in 
estimates and I have many questions to ask because it is 
somewhat new to me. 
 
I wanted to start right from the budget on page 88. With regards 
to salaries, could you tell me how many people are employed 
by the department in full-time, three-quarter time, and 
half-time? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, the department 
has 176.3 FTEs, which is full-time equivalents, and that’s how 
our staffing is calculated. 
 
Now if you’d need more of a breakdown than that, we don’t 
have the information on us right now but we can get it to you as 
soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Another generic question for the minister. 
Just under the administration again, supplier and other 

payments. What would these payments be made for, what type 
of things? Could you just explain that to me? Thanks. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Really what this total is is anything 
that’s not salary. So it can be contractual services, advertising, 
printing that was done by the department, travel, business 
expenses, supplies and services, equipment, and fixed assets. So 
it really is a miscellaneous kind of category. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — With regards to the labour support services 
and the information services particularly, could you just explain 
to me what that means? The information services, what type of 
services they provide? That would be helpful. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member from Kindersley, 
information services is really a number of areas that we deal 
with. One is the communications staff. The communications 
staff put together the brochures that we use, whether it’s for 
occupational health and safety, prevention, that type of thing. 
 
Also, this information services contains prevention services 
which does our occupational health and safety and our labour 
standards training. The educational portion is held there. 
 
Also, the computer, the IT (information technology) that the 
department has not only within house, but what we’re working 
on is to get our information and brochures on-line. So that’s 
what’s contained in the information services. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have two 
questions following that. Could you elaborate a little bit on the 
dissemination of the information with regards to pamphlets and 
whatnot — how are those distributed, who receives them, what 
is the target audience? 
 
And then the second aspect, which would be with regards to the 
IT side, the tech side. Is that done in-house for all the computer 
programming, Web-site design, and whatnot or is that 
contracted, and if it is contracted, to what extent? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To the 
member opposite, IT is done in-house. We have our own staff 
that do that in-house; it is two people. The Web server is not in 
the house; that is outside. 
 
Now when you talk about . . . when you ask the question about 
brochures, the department puts out a wide range of brochures. It 
can range from technical bulletins that can be sent out whether 
it is something to do with hantavirus, occupational health and 
safety, mines regulations — I mean we just cover the whole 
areas of Saskatchewan’s business and agricultural sectors. I 
mean we just cover everything. So there’s a number of 
brochures that go out. 
 
Occupational health and safety, there may be brochures 
explaining labour standards. There is a program that deals with 
young people entering the workforce, working safe, 
ready-for-work programs. There’s also the farm safety council 
that puts out a variety of brochures and information that is 
focused in that area. 
 
When these brochures are printed they would be sent to 
traditional users of this information where it could be accessed; 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

 

could be sent out to our offices throughout the province where 
you may access it there. Also upon request, you could request 
information if you wanted anything specific from the 
department. Quite often that will help . . . or happen. We also 
have a library of videos that can be accessed for teaching 
classes, training sessions, whether it’s in the workplace, in the 
school, or wherever. 
 
So there’s quite a body of information and resource that we do 
produce and there’s a variety of ways of accessing it. And we’re 
working towards getting more on-line but not everything is 
available there, but we still have the traditional printed forms 
that are available. 
 
And if there’s anything that you’re interested in, you can 
contact my office or the department and we’d gladly get you 
any information that you would require. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
With regards to the pamphlets being printed and whatnot, 
would there be one specifically on sexual harassment in the 
workplace and how is that disseminated to . . . Again, an 
important issue which affects all working persons. 
 
And further, just for contact to the department for my 
information, if a worker or employer wants to get in touch, I 
take it there’s 1-800 numbers also to contact. Thank you for 
your nod on that. 
 
On the other issue, I’d appreciate an answer. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To the 
member opposite, The Occupational Health and Safety Act 
within this province has since 1996 required that every 
workplace have a harassment policy. 
 
Many will be done . . . You can appreciate that in a unionized 
workforce, there may be more information. Many are negotiated 
or referred to in collective agreements. But other workplaces are 
also required to have a policy and there are guides through the 
department that are available to help an employer establish a 
policy within that workplace. 
 
If the guide isn’t adequate, we also have officers that are more 
than willing to come out and work with any workplace to 
establish a policy for that workplace. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, would those guidelines that would be set, would they 
be in concurrence with the own standards that our Public 
Service Commission sets for the workers directly of the 
Saskatchewan Government? Would it be the same information 
in those pamphlets and whatnot? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The policy that the department has is 
basic and what it does is establish the criteria for harassment 
policies. I mean a number of these, just kind of roughly, is that 
a policy will be developed in each workplace, and if there is an 
employee committee within the workplace that it be done in 
consultation with employees or the committee. And also that 
employees need to be aware that the policy is there. And also 

there’s a requirement that it be posted. 
 
Now it is the basics that we have within our legislation and each 
employer and employee group will develop a policy that suits 
their workplace while maintaining the basics that are contained 
within the legislation. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Two following questions with that with 
regards to the basics within that legislation. I would assume that 
the terminology of zero tolerance is put forward and that should 
be the standard that we’re holding all businesses and places of 
employment accountable to. 
 
And secondly, if the minister would be able to give me a cost of 
the monies spent by the department specifically with regards to 
reaching workplaces, around the information about promoting 
zero tolerance and sexual harassment policies in the workplace. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now to the member opposite, I actually 
forgot a piece when we were talking about the basic criteria of 
the policy. And part of it is — and this is very important — is 
that there has to be a process of dealing with a complaint laid 
out within the policy. Not only can this be a very awkward and 
uncomfortable situation, but there has to be a clear process on 
how it is dealt with, who the harassment should be reported to. I 
mean there’s a number of things that have to be taken into 
consideration. But that’s actually a very important part of the 
policy. 
 
When you had asked about costs that the department spends on 
this area specifically, officers may deal, or there may be 
inquiries, either through the phone or to an officer anywhere 
from 2 to 300. To give you an actual breakdown on that would 
be timely, or time-consuming, and I’m not sure how accurate it 
would be to break out specific issues that each officer dealt 
with. But we could get you a cost of the publications and 
brochures that are specific to this area and we will get that out 
for you. 
 
Your comments about the zero tolerance, the department 
focuses more on prevention. So the terminology that we use is 
different. The zero tolerance term really deals to the 
acceptability of this issue and our whole focus is on prevention. 
So it’s not a wording that we would use or terminology that we 
would use. 
 
And our whole focus, I say again, is the design of the 
information we use. And the criteria of the policies that we use 
are all focused on prevention and preventing harassment 
wherever it may occur. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I’d like to thank the minister for her answer. 
I’d like to turn now . . . I’m going to ask the minister, please, 
some general questions surrounding the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement. 
 
The first question that I would ask is, when bids come in, what 
is the process for recognizing that the members making bids are 
unionized organizations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement) faded away as of December 2000, so I 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

don’t know if there’s any relevance to the question. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Could the minister tell me what replaced the 
CCTA? I take it that there’s a new organization. Maybe she 
could give me the name and acronym? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When the CCTA ended as of December 
2000, what happened was there was a series of tendering 
guidelines that the government established to guide the way 
tendering is done through the tendering agencies. Just roughly: 
fairness in awarding government contracts; a tendering process 
that will be open and transparent; a stable, viable construction 
industry throughout the province, including policies that ensure 
the attraction of young people into the industry — and I will 
hope that the members opposite will agree that that is very 
important, that we attract young people — and the assurance of 
qualified, certified workforce. 
 
And also the retention of a skilled workforce within the 
province — this is a concern everywhere — jobs for 
Saskatchewan workers and businesses. And also there is a part 
here where we have to respect interprovincial mobility that 
happens in . . . under a variety of agreements. Safe working 
conditions, that’s also one of the guidelines. Competitive wages 
to ensure a stable, qualified workforce within the province. 
Fiscal responsibility to provincial taxpayers; that’s also one of 
the guidelines. Harmonious labour relations in the construction 
industry is a goal of these guidelines. 
 
And also, high-quality work. That’s one thing that we require 
within any government contracting. And employment equity 
initiatives, which is very important to be inclusive and include 
all members of our province and all members of our workforce, 
no matter where they are in this province. Those are important. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member from 
Kindersley asked about the CCTA and we realize that it was 
disbanded in the year 2000. It was replaced by the construction 
industrial labour relations Act. But we still have a few questions 
on the CCTA. 
 
The CCTA was put in place so that all government work would 
be done with unionized workers. Is that correct? Was that the 
intent of the CCTA? I realize it’s not in place now, but I want to 
get the grasp of the whole intent of what the CCTA mandate 
was, what . . . It was to make all Crown work done through 
unionized contractors, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I wasn’t the minister of Labour at the 
time, so I am not going to answer questions on something that 
was brought into force and dissolved long before I was here. 
You may have your general attitudes as to what it . . . or what it 
did or didn’t do. And I apologize; I’m not privy to those. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I find it interesting that the minister 
wouldn’t know what the CCTA agreement was all about. It’s 
only two years past, two and a half years past since it was 
dissolved. 
 
I find it very interesting that the Minister of Labour would not 
have any knowledge of what the CCTA stood for, why it was 
put into place, and why it was dissolved. That’s a simple 
question and I think it’s only fair for the minister to answer that 

question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I guess on a more general note — I’m 
not going to speak specifically to a old piece of legislation — 
this government believes, much the same as many other 
governments, that when contracting is done with taxpayers’ 
dollars, it should be . . . there should be requirements and 
criteria attached to it. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well to the minister, I mean the CCTA was 
definitely that. It was for Crown work to be done by unionized 
contractors. It’s as simple as that. That was the whole intent of 
it. 
 
The reason these questions are coming up now — and I would 
have loved to have asked, or the Labour critic would have loved 
to have asked these questions in the year 2000 when the CCTA 
was still in place — but it was only in December 2002 when the 
minister finally came through and told us that the whole 
SPUDCO issue, and one of the reasons why it was shown as a 
government partnership with private industry, was to avoid the 
very CCTA that your government put into place. 
 
So the question is, is not the . . . What would happen with the 
government if they knew a Crown bid was let out and it wasn’t 
offered to a union contractor under the CCTA? What was the 
punishment in place in the year 2000 when Crown work was 
done by non-unionized workers? Was there any punishment? 
Was it ever kept track of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There again I say to the member 
opposite, I wasn’t the minister of Labour then. I wasn’t 
involved in the discussions on this piece of legislation. It’s 
something that I think is irrelevant at this point in time. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I personally don’t think it’s irrelevant at this 
point in time. We finally found out about the SPUDCO issue, 
the $28 million loss by your government, and one of the very 
main planks of why your government put that through as a 
government-private partnership was to avoid your very 
legislation, the CCTA. 
 
Now I’m sorry that as the minister that . . . You weren’t the 
minister then but certainly your department knew what the 
CCTA stood for and now knows that the department . . . the 
minister from P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote who has 
apologized for misleading the public on that private-public 
partnership — the department knows that that agreement was in 
place. 
 
What will the department be doing to correct the absolute 
misleading information that the minister put forward to avoid 
your own agreement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, the CCTA was 
under the jurisdiction of the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation, so your question may be more 
appropriately addressed there or at Crown Corporations. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I had asked the minister earlier about some 
of the specific cases that would go in front of a Labour 



April 25, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

 

Relations Board. Frankly, I would think this would be a classic 
case that would go in front of the Labour Relations Board. It 
would be an agreement that was put in place by your 
government, and also an agreement that was broke by your 
government. There are workers that were working on that site 
that were probably non-unionized workers, a pile of them. 
Should have they not been, by your very agreement, by law 
should they have not been unionized employees working on that 
construction site? 
 
In light of all the information that we’ve received lately . . . You 
know, the investigation done by Ernst & Young specifically 
states that it was a misleading statement to say that it was a 
private-public partnership, and the reason it was stated that way 
was to avoid your own Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement. Wouldn’t this be a case that a Labour Relations 
Board should investigate because no doubt it was a Crown job 
and it was non-unionized contractors doing the construction 
work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The Labour Relations Board, as we’ve 
discussed right at the beginning of this session of estimates, was 
that the Labour Relations Board is mandated . . . established 
under and bound by The Trade Union Act. And that’s the piece 
of legislation that it deals with. 
 
I can probably get you some information, give you a little better 
understanding, but this isn’t something that would fall under 
their mandate. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Could the minister explain to me then, if a 
private company avoids the new Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Act — if they’re double-breasting or whatever — 
what is the punishment; how is that all corrected then? How do 
you keep track of whether they’re double-breasting or not? And 
who is the governing body that determines whether they are? 
Does that not go in front of the Labour Relations Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, if there was a 
concern with a company that was felt to be double-breasting, 
the appropriate paperwork would have to be done and an 
application would be put before the Labour Relations Board. 
 
And they would make the decision under the CILRA (The 
Construction Industry Labour Relations Act) as to whether it 
was double-breasting or not. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So I don’t . . . maybe I’m not getting this 
clear then. You’re saying that if, under the new construction 
industrial labour relations Act, if a company wasn’t following 
through with that Act, there’d be proper application put towards 
the Labour Relations Board, and the Labour Relations Board 
would hear that case, that the company was not following the 
Act in accordance to the Act. 
 
And this labour relations Act replaced the CCTA, and what 
you’re telling me is that the CCTA though had no relationship 
to the Labour Relations Board? In other words, if a company 
had bid on a government contract and did the work with 
non-unionized workers, that there was no penalty at all. In other 
words, the CCTA really meant absolutely nothing. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 

Or if a company that bid on a government contract and was a 
non-unionized contractor, what was the punishment through the 
CCTA? Did it not go in front of the Labour Relations Board? 
You were saying before that it didn’t. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, we’re having 
. . . Where the problem is, is that the Labour Relations Board 
administers and is established under The Trade Union Act, 
which is an Act which regulates the processes that 
employer/employees follow in various workplaces, various 
situations. So that really is the essence of it. It is an 
employee-employer relationship. We’re getting into some 
confusion over that. 
 
I still say to the member opposite, your questions may be served 
better to a different minister. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — We’ll leave the Labour Relations Board out 
of it. If a contractor bid on a government job and it was found 
out that they were not using unionized workers — on a 
government job over the last five years — what was the 
punishment for that contractor or was there any punishment at 
all? Or did that . . . again, does the CCTA really mean 
anything? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, when you think 
of the Department of Labour, I would like to make some 
clarifications here. There’s many things that the Department of 
Labour does. We administer a variety of Acts that cover 
occupational health and safety, the labour standards, prevention 
services — there’s a variety of things. 
 
We are not a tendering agency of government so this wouldn’t 
be something that we were involved in. We don’t tender for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess my question then would be who 
would be responsible for the five or eight or ten years that the 
CCTA was in place? Which department was responsible for 
overseeing the CCTA agreement? Because you know when it 
was changed, it was through the Department of Labour. 
 
I remember when this Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Act came through, it was to replace the CCTA. Who was in 
charge of the CCTA when it was in place for government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Act, it dealt with . . . the amendments that were 
changed in 2000 dealt with the double breasting of companies. 
It didn’t deal at all with the CCTA or what was at that time, the 
CCTA. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — We realize that . . . I mean it was kind of a, 
because we’re going to dissolve the CCTA, here was a bit of a 
carrot and we’ll introduce this Act which eliminated double 
breasting. Although they weren’t exactly tied to CCTA and the 
new labour relations Act, it was kind of an offset. We’re 
dissolving the CCTA but . . . That was the way it was talked 
about during the time, in the year 2000, and ’99, 2001. 
 
But you know when the CCTA was in place and we had 
questions regarding that, I believe we were asking the Minister 
of Labour questions on the CCTA. So the agreement fell, and 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2003 

 

correct me if I’m wrong, but I believe it fell under the 
Department of Labour. Well the author of that agreement, was 
that not the Department of Labour? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, the CCTA was 
a policy that was in place negotiated by the tendering agencies 
to address issues at that time. 
 
When the CCTA ended as of 2000, December 2000, the 
guidelines, government tendering guidelines were put in place. 
Those are still there and have been in use over the last couple of 
years. 
 
The CILRA amendments that were made during 2000 
addressed a double-breasting issue that had been happening in 
Saskatchewan and is allowed in no other province across this 
country. Our legislation was brought in line with legislation that 
is still in other parts of this country, right across. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(12:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, this being the 
weekend that many of the . . . your Ukrainian constituents will 
be celebrating the Easter holiday, I would ask members if they 
might just remember if they meet with some of these 
constituents on Sunday, that they might meet with the 
traditional greeting which says, Chrystos Voskres. Members, 
have a good weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:32. 
 
 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................713 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................714 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................714 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................714 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................714 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................714 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................714 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................714 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................714 
  Sonntag ..............................................................................................................................................................................714, 721 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................721 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................721 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Enhancement of Disability Allowances 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................715 
 National Volunteer Week 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................715 
 Small Business Loans Association 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................715 
 Lifetime Achievement Award to Spiritwood Man 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................716 
 Implementation of SchoolPLUS 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................716 
 Humboldt Broncos Win Anavet Cup 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................716 
 Legislative Committees 
  Van Mulligen.............................................................................................................................................................................716 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Mega Bingo 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................717 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................717 
 SaskTel Investment in Retx.com 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................719 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................719 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................721 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................721 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2003 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................721 
 Bill No. 6 — The Podiatry Act 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................723 
 Bill No. 7 — The Occupational Therapists Amendment Act, 2003 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................723 
 Bill No. 14 — The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2003 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................724 
 Bill No. 10 — The Saskatchewan 4-H Foundation Amendment Act, 2003 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................724 



 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Labour — Vote 20 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................726 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................726 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................728 
 
 
 


