















































Hansard: March 28, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 235 
 March 28, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of producers and Crown grazing leaseholders in the 
region of Cypress Hills, I’ve been asked to present the 
following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers and citizens 
from the community of Sceptre, Tompkins, Swift Current, 
Regina, and a number from the community of Abbey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 58 between Chaplin and 
Shamrock. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Shamrock and Hodgeville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s again a privilege to 
rise on behalf of residents of my hometown concerned about the 
state of the hospital there. And their petition, the prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all the petitioners again this morning have signed 
from the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here dealing with 
prescription drug costs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, Regina, 
Liberty. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm 
River constituency; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 5 and 12. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation: what is the policy for SaskPower regarding 
the policy for fighting fires caused by the failure of power 
transformers, power lines, power poles, and related 
equipment; are these costs the responsibility of SaskPower 
where it’s clear that the equipment has caused the blaze; 
further to that, in 2002 how many claims were made 
against SaskPower and were the claims honoured? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 
and gentlemen, I want to extend a special welcome to all who 
have come here today. And I want to thank you for coming and 
we hope that you enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the House and our assembled guests today, I would like 
to take this opportunity to introduce a school group from the 
community of Abbey. Mr. Speaker, this is the fourth 
consecutive year I’ve had this privilege. I don’t think four years 
represents their commitment though. I believe that this school 
has been represented at the budget day presentation for the last 
five, maybe more, years. 
 
This group of people got up at 5 o’clock, or were on the road by 
5 o’clock, and that does show a commitment. It’s part of their 
educational experience. And so, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, 
I’d like to introduce the students from Abbey School and their 
chaperones and teacher, Mr. Alan Colpitts. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with the member I would 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2003 

 

want to welcome the students, but I would also want to 
welcome all of the guests who are joined with us today in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
As I look at the many, many guests who are here and I think 
gathered in other rooms within this building, I see very much 
the fabric of Saskatchewan. We have citizens. We have young 
people. We have community leaders. We have people that work 
in health, in education, in the disabled community, and 
volunteer organizations. Very much is reflected today of the 
very fabric of Saskatchewan and I want to welcome all of you 
who are here today as guests of the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of 
the Saskatchewan Party official opposition, I would like to join 
with the Premier in welcoming the many guests from all over 
Saskatchewan who are here for the occasion of the provincial 
budget. 
 
I see many friends from many parts of the province who have 
contributed greatly to the province in the past and I know that 
they will continue to contribute in the future. And we appreciate 
their interest in provincial affairs. 
 
I also see many Saskatchewan Party nominated candidates and 
particularly would like to welcome them, and ask all members 
to give a warm welcome to our many guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, indeed 
one of the things that makes budget day so special in this 
province is that we do have the opportunity to welcome 
community leaders from the entire length and breadth of this 
province. And on behalf of the entire Liberal caucus, I want to 
welcome them and thank them for being with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

72nd Wedding Anniversary Congratulations 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and 
members of the legislature, two years ago I had the pleasure of 
asking you to extend warm congratulations to Mr. Gordon and 
Mrs. Edith Taylor on their 70th wedding anniversary. 
 
On Saturday, March 22, this amazing couple celebrated their 
72nd anniversary. They are still looking after each other and 
enjoy visits from friends, 6 children, 10 grandchildren, and 17 
great-grandchildren. This couple has lived through many of 
life’s trials, including the Great Depression. In spite of the 
troubles they have endured, the dedication of these two 
continue to have each other’s . . warms the hearts of everybody 
as they see them and know them. 
 
On their 70th anniversary Gordon’s comment about their 
marriage was, and I quote: 
 

It gets better as time goes along. We were happy when we 

got married, and we’re still happy about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again it is with delight that I ask the Assembly to 
join me in congratulating this special couple for celebrating 
their 72nd wedding anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News for Saskatchewan’s Economy 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re all looking 
forward today to hearing the new Minister of Finance present 
his first budget — his first of many, I might add. And I predict 
that listening to it will be a rewarding experience. 
 
Before he stands up though, let me prepare the way by telling 
you some more good news about Saskatchewan. 
 
The budget will be good. And why? Well for one reason, 
according to the chief economist of Scotiabank, Saskatchewan’s 
economy will grow faster than the national average this year. 
Our economic growth will be driven by the oil and gas industry, 
but not just by this one sector. 
 
We have in Saskatchewan a diversified economy. Just look at 
our strong growth in employment, in retail sales, in motor 
vehicle sales, and in mining and manufacturing. 
 
The Scotiabank is not the only bank high on Saskatchewan. The 
TD (Toronto Dominion) Bank, the Royal Bank, the CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce), BMO Nesbitt Burns, 
and even the Conference Board of Canada all say we will 
outstrip the nation in growth. This prediction, Mr. Speaker, 
comes from the banks of Canada, rock-solid institutions of 
fiscal caution and financial prudence. We can trust their 
predictions. 
 
Who doesn’t trust them? Well how about the political party that 
claims to be the grassroots of democracy; the party that says our 
economy won’t grow; the party that knows something the banks 
and Conference Board apparently don’t know. The election . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Aboriginal Achievement Awards 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
would like to pay tribute to three outstanding members of the 
Aboriginal community from Saskatchewan who will be 
honoured tonight at the 10th annual National Aboriginal 
Achievements Awards. And they are Matthew Dunn, John 
Arcand, and Gary Bosgoed. These individuals are being 
recognized for their contributions to the betterment of life in 
Aboriginal communities and to Canada as a whole. 
 
Matthew Dunn is a fourth-year Métis student in the University 
of Saskatchewan’s mechanical engineering program, with hopes 
of becoming an astronaut. He is this year’s recipient of the 
$10,000 Youth Achievement Award. Matthew plans to use this 
prize to pursue a master’s degree in aerospace engineering upon 
graduation. Matthew has earned numerous scholarships, 
received academic and citizenship awards, and is 
Saskatchewan’s representative in the national Native role-model 



March 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

 

program — a true leader for tomorrow. 
 
John Arcand, the undisputed master of the Métis fiddle, is 
recognized in the arts and culture category. John is a 
ninth-generation Saskatchewan Métis fiddler who has ensured 
that the Métis culture remains vibrant and strong, in part 
through his founding of and instruction at the Emma Lake 
fiddle camp. 
 
Gary Bosgoed, based in Regina and one of Canada’s leading 
Aboriginal entrepreneurs, received the Business and 
Technology Award; the founder and operator of Bosgoed 
Project Consultants, a one-of-a-kind enterprise in Canada. 
 
Congratulations to these three recipients of National Aboriginal 
Achievement Awards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Newcomers to Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s something 
that I’m sure we can all agree is good news for Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, in an article in the most recent issue of 
Saskatchewan Business magazine, Paul Martin states that the 
province is experiencing a new wave of immigration. 
 
In the article, Mr. Martin talks about more than 150 people 
gathering for a dinner held in Yorkton to, and I quote: 
 

. . . to recognize a host of newcomers, immigrant farmers 
who . . . (have) moved to the area from as far as England 
and Germany, although most . . . were from Alberta. Yes, 
Alberta. 

 
Mr. Martin also goes on to say that the new wave of 
immigration is not restricted to individuals who have never 
been here before. And he tells the story of a young couple who 
moved to this province . . . from this province to Alberta two 
years ago after graduating from the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan). Now the couple, and again I quote: 
 

. . . are back in Saskatchewan and have never been happier. 
 
Mr. Martin also tells that this couple is not alone. The young 
man in question has, since his return, tracked down another 
dozen members from his graduating class that have returned to 
Saskatchewan after moving to Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a new wave of immigration; Saskatchewan young 
people returning. A vision, a plan, a future wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Estevan Students 
in Great Canadian Geography Challenge 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mason 
Schick will be the Estevan Junior High School’s representative 
at the Great Canadian Geography Challenge provincial finals on 
April 5. 
 
Mason earned a berth in the provincial finals by outlasting his 

fellow students at the Estevan Junior High in his respective 
classrooms and then out-duelling all other competitors in the 
school. 
 
Mason, a grade 8 student, will have his work cut out for him 
since he will be up against top geography counterparts from 
grades 7 to 9 from every corner of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago Stewart Wright captured a berth 
in the finals as a representative from the Estevan 
Comprehensive School. Stewart is a former winner from the 
Estevan Junior High. This will be the first time Estevan has 
played host to the geography challenge and between 20 and 25 
finalists will line up for the provincial meet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these two Estevan students and all competitors from the 
different areas of the province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

Economic Indicators 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, here’s more good news 
from Regina and Saskatoon. The Regina Chamber of 
Commerce recently released their 2003 economic indicator 
survey. And this government wasn’t at all surprised to learn that 
the Regina business community has confidence in the growth of 
the Regina and the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Respondents say that they expect to see a steady, positive 
growth in the Regina economy, and that they are more likely to 
hire new staff this year than they were last year, and they intend 
on paying them more. They also believe that the government’s 
top priority should be attracting new private investment, which 
is exactly what we plan to do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, numbers released by the Saskatoon Regional 
Economic Development Authority reveal that Saskatoon in 
2002 had one of the strongest growth rates of total employment 
among metro areas in the country — surpassing Calgary, 
Toronto, Vancouver, and Halifax. It was also noted that 
Saskatoon’s population has the youngest median age of any 
major city in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is proud to work closely with the 
business community to help develop an environment that will 
lead to growth and prosperity for businesses and their 
employees and their customers. Mr. Speaker, we have a vision 
and a plan; and, Mr. Speaker, clearly that plan is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I know that our guests really do 
appreciate the work that our members do. And I know that the 
members really do appreciate any applause that they can get, 
any time. However I do ask all guests to contain themselves in 
their eagerness and the participation on the floor should be only 
by members. 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2003 

 

Arm River Constituents Complete 25 Years 
of Service in Crop Reporting Program 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today in the House to give well-deserved praise and recognition 
to three of my constituents — Dave Ehman of Craik, Fred 
Headford of Bethune, and Norm Langager of Strongfield — the 
three gentlemen who now have completed 25 years of the 
Saskatchewan crop reporting program. 
 
These men and others from around the province are being 
honoured by . . . this month for their great contribution to 
Saskatchewan’s most important industry. Their continuing work 
towards assessing our crop year, year in and year out, provides 
invaluable tool, not only for provincial authorities and Sask 
Crop Insurance officials, but as a way of farmers helping other 
farmers to get a complete provincial picture of each year’s crop 
status. 
 
The continued accuracy of these ongoing reports indicate a 
degree of professionalism among the farming community that 
continues to carry farmers through tough times. It is very 
important that this Assembly recognize these 25 years of 
continuous service for these three Arm River residents, indeed. 
 
It can be said that if the members opposite were as committed 
as these individuals towards helping the farming community, 
perhaps our provincial farmers would not be going through such 
hard times. 
 
On one hand, we have three good men who have volunteered 
their service for over 25 years on behalf of the farming 
community, while on the other hand we today have a 
government that only doesn’t support the farming community 
but takes actions like increasing crop insurance premiums by 52 
per cent. This is hardly the kind of thing that helps farmers in a 
way whatsoever. 
 
I would call on the members to join me in congratulating these 
three gentlemen on their remarkable contribution to our 
province’s most important industry. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, this is quite a week for literature in Saskatchewan. 
The former Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, has put out 
her new book — a major work of non-fiction. And in just a few 
minutes the new Finance minister is going to put out his first 
major work of fiction — the provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister continues to tell us the budget is 
balanced while at the same time admitting the government will 
have to take more money that isn’t there out of its imaginary 
bank account that doesn’t exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people will probably buy Janice 
MacKinnon’s book but they aren’t going to buy this minister’s 
fiscal fiction. Mr. Speaker, how large will the deficit be in this 

year’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the critic for Finance in the 
opposition should just wait a few moments and he will have all 
of his questions answered by the Minister of Finance. 
 
But let me answer this question that he puts in his comment. He 
asks, how large will the deficit be in this budget? The answer is, 
this will be a balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I recall last year at budget 
day that same critic — or that same leader, I’m not sure which 
— stood up, asked the very same question, said to the 
government, how big is the deficit going to be? 
 
I want to report, Mr. Speaker, to the members this morning, that 
in this fiscal year now concluded, not $1 has been taken from 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Our revenues have balanced our 
expenditures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s go through this again. The 
minister says . . . the Premier says he’s going to balance the 
budget using the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
according to the Provincial Auditor, has no money in it. So the 
deficit is going to magically turn into a surplus using imaginary 
money from a make-believe bank account that doesn’t exist. I 
think the Premier made a big mistake. He should have named 
Harry Potter as the new Finance minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker. I’m not the only one 
questioning the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) voodoo 
economics. So is Janice MacKinnon, who calls this deficit 
budgeting. Why doesn’t the NDP just admit Janice is right and 
admit they are running a massive deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Our Finance critic has now turned into a 
book critic. Mr. Speaker, I know . . . I know the book, I know 
the book that Saskatchewan people, border to border, are 
waiting for. It’s the book by Grant Schmidt. That’s the book 
that we’ll be waiting for. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, the facts of the matter are 
these. When times were very good, this government had the 
prudence to set aside monies for a rainy day — had the 
prudence. If I may say, Mr. Speaker, exactly the same prudence 



March 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

 

was shown during the 1990s when, in difficult times, savings 
accounts were used to balance budgets. Nothing new here — 
nothing new. 
 
The fact of the matter is this though, Mr. Speaker. In this 
current fiscal year now ending today, we have been able to 
balance the books of the province without one penny withdrawn 
from savings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just read one more time 
what Janice MacKinnon had to say and I quote: 
 

The new government was going to increase spending by 
about eight per cent when revenues were declining, which 
meant that balancing the budget would require a major 
drawdown of reserves. So I would have to support a deficit 
budget (a deficit budget) after all the years I had spent 
fighting deficits. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are not my words. They are the words of 
former NDP Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, who quit this 
government because the new Premier decided to take 
Saskatchewan back to the deficit days of the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why can’t the NDP just tell us the truth. How 
large is the deficit in today’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’ll give the opposition this. If there’s 
any group of men and women of the province of Saskatchewan 
who know about deficits, it’s that group over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’ll give them that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, here are the facts. Here are 
the facts of the matter. Here are the facts of the matter. When 
this government assumed office in 1991, following that group 
of men and women in power, this province had racked up the 
worst debt per capita ratio anywhere in Canada, the worst debt 
to GDP (gross domestic product) ratio anywhere in Canada. 
 
I can report to you today, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the work of 
this government, we now have the fourth, the fourth best debt to 
capita relationship in the country, and we are second best, debt 
to GDP, across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier needs to 
look at the Provincial Auditor’s report and clarify the numbers. 
In 1991 the Provincial Auditor has revealed that the debt of this 
province was $12.1 billion, okay. There is a suggestion by the 
end of this fiscal year that we’re going to be in excess of $12 
billion worth of debt — larger than what occurred in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, for six years the NDP didn’t tell 
us the truth about SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company). They only told the truth when it came 
out in court. The NDP didn’t tell anyone about the millions of 
dollars of misspending by Dutch Lerat and SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority). They only told the 
truth when they got caught by the Provincial Auditor. And now 
they won’t tell the truth about the deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one believes that this is a balanced budget. The 
Provincial Auditor doesn’t believe it; Janice MacKinnon 
doesn’t believe it; and no one in Saskatchewan believes it. Why 
doesn’t the NDP just tell the truth — how big is the provincial 
deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The people of Saskatchewan, members, 
and the people of Saskatchewan have an option. You can 
believe the critic of the Finance in the opposition and you can 
believe the Leader of the Opposition, or you can believe the 
Dominion Bond Rating Service of Canada, you can believe 
Moody’s of New York, you can believe Standard and Poor’s. 
Each one have given this government credit rating upgrade 
based on our fiscal management of the public purse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So you believe them or you can believe 
the bond rating agencies of Canada and North America. I ask 
the public to take your pick. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Support for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the recent SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 
the Premier and some of the ministers hinted to delegates that 
there would be a significant announcement regarding property 
tax funding of education in this budget. This has municipalities 
and school boards and property tax payers right around this 
province very excited that they might actually receive a break 
from this government. Lessening the burden on property tax 
payers would definitely be a good move, a move that the 
Saskatchewan Party could support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now is not the time for more discussion or 
thought. Now is the time for action. Will property tax payers 
receive a break today? Will the province increase their share of 
educational funding in this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again I would ask the 
member simply to just have a little patience. It’s about 10 
minutes now, I think, before the Minister of Finance will stand 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Sixteen minutes? Sixteen 
minutes till the Minister of Finance will stand in his place. 
 
I can inform the member of two things. There will be a 
significant announcement regarding the funding of education in 
Saskatchewan, an announcement that will take us forward in 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2003 

 

partnership, in consultation, with the people of Saskatchewan. I 
can tell her that there will be increased, substantially increased 
support for our municipal governments in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I can remind her that this government, every budget since 
we’ve been around here, have been reducing the tax load on 
Saskatchewan people. We set out, Mr. Speaker, to implement 
the most significant reform of the personal income tax system 
in the history of this province. This means that thousands and 
thousands of dollars are being saved from the average 
Saskatchewan family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we make a plan and we put the plan in place. It’s 
balanced and it will be sustainable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the Premier 
that Saskatchewan taxpayers pay the highest portion of 
education tax of any province in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year a new collective agreement was reached 
with the province’s teachers. When the Finance minister was 
the minister of Learning, he told the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association that he would strongly advocate funding 
to cover the increased salary costs with his cabinet colleagues. 
Mr. Speaker, on top of those costs, school boards are also 
facing increase in energy, insurance, transportation, 
instructional costs — just to name a few. 
 
The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 
projects a total increase in operating costs of over $38 million 
this year. And that’s just to maintain the status quo. That does 
not allow for any enhancements or the addition of new 
programming like the SchoolPLUS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the former minister of Learning controls 
the provincial purse strings, did he transfer his knowledge about 
the needs of the education system to Finance, and will this 
budget commit at least $38 million to sustain the education 
system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It’s now 13 minutes the member has to 
wait to understand the total, the total commitment that this 
government will make to education. And she and the people of 
Saskatchewan will be very, very pleased about this 
government’s commitment in this budget to education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to remind the member that over 
the last several years this government has increased by 42 per 
cent, by 42 per cent, the support per student to all of our 
students in K to 12 (kindergarten to grade 12) education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, we have doubled the 

number of community schools. We have virtually doubled the 
number of pre-kindergartens. We have invested in our 
post-secondary institutions. Because this is a government that 
believes in the future; this is a government that believes in 
education. 
 
Unlike, Mr. Speaker, the group opposite who in the last election 
campaign went to the people of Saskatchewan and you know 
what they said? They said the increase for education will be at 
the rate of inflation, absolutely freezing funding to education. 
That was their commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
remind the Premier that we have 15,000 fewer students in this 
province now because of that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the minister leaked his budget to the news 
media last weekend — what the minister now calls speculation 
— he said there was going to be an increase in the education 
budget this year. So let’s hope that’s true today and that his 
budget will contain at least $38 million more, needed for school 
boards to maintain their existing budgets. 
 
But another concern is how the increase will be distributed. If 
the province increases the operational funding to school boards 
this year through the foundation operating grant, there’s still 
going to be 18 school boards who won’t receive one red penny 
from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this Assembly if there’ll still 
be school boards in Saskatchewan that will receive no funding 
from this government this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t pretend to have all 
the expertise about the educational funding and the foundation 
operating grants. But I think it’s well known to most everybody 
in Saskatchewan that those areas of the province where the 
economy is booming will not receive the share, will not receive 
the share of funding of other areas. And the fact of the matter 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So the fact of the matter is it’s very good 
news that we have such a hot economy that this support is there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about something that occurred in 
this province yesterday, when we want to talk about children 
and education. Yesterday this government, the minister of 
community resources and employment and I, announced the 
largest single increase in child care spaces in the history of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what we announced yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that 
announcement I received a short e-mail from someone who is 
interested and involved in child care in our province. And she 
concluded this little e-mail by saying to myself, quote: 



March 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

 

(Mr. Premier) Your gov’t has ‘dared to care.’ 
 
This is a government that dares to care about the young people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
challenge the Premier to go out into rural Saskatchewan and tell 
the farm families of this province that their economy is 
booming. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Minister of Agriculture. 
Farm families across Saskatchewan are anxiously waiting 
today’s provincial budget. Just three years ago — the Premier’s 
first Throne Speech — there was a big commitment to 
agriculture and rural revitalization. But since then, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan agriculture producers have suffered through two 
years of severe drought. 
 
And not only has the NDP government cut crop insurance 
programs and hiked the premiums; the Premier’s much 
publicized Department of Rural Revitalization has all but 
disappeared. Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope the Saskatchewan 
agriculture community will not be disappointed with today’s 
budget. 
 
Will there be an increase in funding for the Department of 
Agriculture? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member needs to wait for 
a couple of more minutes and she too will hear what the 
funding in the Agriculture budget will be. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that on this side of the House, 
and that producers who have been working with me to develop 
an agricultural policy for Saskatchewan have said that they 
don’t want to have the direction from the Saskatchewan Party in 
building an agricultural policy because, Mr. Speaker, the last 
time that the minister was on her, or the member was on her 
feet, a couple of days ago — from Watrous — what did the 
member say? She said that we should take the crop insurance 
program and we should amortize it out over eight or nine years, 
Mr. Speaker, is what she said. 
 
And we already have an amortization of the crop insurance 
program today for 15 years, Mr. Speaker. She wants it 
amortized down to eight or nine, Mr. Speaker. That would add 
to Saskatchewan producers today an additional 40 per cent on 
their bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’re not asking the Saskatchewan Party for farm policy, 
Mr. Speaker, because they don’t have any. And when they do 
talk about it, it doesn’t work, and it costs Saskatchewan farmers 
more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Agriculture minister has signed the agreement of intent to 
participate in the new agricultural policy framework agreement 
with the federal government. But unlike other provinces like 
Ontario and Quebec who are raising concerns about the design 
of the new program, the minister stated this week that he 
intends to sign the agreement of implementation for the APF 
(agricultural policy framework) very, very soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister will not agree with the other 
provinces and support a call for an extension of the existing 
programs for one year until the new program details can be 
worked out in the best interest of the Saskatchewan farm 
families, will the minister then commit that there will be 
significant and adequate funding in today’s provincial budget to 
fund Saskatchewan’s participation in this new APF 
programming? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for the member 
from Watrous to produce to the people of Saskatchewan where 
I have ever said that I’m prepared to sign the implementation 
agreement. I would like to see that, Mr. Speaker, because it is 
absolutely nowhere in quote. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the member from Watrous this — 
in this province and in this country, we were the last minister to 
sign the agricultural policy framework agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
Why was I the last to sign the agricultural policy agreement, 
Mr. Speaker? Because we wanted a better deal for farmers in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, and for Saskatchewan and that’s why we 
haven’t signed. 
 
The member from Watrous asked us to sign the agricultural 
policy framework in June, Mr. Speaker. And today, she’s 
asking us to sign an implementation agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
which will undo — undo — the Fredericton formula that we’ve 
worked to. 
 
And she says to me, we should sign with Ontario. Why doesn’t 
Ontario like the agricultural policy framework, Mr. Speaker? 
Because we’ve taken the Fredericton formula away from 
Ontario, put more money into western Canadian farmers. And 
the member from Watrous wants us to sign an agreement which 
gives Ontario and Quebec more money again. Shame, Mr. 
Speaker, on the member . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are 
absolutely outraged about the NDP’s negligence when it comes 
to overseeing gaming revenue in this province. And according 
to the Provincial Auditor, this is public money. But how was it 
spent? 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is a list of Dutch Lerat’s spending over one 
year — one year — while the First Nations people in this 
province live in poverty. 
 
This is what this government and this minister turned a blind 
eye to. We have on this list: Edmonton Oiler tickets; WWF 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2003 

 

(World Wrestling Federation) tickets in New York; limos in 
New York; tickets to Australia; jewellery; Kon Tiki holidays; 
hotels in Vegas, Barbados, France, Florida, Barcelona; Toys ‘R’ 
Us; sunglasses. The people of Saskatchewan even paid for 
Dutch Lerat’s groceries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is responsible for this flagrant abuse of public 
money and who is going to be held accountable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
has indicated, obviously nothing’s been hidden. There were 
issues. They were addressed. 
 
And let me just once again remind the member, SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) ordered a special 
investigation, a special audit which comprehensively reviewed 
those issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has conducted his report on this file and 
reported in November 2000. The RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) has investigated the file, Mr. Speaker. The 
Justice department has reviewed this file and made its 
decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I just hope that that member 
would join her leader, the Leader of the Official Opposition, in 
celebrating the good news, and not living in the past when . . . 
and I quote the article from The StarPhoenix of February: 
 

Hermanson praised the FSIN for running a successful 
gaming business and complimented it for addressing 
“governance challenges” at SIGA. 
 

Mr. Speaker, where are they coming from? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, as the minister 
indicates, this is not about the past; it is about the present. This 
is why taxpayers are so outraged. Eight hundred thousand 
dollars down the drain because of Dutch Lerat’s misspending. 
But now, under this minister’s watch, another $550,000 was 
misspent. This is after the Dutch Lerat scandal. 
 
In the Provincial Auditor’s Report from fall of 2002, the auditor 
states, and I quote: 
 

SIGA paid $400,000 to the FSIN and $150,000 to 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing . . . Although 
Liquor and Gaming specifically approved these payments, 
we think the 1995 Casino Operating Agreement does not 
authorize those payments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming still 
authorizing payments that are not allowed under the casino 
operating agreement, and who is going to be held accountable? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The . . . I just 
want to remind the members and the public again that SLGA 
has recovered the $1.36 million that was misspent or 
mismanaged. That includes the monies that goes to the 
Associated Entity Funds and for community development 
projects. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind once again, and assure the 
members, that with the changes that have been made at SIGA, 
changes that have significantly reduced the expenditures and 
have increased the profits from 2000-2001, from $13.4 million 
to $24.8 million, Mr. Speaker, monies that will benefit the 
entire communities, all the communities throughout this great 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, $800,000 has not been paid back 
— it is gone. And there is another $550,000 that has gone 
missing under this minister’s watch. And this minister thinks 
it’s okay. Well it is not okay. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are outraged and especially the 
First Nations people are outraged. This is their money. This is 
public money. And this minister and this government has 
chosen to turn a blind eye to this flagrant abuse of public 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming and this 
minister still allowing this to happen? Who knew about the 
spending and who is going to be held accountable by this 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 
great for accusations, allegations, innuendoes, with no facts, 
and not proper facts. Mr. Speaker, if there are accusation being 
made about this minister or anybody in SLGA, please, I would 
hope she would repeat them outside of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a Public Accounts Committee which 
scrutinizes government expenditures and has the legislative 
authority to call SLGA. SLGA would be pleased to tell the 
Public Accounts Committee and . . . about accountability and 
respond to any questions the members have that are specific to 
the issues that they are concerned about First Nations. I’m not 
so sure they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to stand on behalf of the government and table a response to 
written question no. 4. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to question 4 has been tabled. 
 



March 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
submit the estimates and supplementary estimates, accompanied 
by a message from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Would all please rise for the message from 
the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2004, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for 12 months ending March 31, 2003, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
(Signed), Lynda Haverstock, Lieutenant Governor, 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the Premier: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker, my 
hon. colleagues. Before I begin, I’d like to take a moment to 
introduce some of the special guests who have joined us here 
today. My wife, Donna, my soulmate and life partner, is here 
with us today. 
 
I’d also like to welcome Norm and Delva Rebin who are very 
good family friends, and I must add, social activists, educators, 
entrepreneurs, recent recipients of the University of 
Saskatchewan’s Humanitarian Award — the Alumni 
Humanitarian Awards — and also the Queen’s Jubilee Medal, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And Vernice McIntyre, a retired 
teacher from Saskatoon East and my very capable constituency 
assistant. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome them here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And I’d like to welcome everyone 

here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Lieutenant Governor’s Throne Speech she 
outlined broad plans for the government. She talked about the 
government’s vision for a future that’s wide open. I’m here 
today to tell you how we are going to implement those plans, 
how we are building for the future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Building for the future means having 
healthy and self-reliant families. It means having opportunities 
for youth. It means having a prosperous and competitive 
economy. It means having modern and competitive 
infrastructure and it means having strong and vibrant 
communities. 
 
This is a budget that makes a record 2.5 billion investment in 
health and a record 1.2 billion investment in education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — A budget that increases revenue 
sharing to municipalities by over 15 per cent for northern, rural, 
and urban municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — A budget that invests 296 million in 
road and highway improvements. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a budget that will invest 145 million for 
research and development, R&D expenditures and tax credits. 
 
A budget that will see more than 300 million in capital projects. 
 
A budget that will see our Crown corporations invest 650 
million to expand and upgrade their services, and a budget that 
will build our economy through tax reductions and incentives 
for business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now before I get into further details, 
Mr. Speaker, I will point out that we are now forecasting a 2.1 
million surplus for last year with no transfer from the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund and no equalization dollars from Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — That’s right, Mr. Speaker, the fiscal 
year that ends in just a few short days has had such a dramatic 
rebound in the fourth quarter that the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
balance is fully available to balance the ’03-04 budget, with a 
further 102 million available for the ’04-05 budget year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — This fund has served its purpose 
well, allowing us to make transfers as required, using discretion 
and fiscal prudence. And of course if the fund is not needed in 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2003 

 

any given year as it was not needed last year, it is available to 
subsequent years to ensure that services can be maintained 
without wild shifts in taxation levels or expenditure plan 
changes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And as the former minister of 
Finance said all the way along — and I will continue with the 
same message — we have a plan. It’s balanced and responsible. 
We take all the fluctuations in stride and plan the best course of 
action accordingly. 
 
We did it all of last year. It’s what we’ve done with the budget 
this year and it’s what we will continue to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That said, Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that we in Saskatchewan 
have faced a tough couple of years. Two years of drought have 
taken a toll. But in spite of the challenges our economy is back 
on the right track with positive growth. In fact with the return to 
normal crop production, our economy is expected to grow by a 
whopping 6.8 per cent in 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Exceeding 32 billion in real GDP, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I would also say that in spite of the challenges and the 
disappointments of the members opposite, we have still 
managed to fulfill key commitments to the people of this 
province. Our commitment to financial management has been 
recognized by independent sources and respected credit rating 
agencies, with the province receiving 10 credit rating upgrades 
since 1995, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, our record on tax 
reform speaks for itself. We have been lowering taxes over the 
last decade, and during the last three years we have made 
dramatic reductions. A family of four earning $50,000 annually 
has had a 37 per cent reduction in personal income tax. 
 
As well, we have eliminated the flat tax, the high-income 
surtax, and the debt-reduction surtax. We have reduced taxes 
. . . rates three times in the last three years. Mr. Speaker, 
building for the future means having a plan and sticking to it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I outlined some of our key priorities at the 
beginning of my address; now I’m going to go into a little more 
detail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is undertaking many initiatives to 
support our goal of having healthy and self-reliant 
Saskatchewan families. We are providing 19 million in funding 
for medical equipment this year, such as a new CT 
(computerized tomography) scanner in Yorkton and Moose 
Jaw, and a permanent location of a CT scanner in Swift Current, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are also providing 27 million in health capital funding this 
year and an expanded capital program totalling 34 million next 

year. 
 
And there is funding for construction on the Fort Qu’Appelle 
First Nations hospital, the Weyburn regional care centre, the 
Yorkton long-term care centre, and the Melfort regional care 
centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I might add, the Minister of Health will be making many 
more similar announcements over the next few months in 
communities throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year we are using 32 million from the federal Health 
Reform Fund for primary home care and additional coverage 
for catastrophic drugs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is increased base-operating funding of almost $90 million 
for regional health authorities. 
 
And to improve patient services, we are implementing the new 
surgical wait-list registry, introducing a new system to collect 
complete prescription drug information, and piloting a clinical 
tool for assigning surgical priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building for the future through our 
commitments to health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to build for our future 
we must build for our youth because they are our future. 
 
Over the next two years we will invest $110 million to help 
ensure high-quality learning facilities are in place for our 
students, with $76 million in capital improvements happening 
this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And our post-secondary facilities our undergoing significant 
development. We are supporting construction of the sports 
complex at the University of Regina. The U of R will also 
receive support for a feasibility and planning study for their 
new laboratory building, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at the University of Saskatchewan, we are supporting 
restoration of the College Building and the Research Annex. 
And we are investing $800,000 this year for feasibility and 
planning to look at options for developing the new academic 
health science centre at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Total funding to post-secondary 
institutions including capital operating grants and other program 
funding will amount to over $407 million this year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We are also providing more money for students to pursue their 
post-secondary goals. Mr. Speaker, for the 2003-2004 academic 
year. We are tripling the scholarship exemption for 
Saskatchewan student loans from $1,600 to $1,800. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And at the same time we’re 



March 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

 

increasing the earning exemption from $600 to $1,700, Mr. 
Speaker. And $66 million is available in Saskatchewan student 
loan assistance this year, helping almost 17,000 post-secondary 
students. And, Mr. Speaker, over one-half of this amount, $34 
million, will be provided as bursaries or grants or other debt 
reduction measures, Mr. Speaker, one of the most generous 
student support programs in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, we are also 
funding the full cost of the teachers’ contract for 2003-2004, 
increasing transfers to school boards by over $32 million over 
last year’s budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, there is 180 million in 
funding for more than 25,000 training spaces and over 9,000 
training allowances between the departments of Learning and 
community resources and employment. This includes 260 
spaces in each year of the four-year Nursing Education Program 
of Saskatchewan, 144 spaces for training practical nurses, 40 
additional training spaces through the northern health access 
program, more than 70 spaces at out-of-province institutions to 
provide training for health technicians, and training for an 
additional 80 EMTs (emergency medical technician) this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Now, Mr. Speaker, recruitment and 
retention of our medical professions will remain a priority. We 
will continue with return service bursary and professional 
development programs and train 235 students in the College of 
Medicine. We are also implementing a pilot project for medical 
students, Mr. Speaker, to cover the costs of an interest-free line 
of credit. Over 3 million in bursaries will be targeted nursing 
. . . to nursing and medical students and residents, and a portion 
will also go to incentive programs to attract medical staff to 
rural Saskatchewan. Four point four million will continue to 
fund a variety of programs designed to recruit and retain 
physicians and specialists in this fine province, and funding of 4 
million will be maintained for the physician long-term service 
fund retention initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the centennial student employment program 
provides summer and part-time jobs throughout the year for 
high school and post-secondary students returning to school. 
Seven hundred students this year will have jobs through this 
program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, through these 
numerous commitments and opportunities for our youth, we are 
building for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a modern and competitive infrastructure is also 
vital so we can build for the future. Mr. Speaker, over the next 
five years we will finish twinning of the province’s national 
highway system. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Highway 1 West will be fully 
completed later this year and Highway 1 East will be completed 
in 2007; as well, Highway 16 between North Battleford and 
Lloydminster will also be completed by 2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, over the next 
three years over $90 million will be invested to upgrade 450 
kilometres of rural roads to a paved standard through the Prairie 
Grain Roads Program. 
 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, we are spending more than 296 
million overall on our roads and highways, not only to 
accelerate twinning but also to resurface more than 385 
kilometres of the provincial highway system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, our other multi-year 
commitments and support of infrastructure includes $170 
million in funding to municipalities over five years through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. This includes 
money for an ongoing commitment to the northern water and 
sewer program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clean, safe drinking water is vital for good health. 
In support of our long-term safe drinking water strategy, 19 
multi-year water and sewer projects have already been approved 
for 10 million under the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program. Also, under the northern water and sewer program, 
4.9 million will be spent on 24 projects in 18 communities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, we will also 
repair and upgrade 16 water control structures and increase the 
number of certified waterworks operators to 475. The 
government now has 58 full-time equivalent staff positions 
dedicated to drinking water issues, including water inspection 
and monitoring. 
 
Several municipalities will also see funding for 17 new transit 
vehicles for people with disabilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — This will bring the total to 126 
vehicles in the provincial fleet under the transit for the disabled 
program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are increasing the supplementary funding 
to the four urban parks this year by 10 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m also very pleased 
to announce we are increasing municipal revenue-sharing grants 
by $10 million for the second year in a row. 
 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2003 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Not only that, Mr. Speaker, we are 
also increasing revenue sharing to support our municipalities by 
a further $10 million next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a total of 60 
million additional dollars available to municipalities over three 
budget years to assist in meeting their infrastructure and service 
needs. Mr. Speaker, we are helping our communities build for 
the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, a prosperous and 
competitive economy is critical for us to build for the future. 
Mr. Speaker, things are looking very positive for Saskatchewan. 
World prices for Saskatchewan’s primary commodities all 
exceeded expectations in 2002 and are generally expected to 
remain strong. 
 
Oil and gas prices are up. Employment is forecast to grow each 
year over the next three years, and oil drilling is expected to 
climb by 22 per cent, or 2,000 wells, this year alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, it is also worth 
noting that Saskatoon, the representative survey . . . city in this 
survey, has the lowest overall combined taxes and charges of 10 
cities across Canada that have been surveyed for comparison. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this applies for a single male adult making 
$25,000; this applies for a family earning $50,000; it applies for 
a family earning $75,000 — Saskatoon has the lowest overall 
combined taxes and charges for all ten cities in all three 
categories, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is also 
important to give some context, so I will point out that Canada 
is the only one of the G-7 countries in a surplus position and I 
will point out that most US (United States) states are in a deficit 
position. 
 
I will point out that British Columbia, Prince Edward Island, 
Newfoundland, and the Territories are all forecasting deficit 
budgets, 2002-03. 
 
And I will point out that in Saskatchewan, as we have done in 
the preceding nine years, we are again tabling a balanced 
budget — our 10th consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we can’t talk about a 
competitive economy without talking about taxes. The final 
stage of personal income tax reform was introduced January 1 
with lower tax rates and higher family tax credits, and will 
result in a further reduction of $78 million this year. This means 

more money in consumers’ pockets to spend as they please. 
 
Saskatchewan’s top marginal tax rate is now the second lowest 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And beginning January 1, 2004 the 
income tax system will be fully indexed to inflation, eliminating 
bracket creep. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does not have any tax increases but it 
does have some additional tax decreases. The small-business 
corporate income tax rate will be reduced from 6 per cent to 5.5 
per cent on January 1, 2004 and to 5 per cent on January 1, 
2005. Mr. Speaker, that is half of what it was in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, we are expanding 
the incremental corporate capital tax exemption for 
Saskatchewan-based companies from 5 million to 7.5 million 
January 1, 2004 and to 10 million as of January 1, 2005. This 
brings the maximum corporate capital tax exemption to 20 
million for Saskatchewan-based companies, the highest tax 
exemption threshold of all Canadian provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, research and 
development, R&D, plays a key role in ensuring that 
Saskatchewan stays competitive and to help us draw 
professionals to our province. 
 
Our budget this year provides 145 million for research and 
development expenditures and tax credits, an increase of 9.1 
million or 6.7 per cent from 2002-2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economy is growing; our future is indeed wide 
open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we 
want strong and vibrant communities so people can flourish, so 
they can feel safe, so they can find the supports they need when 
they need them. Mr. Speaker, we are building for the future by 
strengthening our social programs. 
 
Through the Community Initiatives Fund, 19 million in 
centennial funding will be directed over three years to 
Saskatchewan communities for programs that encourage 
physical fitness, for infrastructure and capital projects, and for 
initiatives that encourage Aboriginal access to culture and 
recreation. 
 
Another multi-year initiative we are funding includes a 45.9 
million, four-year federal-provincial program to build 1,400 
housing units, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, over the next five 



March 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

 

years we will also partner with the federal government to 
enhance licensed child care. In this, the initial year of the child 
care Saskatchewan program, we will more than double the 
federal contribution to provide 1.8 million to develop 500 new 
child care spaces, early child services funding for 250 existing 
spaces, and capital funding for building development, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We are also providing 1 million to increase child care subsidies 
an average of $20 per child. Provincial programs will also 
support more than 7,800 spaces and 450 licensed child care 
facilities. And, Mr. Speaker, our child care supports will grow 
next year and every year for four more years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, our Kids First 
program will create 80 new child care spots for children in the 
most vulnerable situations. And we are providing an additional 
1 million in social assistance program funding for people with 
disabilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, together with 2 
million to create an additional 950 employment support spaces 
to assist disabled social assistance clients develop and sustain 
labour force attachment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government 
that dares to care. Mr. Speaker, our community-based 
organizations are our partners in ensuring strong and vibrant 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
The government is also continue its commitment to CBOs 
(community-based organization) with a 3 per cent salary 
increase this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, the Department of 
Justice will see a 6.7 million or a 3.6 per cent funding increase 
this year, and a portion of this money will go towards hiring 10 
new police officers to support integrated, targeted, 
community-based approaches to reduce crime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the province overall 
and rural Saskatchewan communities in particular depend on a 
strong agricultural economy. There have been hardships, 
especially the past two years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan has signed on to the federal government’s 
agricultural policy framework. Through the APF program 
framework Saskatchewan will commit $1 billion over five 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year the province will continue with its 
farm families opportunity initiative and we’re also continuing 
with the Conservation Cover Program, helping farmers to 

convert marginal lands to perennial cover. Last year 300,000 
acres were converted; $3.9 million will be available this year 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — As well, Mr. Speaker, our 
government provides about $240 million per year in tax 
exemptions and rebates for farm input costs, including the 
provincial sales tax exemption from major farm inputs, the PST 
(provincial sales tax) rebate for livestock and horticulture 
facilities, and the fuel tax exemption for farm activities — $240 
million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are aware that the means by which 
property taxes are applied in Saskatchewan, particularly for 
funding K to 12 education is a longstanding issue. Mr. Speaker, 
an independent commission on how K to 12 education is funded 
in Saskatchewan and options for change will be formed. Further 
details on this commission will be announced in the next few 
weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 
northern reaches and communities will benefit from this budget. 
Our budget this year includes $27.1 million in new initiatives 
and capital for the North. 
 
And here are a few highlights, Mr. Speaker. We’re providing 
$797,000 increase in northern revenue sharing, increasing grant 
funding from 5.2 million to almost 6 million. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re committing funding for a new school in Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Fyke Commission 
on health care recommended that in the North we adopt a 
three-health-district, four-hospital approach. Mr. Speaker, we 
have three health districts established. We have built a new 
hospital in La Ronge. We have built a new hospital in La 
Loche. We have built a new hospital in Black Lake, and, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be starting construction on a new, 
multi-million dollar hospital in Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We’re providing $500,000 to 
northern health authorities for implementation of a northern 
health strategy, primary health care and prevention initiatives, 
and improved water quality monitoring and public water 
supplies. We’re providing 2.1 million for 600 training spaces 
provided under the northern schools training program. And 
we’re providing a 466,000 increase for 40 additional training 
spaces provided under the northern health access program. Mr. 
Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan, we are building for the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the initiatives and 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2003 

 

programs outlined in this budget will help us to build for the 
future, to build a strong and thriving province. Our government 
has a proven track record of funding and maintaining key 
priorities. 
 
Laurentian Bank Securities recently gauged our economic 
progress and prospects at the outset of 2003. They said we are 
tied with Alberta for second place in terms of greatest economic 
momentum at the outset of 2003, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board of Canada is 
forecasting that Saskatchewan, along with Alberta, will outpace 
all other Canadian provinces for economic growth in 2004. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue on 
this track of strategically investing in Saskatchewan’s future 
while at the same time managing the province’s finances, being 
mindful that we are accountable to the people. 
 
As further proof of our commitment we are announcing two 
enhancements to our government’s accountability framework. 
First, this year we have produced a budget document entitled 
“Our Plan for 2003-04,” which sets out concrete objectives for 
government for the year ahead. And second, Mr. Speaker, the 
government will provide a summary financial plan as part of 
next year’s budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can see 
that the members opposite appreciate that announcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s future is bright. We are providing 
record levels of funding for health care and education. We are 
encouraging investment and growth. We have dared to care, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our future is indeed wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And with that, and with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance. 

 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. I’d like to begin the debate around the budget by 
first of all thanking a number of people that have assisted so 
adequately. And I want to thank first of all the staff members 
here in the caucus, as we’ve had the opportunity to prepare for 
this session and to look forward to the future they have been 
very, very helpful. 
 
I too want to thank the people back home. My constituency 
assistant, Bob Blahay, who serves in my Canora office and my 

Norquay office, and Renee Parsons who serves in my Foam 
Lake office. Without their capable assistance it would be 
difficult to do this job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most importantly though, as indicated I think it’s 
very, very important . . . We’ve heard that a number of times in 
this House in the last 10 days how important family is to a 
member of the Legislative Assembly. And I want to especially 
recognize my wife, Gail, who is serving in her first year as 
principal of the Invermay School, who through that 
commitment is unable to be present with me on many functions 
when I do my job as a member of the Legislative Assembly. 
But I know that she assists wherever she can and I want to 
thank her for that support and love. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, my two children have 
been a tremendous inspiration to me, and I want to thank Bryce, 
my son, who is in his second year teaching in the community of 
Strasbourg. And I know he enjoys his teaching in that 
community. He enjoys the community a tremendous amount. 
But he does occasionally phone me, not only to talk about 
financial needs but also to give me some advice. So I appreciate 
that assistance. 
 
My daughter, Lindsay, is in her first year here at the University 
of Regina, and that has obviously benefited me, Mr. Speaker, 
because as we leave our homes and come to Regina to do our 
jobs, we’re usually away from family. In this case a family 
member has joined me here in Regina, beginning her first year 
in administration at the University of Regina, and I want to 
thank her for all of her assistance. 
 
I want to mention two other couples very quickly, Mr. Speaker, 
my dad and my stepmother, Peter and Sophie Krawetz, back in 
Invermay, are I’m sure watching and wanting to wish me well. 
And my in-laws, my spouse’s parents, who reside in Theodore, 
John and Eleanor Maleschuk, have been very, very supportive. 
And those are constituents, Mr. Speaker, that I currently have, 
but with the redrawing of the boundaries they will no longer be 
in my constituency of Canora-Pelly. So I want to thank them for 
their support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been my first opportunity to stand in the 
House since we reconvened and I want to first of all 
congratulate the two newest members here in the Legislative 
Assembly — a tremendous commitment to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I want to congratulate the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview and the member from Battleford-Cut Knife 
for determining to fulfill their need and serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I want to also thank my colleagues and the 
Leader of the Official Opposition for allowing me to serve as 
the official opposition’s Finance critic and to assist me so very, 
very capably. I want to thank them for their support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I will be using the coming days 
and weeks to get into the details of this budget. But I want to 
touch on a few major issues right now. 



March 28, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost exactly one year ago, I stood in this place 
to respond to what was to become known as the fudge-it 
budget. That was a budget based on smoke and mirrors — 
twisting the numbers every which way by the government in 
order to tell a tale that simply wasn’t true. It was based on a 
so-called rainy day fund that doesn’t exist. It was based on an 
attempt to hide debt from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I never thought of that budget as the good 
old days because this year we’ve moved well beyond the 
fudge-it budget. 
 
This new Finance minister this morning has presented a budget 
that is a complete work of fiction. Mr. Speaker, this budget 
document is so riddled with inconsistencies, questionable 
assumptions, and simply outrageous claims, one scarcely knows 
where to begin. 
 
Well, let’s start with the debt, Mr. Speaker. We have just had 
presented to us a budget which, under the most optimistic 
conditions, is slated to increase the overall debt of 
Saskatchewan by nearly $500 million — half a billion dollars, 
Mr. Speaker. And this in the mind of the new Finance minister 
is balanced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s worth noting once again, in front of the 
province-wide television audience and those who have joined 
us in the Assembly this morning, that after two years under this 
Premier the total debt of this province today is higher than it 
ever was under the government the NDP replaced. Even if you 
accept, even if you accept the wild assumptions contained in 
this budget, the total debt of Saskatchewan is slated to climb to 
an astounding $12.2 billion. 
 
In other words, after all of the struggles and the cutbacks and 
the tax increases the people of Saskatchewan endured in the 
’90s to get the fiscal situation under control, in two short years 
the current Premier has put us in a situation even worse than 
was the case in 1991. 
 
Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP Finance minister 
who was in charge of the budget for most of the ’90s is now 
publicly questioning the budget practices of the current Premier 
and this government? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have seen and heard the Minister of 
Finance admit that the debt will explode by half a billion dollars 
in the coming year. And this, to him, is balanced. One shudders 
to think how much red ink has to flow before the members 
opposite admit to a deficit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as bad as the news of a $500 million deficit 
is, once you read the budget documents carefully, you get the 
feeling that when all is said and done, we may be wishing this 
year’s balance sheet was that good. In getting us to this half a 
billion dollar deficit, the Finance minister has predicted an 
economic growth rate for the coming year that is simply 
ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when the independent economists and 
financial institutions are predicting a growth rate for 
Saskatchewan in the coming year of between 2.7 and 3.7 per 
cent, and the most recent issue, March 22 of The Economist, 

lists 16 industrialized countries and their projected GDPs for 
2003 — no country is listed beyond 3.4 per cent, Mr. Speaker 
— this Finance minister and the Premier have promised and 
produced a budget today based on 6.8 per cent growth. 
 
To call this, Mr. Speaker, overly optimistic isn’t quite 
descriptive enough. To call it ridiculous is much closer to the 
mark. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this is a budget built on a 
foundation of fantasy. This is not an economic blueprint for our 
province. It is a last gasp effort by those members opposite to 
try and salvage their political careers on that side of the 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, over the next few days, weeks, 
and months there’s going to be a big debate in this legislature 
and in this province about debt and deficit. 
 
And we are going to hear, over and over again, from the 
Minister of Finance and this Premier making this distinction 
between good debt and bad debt. The billion dollars of red ink 
that has accumulated in the last two years apparently, Mr. 
Speaker, is good debt. 
 
The fact that the debt of this province is now higher than it was 
the day the NDP took office with a mandate to get the debt 
under control apparently is a good thing in the eyes of the 
Finance minister and this Premier. So we are going to hear a lot 
from those members, much about good debt versus bad debt. 
 
But I’ll tell you what else we’re going to hear, not only in this 
legislature but right around this province, the difference 
between good government and bad government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And it has never been more clear than right 
now that this province is now in the hands of a bad government. 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for a change. 
 
I will have much more to say on this document on Monday, and 
as my colleagues will over the course of the next number of 
days. And for now I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw 
North: 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2003 

 

That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed on 
Monday, March 31, 2003. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:34. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................235 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................235 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................235 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................235 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................235 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................235 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................235 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................235 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................235 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................236 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................236 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 72nd Wedding Anniversary Congratulations 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................236 
 Good News for Saskatchewan’s Economy 
  Lorjé...........................................................................................................................................................................................236 
 National Aboriginal Achievement Awards 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................236 
 Newcomers to Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................237 
 Estevan Students in Great Canadian Geography Challenge 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................237 
 Economic Indicators 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................237 
 Arm River Constituents Complete 25 Years of Service in Crop Reporting Program 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................238 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Provincial Finances 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................238 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................238 
 Financial Support for Education 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................239 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................239 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................241 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................241 
 Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................241 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................242 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................242 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................242 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................243 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................243 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Melenchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................243 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................248 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................249 
 


