















































Hansard: May 21, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1127 
 May 21, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 
petition on behalf of people who are concerned about the high 
cost of education on property taxes. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in education tax burden 
carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Kuroki, Margo, and Fosston. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw and district 
concerned about a lack of dialysis services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Again today, the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Moose Jaw, and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I stand once 
more to present a petition on behalf of producers in the Cypress 
Hills constituency. This concerns the issue of Crown grazing 
land lease renewals. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed almost exclusively by 
constituents around the community of Claydon and Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the short-sighted and 
unacceptable lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose 
Jaw. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people very concerned 
about the condition of Highway 47. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by people from Estevan, Macoun, Crosby, 
North Dakota, and Regina. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition of behalf of people from west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the alarming rate of school 
closures in the area. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse its position on the isolated school grants and have 
them reinstated for negative grant divisions; and further, 
stop the discrimination against our rural citizens by 
supplying a quality education central in their community. 
 
And as is duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks from Major, 
Saskatchewan and Superb, Saskatchewan. 
 
I here present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to the crop insurance premium increases. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, our petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Mantario, Kindersley, and Flaxcombe. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens that are concerned about the fairness of Crown 
leaseholders. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Battleford and Cando. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I bring 
a petition forth in recognition of the condition of Highway 14. 
 

Whereby your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the deplorable condition of Highway 14 from 
Biggar to Wilkie, and to take necessary action to 
reconstruct and repair the highway in order to address the 
safe concerns and to facilitate economic development 
growth possibilities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

And this petition is signed by people from the city of 
Saskatoon, the town of Wilkie, Unity, and Marengo. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on behalf 
of constituents concerned with the condition of Highway 22, 
that section between Junction 6 and Junction 20. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Strasbourg, Earl Grey, and Bulyea. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned with the 
government’s handling of the Crown land leases. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 
those leases. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Rabbit Lake, Spiritwood, and Dundurn. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and are hereby presented as addendums to sessional 

papers no. 10, no. 12, no. 13, 18, 35, 36, 41, 90, and 100. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 46 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April 2002, 
how much money did SaskPower spend on television ads? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have also similar questions for subsequent 
months. 
 
I also have the . . . I give notice that on day no. 46 I shall ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April 2002, 
how much money did SaskPower spend on radio ads? 

 
And then, Mr. Speaker, there are subsequent questions for 
subsequent months. 
 
And finally, I give notice that on day no. 46 I shall ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: during the month of April 2002, 
how much money did SaskPower spend on print ads? 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are also questions for subsequent months 
and I’m pleased to present these questions. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the CIC minister: what are the guidelines for allocating 
funds to corporations of which CIC has 100 per cent equity 
in; and what are the guidelines for further allocating cash 
injections to the company or companies; and specifically, 
what are the debt to equity ratios within these guidelines? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: does Sask 
Water have any water sharing agreements with the states of 
Montana and North Dakota; if so, could the minister please 
provide details of these agreements? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: how many different lawsuits is 
the Government of Saskatchewan currently defending 
against? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

 

seated in your gallery are two guests from the province of 
Alberta. They are Rob Renner. Mr. Renner is serving his third 
term as Member of the Legislative Assembly for Medicine Hat. 
He is a member of the standing committee on law and 
regulations, the Treasury Board, and the Standing Policy 
Committee on Health and Community Living, and he chairs the 
Government Reorganization Secretariat. 
 
He is accompanied here today by Dennis Gartner, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of pensions, insurance and financial 
institutions and serves as the superintendent of financial 
institutions. They’re also accompanied here today — not with 
them — Mr. Peter Thomas of the pensions, insurance, and 
financial institutions division. 
 
And these gentlemen are here to discuss insurance matters with 
officials in Saskatchewan. I would ask all my colleagues, Mr. 
Speaker, to join me in extending them a very warm welcome. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join with the member opposite on the 
government side to welcome our visitors from Alberta to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we know that this is a difficult time in the area of pensions 
and insurance right across Canada, and we look forward to 
co-operating with you and building what is correct for Western 
Canada. 
 
So I hope you enjoy your visit to the legislature and the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
this House, some young people who won the Orange Zone 
contest. 
 
We have up in your gallery — and I would ask them to stand as 
I read their names — Mark Laprairie, grade 10 student at 
Campbell Collegiate and winner of the Orange Zone Challenge. 
You’ll be seeing his Orange Zone ad on the TV. 
 
And accompanying him, Katrina Bray, grade 12 student at 
Campbell Collegiate and runner-up in the Orange Zone 
Challenge. And you may have already seen her ad in print — 
the turtle crawling through the oranges — a very effective ad. 
 
Also accompanying them are Howard Jesse, who is the 
principal at Campbell Collegiate, and Stuart Harris, the 
computer science teacher, who I hear has done an excellent job 
with all the students in enabling them to develop their skills and 
talents, and we see this particularly in these two. 
 
The Orange Zone Challenge project was created to have 
advertising material developed for younger, newer drivers by 
younger, newer drivers. And they have done an excellent job. 
 
Accompanying them also would be Marita Bray, Katrina’s 

mother, who we welcome to the legislature. And from the 
Department of Highways and Transportation, Brian Cook, 
senior information officer; and Layna Segall, Internet manager. 
 
So I’d ask you to join me in welcoming these folk to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you, 25 grade 12 
students and their teacher, Leslie Tivas from Esterhazy. 
 
I’ll have the good fortune of meeting with them shortly and I’d 
ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to also introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the legislature, a group of 27 grade 5 students 
from Ruth M. Buck School seated in the gallery opposite. 
 
I’m looking forward to meeting with them after their tour of the 
building, and also I’d like colleagues to recognize their 
teachers, Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. Bailey, and welcome them here 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members 
of this House, someone sitting in the west gallery. This 
gentleman lives in Gravelbourg, Saskatchewan, and is the 
candidate for the New Democrats in the Wood River 
constituency. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased. Trevor Davies, Trevor 
Davies, Mr. Speaker, came and spent the day at a caucus 
meeting, and here to give notice to the member from Wood 
River to get out there and do some work because he’s got a 
fight on his hand come next election. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, last 
evening the Swift Current Chamber of Commerce hosted the 
fifth annual Swift Current Business Excellence Awards that was 
attended by over 240 people. A very successful evening, Mr. 
Speaker, as the Swift Current business community gathered 
together to honour both those who had been nominated for 
awards and those who eventually went on to win. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the winners last night included Anderson & 
Company, barristers and solicitors in the Property Appearance 
Award category. Boston Pizza won the Community 
Involvement Award. The Heritage Award was won by 
Armstrong Implements, Mr. Speaker, and the New Business 
Award was won by John’s Country Cafe in downtown Swift 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

Current. And Golden West Radio, that operates both the AM 
(amplitude modulation) and FM (frequency modulation) 
stations in Swift Current as well as the AM station in 
Shaunavon, won the Customer Service Award. 
 
The Business Choice Award was a hotly contested category 
won by Tim Hortons. And, Mr. Speaker, the Business of the 
Year Award was won by Diamond Energy Services Inc. — the 
other nominees, Robertson Implements and Shaunavon 
Chevrolet Oldsmobile Pontiac Buick GMC — as the Swift 
Current Business Excellence Awards, for the first time in their 
five years, expanded to the whole region. 
 
But the winner again in the Business of the Year Award — and 
congratulations to —Diamond Energy Services, an excellent 
and dynamic company in Swift Current. 
 
(13:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know members of this Assembly will want 
to join me in congratulating all those who were nominated, the 
winners, and to thank the businesses in Swift Current and area 
for all that they do for Swift Current and the entire Southwest. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want you to 
know that it’s that time of year again. For reasons as varied as 
all the unique things our constituencies do, I’m very proud to 
represent Regina Centre, and at this time of year we’re having 
the 12th annual Cathedral Village Arts Festival. And I think 
anyone who has tried to drive down 13th Avenue these days 
would see that there’s a lot going on. 
 
It is in the heart of the city, Mr. Speaker, and it has the 
characteristics and virtues of a village — tight-knit yet diverse 
community of performers, artists, small-business people, school 
children, immigrants, volunteers, seniors, young families — 
very proud to be at the heart of Regina. And it is . . . I think the 
Cathedral Village Arts Festival was created as a way to express 
the good fortune to be members of the village, members of the 
province, the nation. 
 
And we invite everyone who is listening today and everyone 
here to join us in the many delights we have to offer. 
 
We did have a bit of cool beginning on Monday at the picnic 
but I want people to know that there’s something on every night 
in every available church basement, hall, etc., all the way down 
13th Avenue. There’ll be musical talents, drama, street theatre, 
poetry, art exhibits, craft sales, movie under the stars. And this 
is on Saturday, one of the largest craft sales now in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s magicians, face painting, and we have food 
and drink — something for every age and taste. So 
congratulations and thanks to festival coordinator, Debra Bell, 
and her committee. 
 
Right through to Saturday night, Mr. Speaker, we invite you all 

to come on down to the Cathedral Village Arts Festival. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Aboriginal Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is national 
Aboriginal Awareness Week, and it has been designated to raise 
public awareness of Aboriginal issues and is part of the federal 
government’s strategy to foster increased employment and 
retention of Aboriginal people in the public service. 
 
And why is increased awareness important, Mr. Speaker? Well 
Aboriginal people represent the fastest-growing segment of our 
population. Saskatoon and Regina have the highest percentage 
of Aboriginal people of all Canadian cities at 7.5 per cent and 7. 
1 per cent respectively, yet Saskatchewan has one of the 
weakest Aboriginal workforce participation rates in all of 
Canada. 
 
In our province, Aboriginal unemployment is four times higher 
than the general population, and this phenomena is not because 
of Aboriginal culture, Mr. Speaker. The social and economic 
conditions of many First Nations people are the result of 
historical factors, including failed government legislation, and 
government interfering and controlling Aboriginal lives. 
 
Many Aboriginal people have not had the same opportunities 
for education or employment as other Canadians. And this is 
slowly changing, Mr. Speaker, and provincial and federal 
governments must continue to work with Aboriginal people in 
order to find solutions to these unique problems. It is up to 
community leaders to forge understanding, set examples, and 
work together. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just mention to people of the Assembly, as 
well as people across our province, how very important it is to 
learn to walk alongside each other in harmony. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emergency Medical Services Week 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
Emergency Medical Services Week, a time when we recognize 
and honour EMS (emergency medical services) providers for 
their dedication and professionalism. 
 
This group of health care practitioners includes emergency 
medical technicians, emergency medical practitioners advanced, 
paramedics, emergency medical dispatchers, and first 
responders. This year’s theme is EMS: When it matters most, 
which is a reflection of the critical role played by EMS 
practitioners in the delivery of health care. 
 
According to the chairman and CEO (chief executive officer) of 
the Saskatchewan Paramedic Association, and I quote: 
 

Gone are the days when the attendant simply picked up an 
individual in an ambulance and drove as fast as they could 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

 

to a hospital. We are now a mobile health care team . . . 
comprised (of a team) of very highly skilled practitioners. 

 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this year the first-ever Stars of Life awards 
were presented by the Saskatchewan Emergency Medical 
Services Association to recognize the achievements of 10 EMS 
professionals from various health regions. A highlight of this 
week is the presentation of the Governor General medals for 
exemplary service to 11 EMS professionals from across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues and all in the Assembly to 
join me in congratulating the various award winners and in 
acknowledging the fine work of all EMS practitioners 
throughout the province for the crucial role in making our 
health care system the best in Canada. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wilkie Student Provincial Winner of the  
Great Canadian Geography Challenge 

 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
a student that has met the geography challenge. Adam Baslar, a 
grade 9 student from St. George School at Wilkie, captured first 
place honours at the provincial level of the Great Canadian 
Geography Challenge held in Estevan on April 5. 
 
Adam won the gold medal at the school level held in 
mid-January. He then wrote a qualifying test to be eligible for 
the provincial competition. There were over 105,000 
competitors from across Canada who took part in this year’s 
challenge. Of those, 345 moved on to the provincial 
competition. Adam beat out 22 other Saskatchewan students to 
capture first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Adam will now compete in the on-line national 
finals held on May 24. The top three students will be declared 
the Canadian national champions and will receive Bank of 
Canada scholarships of 3,000, 2,000, and $1,000. The 
first-place student will earn the berth to the Canadian team that 
will compete at the national geography championship in Florida 
this July. 
 
Mr. Speaker, join me in congratulating Adam and wishing him 
good luck in the national finals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Honoured With Sterling Award 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year the Sterling 
Award is presented to a woman from the Saskatoon area in 
recognition for her contributions to the quality of life in the 
community. I am pleased to say this year’s recipient of this 
prestigious award is Lorena Dora Nickel, from my own 
constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Nickel is a worthy recipient of the Sterling 
Award. While living in Rosthern, she served as a member of the 
hospital auxiliary and was responsible for organizing seminars 

and workshops for the community. She must have done quite a 
job. When Ms. Nickel moved from Rosthern into Saskatoon, 
the hospital auxiliary honoured her with a lifetime membership. 
 
Ms. Nickel’s volunteer work has taken her to Africa twice, 
where she worked in mission hospitals. On her first trip she, 
along with her husband and two small children, spent a couple 
of years in the Congo. Some time after that, now with a family 
of five, Ms. Nickel returned to Africa — this time to Tanzania 
where she taught in a nursing school. 
 
In 1995, Ms. Nickel began volunteering at the Saskatoon Sexual 
Assault and Information Centre, devoting hours to the crisis line 
and helping abuse survivors in other ways, even accompanying 
them to the police station and hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Lorena Dora Nickel on being presented with the 
Sterling Award and in thanking Ms. Nickel for her dedication to 
the community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Conference on Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Drinking alcohol is 
an acceptable norm in our society. Unfortunately, the 
consequences of drinking alcohol while pregnant can be 
devastating to an unborn child. 
 
I attended a fetal alcohol spectrum disorder conference called 
One Voice: Shared Vision which was sponsored by Human 
Resources Development Canada as part of its Saskatchewan 
homelessness operations. The purpose of the conference was to 
kick-start better relations among various groups and 
organizations working with people with FASD (fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder). 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s heartbreaking listening to individuals affected 
by FASD speak about not being able to cope in mainstream 
society, about not fitting in, about the struggles within a system 
that’s set up for an average person and not a person with a 
disability. They talk about their disability, which isn’t visible; 
being called lazy or disruptive when in fact they are unable to 
understand. They talk about not knowing what was wrong with 
them and the sense of relief when they are finally assessed. 
 
It’s equally heartbreaking to talk with parents whose children 
are in the justice system or struggling to make their way. 
Parental frustration with a lack of understanding by the 
education, social, and justice systems was also very apparent. 
Frustration by judges, social workers, educators, and health 
officials for the lack of resources and understanding was also 
very apparent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, FASD is totally preventable. I ask all my 
colleagues to share the vision of the conference and to integrate 
the departments to best serve the needs of the people who are 
afflicted with FASD, as well as educating the public in 
understanding this totally preventable and heartbreaking 
disability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Yesterday the 
federal Minister of Agriculture, in the province of Alberta, 
announced that one case of BSE (bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy), also known as mad cow disease, had been 
confirmed in an eight-year-old beef cow in that province. 
 
In response, the United States imposed a temporary import ban 
of beef cattle and beef products from Canada. However, USDA 
(United States Department of Agriculture) officials are 
confirmed to be working closely with the Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency to investigate the incident, and hopes are 
that this case will be isolated and the ban lifted in short order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to this Assembly what 
conditions must be met in order for the US (United States) to 
lift this ban so that Saskatchewan and Canadian beef exports to 
the US can resume, and how long may it take to meet those 
conditions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will ask the Minister of 
Agriculture to respond to following questions, but I wanted to 
speak on behalf of government to say that we, and I’m sure all 
members of this legislature together, take this issue very, very 
seriously. Mr. Speaker, we are not alarmed but we are treating 
this with great diligence and I appreciate the co-operation of the 
opposition in this circumstance. 
 
I do want to report to the House that since this became known 
to us there have been virtually hourly consultations between our 
officials, the federal officials; USDA has been co-operatively 
involved; that the department and minister are putting together 
an advisory committee of the stock growers, producers, the 
meat processors, all involved in the industry within our 
province. 
 
I’ve taken the opportunity to speak to our Saskatchewan 
member of the federal cabinet and have been communicating 
with the Prime Minister’s office on this matter. And I think we 
all, as legislators today, feel the weight of seriousness that 
attaches to this issue given the significance — the large 
significance — of the industry in our province, indeed in 
Western Canada and in Canada total. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like 
to thank the Premier for his concern. It’s certainly one that all 
Saskatchewan residents share. 
 
We of course have been hearing from our constituents ever 
since the story hit the news yesterday. And there’s a lot of 
concern amongst the public about the safety of beef products. 
But let it be said in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that the 
discovery of this case in Alberta proves without a doubt that the 
beef inspection system in Canada works. Canadian beef 
products are most certainly held to some of the highest 
standards in the world. And because of this system, this animal 
did not enter the public food chain. 

While ongoing investigation in Alberta is important to secure 
this case and return Canada to our BSE status free, it is also 
important to help Saskatchewan beef producers, slaughter 
facilities, and meat — pardon me — meat production 
companies weather the impact of this incident. 
 
I appreciate the announcement of an advisory group and I 
wonder would the minister include industry participants in 
regular briefings on the progress of this investigation and seek 
their input on how the government can help ensure that this 
province remains BSE free? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Leader of the Opposition Saskatchewan Party makes a very 
important point. Not only are we advising the industry 
committee on a daily basis or on an hourly basis as the 
information comes to us in terms of the findings, but we also 
have established within the department ourselves a working 
group of four men and women who are senior members of our 
administrative team led by two of our physicians, or two of our 
doctorates, who are in the Department of Agriculture. 
 
We are also in a daily communication, every morning, with the 
federal government and the CFIA (Canada Food Inspection 
Agency) and on an ongoing basis if there are new developments 
that are occurring. And so what we’re attempting to do, Mr. 
Speaker, is to keep not only those who are in the industry 
informed on an ongoing basis, but also communicating that 
information with the general public so that consumers are also 
aware of all of the findings that are occurring on a regular basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our 
understanding from a technical briefing by the Department of 
Agriculture officials this morning is that the CFIA is taking 
swift action to depopulate and quickly test all of the animals in 
the source herd and to trace back the origin of the infected cow. 
They have also traced out sales of animals from that herd and 
quarantined the farms where those animals now live. 
 
It is important that Saskatchewan Agriculture officials are kept 
up to date on the progress of this investigation and that we as a 
province participate in any way possible in assuring the safety 
of Saskatchewan and Canadian cattle and beef products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain what the province of 
Saskatchewan is doing to help with the investigation into the 
BSE case in Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One 
of the first things that we did as soon as the information became 
available is that we . . . Our officials were contacted by the 
federal officials, and our officials and the federal officials are 
working very closely in monitoring and overseeing in tracking 
and tracing of the information on the animals that are from this 
individual’s farm. 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

 

Because there is such broad movement in the livestock industry, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to know where this animal might have 
actually originated from. It’s been with this particular producer, 
I believe, for three years. The animal’s eight years old; it’s been 
on that farm for three years. They’re now tracing and looking 
through their surveillance, through the manifests and the ear 
tags and the brands to see where in fact this animal actually 
originated from. 
 
So we’re working very closely with the Alberta officials, 
working closely . . . very closely with the federal government. 
We’re also closely involved through the federal government 
and USDA. The USDA has in fact offered up their expertise to 
assist us in the overseer of this particular issue, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’ll continue to work closely with those three, with those 
two provinces, our province, and the federal government, to 
ensure that we stay abreast of this issue as it moves along. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Operation of Justice System 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
almost a year since Saskatoon police officer John Popowich 
received $1.3 million in apology from the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government, this NDP government, for 
malicious prosecution. 
 
At the time, former Justice minister Chris Axworthy said six 
other people who were wrongfully accused will likely receive 
compensation as well. He said, and I quote: 
 

We would anticipate that in fairly short order we’ll be 
hearing from those plaintiffs. I think it is the first in a series 
of settlements. 

 
Mr. Speaker, almost a year has passed since Chris Axworthy 
apologized to John Popowich and promised similar action with 
the others who were maliciously prosecuted by the NDP justice 
system. When is this government going to do the right thing and 
apologize to those people as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that 11 suits, other 
than the Popowich suit, have been filed in Saskatchewan courts. 
Four of those are related to the investigation and prosecution of 
the Martensville prosecution. Six other suits are related to three 
other prosecutions and one suit has been withdrawn. 
 
I want to say to the House, Mr. Speaker, that it is important to 
note that the prosecutions branch deals with approximately 
84,000 charges each year and about 18,000 prosecutions. We 
have over the past 10 years, five cases that have given rise to 12 
lawsuits. 
 
I have every confidence in our prosecutors, Mr. Speaker. If 
there are allegations that they have done something wrong, in 
these cases those allegations can be put before the courts and 
the courts will decide whether the prosecutors have done 
something wrong. And that process is before the courts and we 
will abide by the decision of the courts, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, why is it that this government 
has the penchant to hide behind, it’s in the courts? You would 
almost think that they love things in the courts so they don’t 
have to answer questions in the House or to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across this country, not just Canada but North 
America, people know of the Martensville case; they know of 
the Klassen case; they know of the Milgaard case — all things 
that have happened under the watch of this NDP government. 
 
So I repeat, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when is this 
government going to do the right thing and apologize to those 
people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I take it from the member’s 
question that the member has decided that the prosecutors are in 
the wrong, and the police are in the wrong, and the plaintiffs are 
in the right. That is what the member has said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this particular instance, Mr. Speaker, justice . . . The 
plaintiffs have their right to their day in court; so too the 
government, the prosecutors, and the police have their right to 
their day in court. 
 
And ultimately, Mr. Speaker, we have a system whereby the 
judges decide. I understand that some of these cases are 
proceeding to trial. The courts will decide. It is not for me to 
decide. It is not for the member to decide, Mr. Speaker. It is for 
the courts to decide and we will respect that process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people that 
need an apology, Mr. Speaker, are the people who are involved 
in the same situation as Mr. Popowich. The former Justice 
minister apologized. If this Justice minister feels these people 
are guilty, he should go out there and say that or give the 
apology as was committed to by the former Justice minister, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, justice delayed is justice denied. These people 
were falsely accused of one of the most heinous crimes 
imaginable — the abuse of children. It took eight years for John 
Popowich to receive some amount of justice, even though 
nothing can really compensate him and his family for what they 
all went through. But at least after eight long years, he received 
compensation and an apology. The others, Mr. Speaker, are still 
waiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the holdup? When are these people going 
to be compensated for the terrible injustice they suffered at the 
hands of this NDP justice system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if it is in fact the case that 
individuals have been subjected to false allegations of abuse, 
the member knows that those allegations did not originate with 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

the government; they originated with other citizens. The fact of 
the matter is when that happens, the police, the prosecutors, are 
expected by society to respond in some way to those 
allegations. I am not saying that anyone is guilty of anything. 
I’m not saying these plaintiffs are guilty of anything; I’m not 
saying the police necessarily are guilty of wrongdoing, or the 
prosecutors. That, Mr. Speaker, is a matter of dispute between 
the parties. The courts are set up to determine that. The 
plaintiffs will have their day in court. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, may have 
drawn his own conclusion; the Justice critic may have drawn 
his own conclusion. They may have concluded the plaintiffs are 
correct and the police and the prosecutors are wrong. We, Mr. 
Speaker, are not judging the case. The case will be decided on 
its merits in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it’s easy for this government to 
haul out a truckload of lawyers and drive some ordinary people 
of Saskatchewan into distraction wondering if they’ll be able to 
hold out against the resources that this NDP government has 
with these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 13 people in a separate but similar case are also 
waiting for justice from this government. Today some of them 
are waiting on the front lawn of this legislature. Richard 
Klassen and 12 others were falsely accused of abusing three 
Saskatoon children in the early 1900s. The government was 
willing to negotiate a settlement in the Popowich case — 
negotiate the settlement, Mr. Speaker — but has been 
absolutely unwilling to discuss settlement in the Klassen case. 
What’s the difference, Mr. Speaker? 
 
In both cases, the Justice department falsely accused people of 
abusing children. In both cases, the charges were found to be 
unfounded. And in both cases, the people have had their lives 
and their reputations ruined by this terrible false accusation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP refusing a settlement case 
situation in the Klassen case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite and I say to the public, the allegations of abuse did not 
originate with the Department of Justice. There were members 
of society that accused the plaintiffs of sexual abuse, as I 
understand it. Those allegations were later withdrawn. That is 
not the fault of the prosecutors. It is not the fault of the police. 
If the prosecutors and the police acted on the allegations in a 
wrong way, Mr. Speaker, the courts can determine that. And the 
matter is before the courts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is fine for the members of the opposition to take the side of 
the plaintiffs against the police and against the prosecutors and 
say that the police are wrong and the prosecutors are wrong. 
That’s what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On this side of the House, we will respect the process. The 
process is before the court. The plaintiffs will have their day in 
court. The judge will decide. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, that NDP government and the 
former Justice minister settled out of court with Mr. Popowich. 
The situations are similar. They know it. Everyone in those 
front benches know it. They need to do the right thing today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and again we’ve seen falsely accused people 
by the NDP justice system, and everyone pays the price except 
those who are responsible. David Milgaard spent 23 years in 
prison for a crime he did not commit and then taxpayers paid 
$10 million in compensation. But there were no consequences 
for anyone in the justice system. 
 
John Popowich was falsely accused, maliciously prosecuted for 
child abuse. After eight long years, taxpayers paid $1.3 million 
in compensation. But there were no consequences for anyone in 
this NDP justice system. 
 
Six others in the Martensville case and eleven others in the 
Klassen case are still waiting for justice from this government. 
But there are no consequences in the justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP justice system allowed . . . was 
allowed to botch up so many high-profile cases with no 
consequences for anyone responsible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in case the member 
opposite doesn’t know, the Milgaard case actually originated 
about 30 years ago. I want the member to know that. 
 
My second point, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite refers to 
the justice system as the NDP justice system and I want that 
member to know, Mr. Speaker, whether they want to hear it or 
not, that the police and the prosecutors are not affiliated with 
any political party, Mr. Speaker. They are not an NDP justice 
system. They are not a Saskatchewan Party justice system. They 
are a justice system that operates free and clear of politics. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would be well advised 
to take that kind of advice and not politicize matters that 
shouldn’t be politicized. The police are not political. The 
prosecutors are not political. Mistakes can be made in any 
system but the system is dealing with a situation where 
individuals may make allegations against others. And when you 
don’t act on those you get criticized for that as well, Mr. 
Speaker. Were mistakes made by the police and prosecutors? I 
don’t know. That will be determined by the courts. 
 
The member says this case is the same as the Popowich case. If 
the member had any personal knowledge of this case, then the 
member himself should come to testify at court, Mr. Speaker. 
But my point is, this matter should be left before the courts who 
will properly deal with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government made a 
political decision and settled out of court with Mr. Popowich. 
They need to take the same responsibility and make settlement 
with other people who are falsely accused. They know they 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

 

should. They know they should. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saturday’s paper had another example of justice 
delayed being justice denied. An individual from Carlyle was 
charged with sexual assault in July of 2000. But the charges 
were thrown out in April. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because it took 
the case too long to get to trial. Mr. Speaker, that’s a very 
disturbing conclusion to this case. 
 
I have no idea whether the accused was guilty or innocent and 
no one else in Saskatchewan does either. But now we’ll never 
know because the charges were thrown out due to delays in this 
NDP justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what good is a justice system that takes too long 
to deal in cases that the judge simply dismisses the charges? 
What is being done to address these lengthy delays? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I wanted to say in answer to that 
question, Mr. Speaker, that if the delay was the fault of the 
prosecutors or the police, then we need to look into that. We are 
looking into it. My office has spoken to the director of public 
prosecutions to get the reason for the delay. And we need to 
take steps to make sure that that does not occur again. 
 
(14:15) 
 
But I also say to the member that this illustrates the point that I 
was just saying to the member a moment ago, which is the 
justice system will be criticized when it operates too zealously 
and too quickly, as he’s alleging it did, or when it doesn’t 
operate quickly enough on allegations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my point is this. It is a system, Mr. Speaker, where some 
human beings will make allegations against other human 
beings. In his first questions the member criticizes the police 
and prosecutors for acting on them. Now this question is he’s 
criticizing them because they didn’t act quickly enough. Now 
that, that criticism, may be warranted, Mr. Speaker. And if the 
criticism is found to be warranted, then I can say to the 
member, we need to make sure that doesn’t happen again. 
 
But I also say to the member he ought not to jump to 
conclusions. Neither should I. We should let the proper 
authorities decide the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s under the watch 
of this NDP government that the justice system took too long to 
prosecute in this case. That’s a matter of looking at the 
calendar. Surely this Justice minister can handle at least 
something as simple as that and make sure that doesn’t happen 
in this particular province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing is a pattern of mismanagement 
of the justice system by this NDP government. We see people 
like David Milgaard, who spent 23 years in prison for a crime 
he did not commit. We see people like John Popowich and 
Richard Klassen and others who are wrongfully accused, 
maliciously prosecuted for crimes they did not commit. And 

then they are forced to wait for years — that’s the problem then, 
Mr. Speaker — they’re forced to wait for years for an apology 
from this NDP government. 
 
Then we see a case like this one in Carlyle, where charges are 
dropped simply because the justice system takes too long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a pattern of mismanagement and 
botched cases in this NDP’s justice system. Why is the NDP 
mismanaging the justice system in this province so badly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member doesn’t 
know this, the member should know that there have been people 
all over the United States found to be wrongly on death row 
because of mistakes in justice systems. There have been 
mistakes in justice systems throughout this country and 
throughout the world, and we should do everything we can to 
make sure those mistakes don’t occur. 
 
But I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the police and the 
prosecutors in this province, I’m told, review more than 84,000 
charges each year; they deal with nearly 18,000 prosecutions. 
And what we have, Mr. Speaker, are over the past 10 years, 5 
cases giving rise to 12 lawsuits. That’s regrettable, Mr. Speaker, 
but is it a justice system out of control, as described by the 
member opposite or different than other justice systems? 
 
The answer to that is absolutely, no, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
very good justice system in Canada, in Saskatchewan, staffed 
by competent police, competent prosecutors, and I’m sure that 
they don’t need the assistance of members opposite who jump 
to all kinds of conclusions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Correctional Centre 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, has it really come to this, 
that this NDP Justice minister has to hide behind the American 
justice system to show that his is better? What a shame. John 
Wayne he isn’t, I can assure you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Corrections and 
Public Safety. Here is another example of NDP mismanagement 
in the justice system. Last week a Provincial Court judge 
announced what amounts to the NDP’s catch-and-release 
program for convicted drug dealers. The judge cut 12 months 
from the jail sentence of two drug dealers who were caught with 
100,000 ecstasy pills worth two and a half million dollars. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Well according to the judge the NDP 
government has allowed the Regina Correctional Centre to 
deteriorate to the point where conditions are too oppressive 
even for hardened drug dealers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP allowed conditions in the 
Regina jail to get so bad that the judge was compelled to let two 
convicted drug dealers out a year early? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think what we’ve seen today from the Sask Party is a complete 
across the map on every issue. On the one hand they say we’re 
prosecuting too slow; on the other hand we’re prosecuting fast. 
On the one hand they’re saying that we’re running the jails too 
tight; on the other hand they want boot camps for kids. 
 
As the Minister of Corrections I can tell you that the Regina 
Correctional Centre was not designed to be the Hotel 
Saskatchewan. It is a tough place, there’s no doubt. But I say to 
those members opposite, tell me in the estimates as we go 
through them, where we find that $90 million. Tell me what 
schools we take off the capital list; tell me what hospitals in 
rural Saskatchewan we take off the capital list; tell me that. Tell 
me, Mr. Speaker, how it is that we move that facility up. 
 
Now the question that’s raised about the three days for one is 
one that we are going to have to take up with the chief judge. 
This is an issue that we are going to have to resolve but we will 
resolve it in a place better suited for that discussion than on the 
floor of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Efforts to Trace and Eradicate 
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to tell 
Saskatchewan citizens what we are doing to help our beef 
industry address the BSE. 
 
Everyone will be aware of one beef cow in Alberta that was 
discovered to have BSE. The Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency, CFIA, is leading the process to trace animals from this 
particular beef herd, and to trace the origins of this cow and 
determine how it acquired the BSE. They are also leading the 
efforts to eradicate this disease. 
 
Saskatchewan has made an offer to the CFIA and to Alberta to 
provide any assistance they require to help them trace and 
eradicate the BSE. 
 
The closure of several export markets has the potential to have a 
significant impact on our beef industry if it lasts very long. The 
United States market is particularly important to our industry. 
We have a substantive two-way trade with the US in live 
animals and meat. Access to the US market is important for the 
long term and the profitability of our beef industry. 
 
I am encouraged, Mr. Speaker, by the response we are hearing 
from our American friends. They recognize we have a strong 
food inspection system combined with a traceability system that 
is among the best in the world. 
 
The federal minister has talked directly with the US Secretary 
of Agriculture, Ann Veneman, informing her and her officials 
about the case of BSE and what we are doing to trace it down. 
The US has offered to provide technical assistance to trace 
down and eradicate the BSE, and our respective food 
inspection/animal disease agencies are in a daily contact. 
 

The US has indicated that they are in every likelihood to reopen 
the border relatively soon. 
 
Saskatchewan has also taken action to ensure that we are able to 
respond quickly. We have established an officials committee 
who continuously monitor the situation and provide daily 
updates to myself and the government and respond to calls from 
customers and consumers, the industry, and the media. 
 
My officials are also participating on a daily briefing with the 
CFIA, the Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, and all provinces 
and territories. 
 
We have also established an industry group . . . an industry 
advisory group of producers, processors, and marketers, and 
technical experts who exchange information on a daily basis. 
This group will also advise me with respect to any other actions 
that our province should take. 
 
I want to re-emphasize that Canada has a strong food safety and 
traceability system. It was our hope that we would never see or 
have to use this system, particularly in respect to the BSE. We 
are now in a situation where our system is being put to the test, 
Mr. Speaker. I have every confidence that we will quickly trace 
the origins of the outbreak and again make Canada a BSE safe 
area. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to thank the minister for sending a copy of his statement in 
advance. And even more, I would like to thank the minister for 
allowing his officials to meet with us earlier today to give us a 
technical briefing on what is being done with this serious issue. 
 
There is no question that there is grave concern from every 
member of the entire Assembly towards this week’s 
announcement that one beef cow in Alberta has been discovered 
to have bovine spongiform encephalopathy. We are very 
pleased to hear that our government is responding expediently 
and positively in supplying any assistance that they can to both 
to the CFIA and the province of Alberta. 
 
The cattle industry is extremely valuable, not only to our 
province but to Canada entirely, and we have the utmost 
confidence that the systems that the industry and the 
governments have put into place to protect the consumers and 
the industry are both effective and efficient. I know that a lot of 
work has already been done in a very short period of time to 
isolate the source of the disease, to trace its place of origin, and 
to ensure its eradication. 
 
It’s also comforting to know that our federal government is in 
constant communication with the US because we can never 
underestimate the importance of that trade and the seriousness 
of the boundaries being closed for any length of time. It is my 
understanding that the USDA is helping in every way that they 
can, so that too is a positive indication that every possible effort 
is being taken to eradicate Canada of bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy. 
 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say it again that we will 
be strongly supporting our government and the federal 
government’s efforts. And I would like to express my 
confidence in the safeguards within the system to address this 
situation. And I want to ensure the people of Saskatchewan that 
I will be enjoying my beef supper tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Forest Centre 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
inform the House of a matter of importance to Saskatchewan’s 
forestry industry and to the province. 
 
More than half our province is covered in forest. Forestry has 
attracted nearly $1 billion in private sector investment during 
the past four years. Over 8,000 new, direct and indirect jobs 
have been created in the past four years. 
 
The Saskatchewan Forest Centre was established in 2001 as 
part of our provincial growth strategy to support and stimulate 
further growth in this industry. It is operated out of various 
facilities in Prince Albert. Construction of a new building for 
the centre has been scheduled for this year, consolidating all 
staff and functions under one roof. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the merits of the new facility were 
called into question. I therefore asked my deputy minister to 
review this proposal and report to me on the level of support for 
the project. Mr. Speaker, I have now reviewed the report from 
my deputy minister. I’m very pleased to inform the House that 
construction of the Saskatchewan Forest Centre will proceed as 
planned. 
 
The review, Mr. Speaker, affirmed the need for the project. The 
review showed solid support for the project from the 
Saskatchewan Forest Centre board, the forest industry, various 
Aboriginal stakeholders, and the community of Prince Albert. 
The review confirmed Prince Albert is the most logical home 
for the project and the downtown location as the best possible 
site with considerable cost savings compared to the proposed 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) site. Mr. Speaker, on this basis, the project will 
proceed as planned. 
 
I want to thank all the people of Prince Albert who took the 
time and trouble to make their views known. Their efforts have 
contributed towards a state-of-the-art forestry research centre 
for our province. It’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that over time the 
Saskatchewan Forest Centre will enjoy the same stature in 
Prince Albert as Innovation Place does in Saskatoon and the 
Regina Research Park does here in Regina. 
 
With continued support and involvement from the private 
sector, the centre can take us beyond primary production and 
help us more fully explore value-added development of our 
forest resources. It can deliver a range of new technology and 
enhance the province’s capacity to manage this important 
resource. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good project for the industry, a good 
project for Prince Albert, and a good project for the province of 

Saskatchewan. I therefore hope all members will welcome this 
announcement and get on board with Prince Albert. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
respond to the minister’s statement. I thank the minister for 
providing me with a copy of the statement which he just 
delivered to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has always strongly 
supported the establishment of a forestry research centre located 
in Prince Albert as an important part of the growing forestry 
industry and the economy of Saskatchewan. However the 
NDP’s current plan is to build a $12.7 million, 
government-owned office building in Prince Albert, financed 
100 per cent by Saskatchewan taxpayers. The Saskatchewan 
Party has called on the Government of Saskatchewan to provide 
a business plan for a forestry research centre that demonstrates 
the project’s primary function will be research as opposed to the 
provision of new office space. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister in his statement alluded to Innovation 
Place in Saskatoon and the Regina Research Park. And, Mr. 
Speaker, all of the information we’ve received about the 
forestry centre indicate that it’s no research park that the 
government is planning on building in downtown Prince Albert. 
At best it might be a centre for some technology transfer. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s far from a research park. 
 
There is a . . . One concern is just a major move of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 
offices from one office building to another because SERM will 
be a major tenant in the new facility. In fact, in a recent column, 
Randy Burton of The StarPhoenix, in speaking of the deputy 
minister, Spannier’s review of the situation says, and I quote: 
 

If Spannier answers the question of what the primary 
purpose of this project is supposed to be, then the solution 
to this problem ought to be relatively straightforward. A 
research facility would be better placed next to a centre of 
learning like the SIAST campus, as Innovation Place is 
located next to the University of Saskatchewan. If the 
research agenda has yet to be established, then delaying the 
building until the industry knows what it needs seems not 
unreasonable. 
 
If the forest centre is a downtown revitalization project then 
the government must answer a whole new set of questions, 
including: 
 
What new jobs are created if this project is simply 
relocating existing government employees from elsewhere 
within Prince Albert? 

 
Mr. Speaker, the business plan which is required to demonstrate 
the financial viability of the project . . . And, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re heckling on the other side but you’d think this 
government would learn that by not doing a business plan they 
get themselves into deep trouble. They’ve done it time after 
time after time with Crown Investments Corporation, with 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company). Mr. Speaker, business plans are very, very essential 
to success. 
 
A business plan in this case should demonstrate the financial 
viability of the project through financial support and a 
commitment to equity participation by private sector forestry 
companies and First Nations. Finally, the business plan should 
include strong evidence that the location selected for the 
forestry centre will be the best one from the perspective of 
facilitating research in the forestry industry. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to direct your attention, to you and through you, to make 
welcome a friend of mine in your gallery, Mr. Duane Favel. 
 
Mr. Favel has travelled in from Saskatoon to have several days 
of discussions with me. And we’ve been after this guy for quite 
a long time to come and work with us, and it appears that we’re 
going to have some success. 
 
Mr. Favel originally comes from Ile-a-la-Crosse but has taught 
at the high schools in Saskatoon and is an accomplished actor. 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, he’s also a hockey player. 
 
So he’s going to be doing some, hopefully some work for us, 
and I’d like to ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
Mr. Favel to the Assembly today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Meewasin 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Jones: — For leave to introduce guests please, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, two guests seated in the west gallery, Ms. Kaitlin 
Stocks and her friend, Annie Zhang. 
 
And earlier we had visitors here from the Campbell Collegiate, 
and Kaitlin and her friend are also from Campbell Collegiate 
and they’re here to take part in some of the proceedings today. 
 
So I ask all hon. members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Quoting Letters 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, hon. members, I 
wish to make a ruling. Hon. members, I wish to rule on the 
matter regarding the letters referred to me by the Minister of 
Agriculture during question period of May 13, 2003, which 
were the subject of a point of order on May 15, 2003. 
 
In raising his point of order the Opposition Whip claimed that 
the Minister of Agriculture quoted from two letters on May 13, 
but tabled one . . . but only tabled one. He asked that the second 
letter be tabled forthwith. 
 
I have carefully reviewed the record of what was said by the 
Minister of Agriculture on May 13 as it relates to the letter in 
question. As well, to the extent that I could, I have followed the 
advice offered to me by the members who intervened on the 
point of order. I will begin with the passages as recorded in 
Hansard. 
 
In Hansard on page 1051, the minister says, and I quote: 
 

I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, that’s written to me by 
Mr. Peters. And he says, Mr. Peters says: 

 
The minister then goes on, using the first person, to refer to 
what the individual said in a letter. On the basis of this passage, 
it is reasonable for the Opposition Whip and the other members 
of this House to conclude that the minister did indeed quote 
from more than one letter. The minister went on to say on page 
1054, and again I quote: 
 

I’d be pleased to table the letters that I quoted from. 
 
This too leaves the impression that the minister quoted from 
more than one letter. 
 
In speaking to the point of order, the minister claims on page 
1116 of Hansard that he merely paraphrased the content of the 
second letter. The government Deputy House Leader asked me 
to review the video record of the proceedings, which in his 
opinion supported the minister’s contention that the Minister of 
Agriculture did not actually read from a letter. I’ve reviewed the 
video record and it supports the claim that the minister did not 
directly read from a letter, but does this mean he did not quote 
from the letter? 
 
It is my opinion that members are quite capable of quoting 
without reading directly from a text. So where does this leave 
us? On the one hand, we have a Hansard record that leads one 
to believe a letter was quoted. On the other hand, we have the 
solemn statement of a minister that he paraphrased the letter in 
question. This leaves the Speaker in a difficult position. 
 
Paragraph 494 of Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, and I quote: 
 

It has been formerly ruled by Speakers that statements by 
members respecting themselves and particularly within 
their knowledge must be accepted. 
 

Hansard goes on to say: 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

 

On rare occasions this may result in the House having to 
accept two contradictory accounts of the same incident. 

 
In these cases it is the practice of this Assembly to accept the 
word of the member. On this basis I find that there is no 
requirement for the document to be tabled. 
 
Before concluding, I wish to address the suggestion raised by 
the member for Canora-Pelly in his intervention on the point of 
order. He suggested that the Speaker access the letter to see 
whether or not the words used by the minister match what is in 
the letter. 
 
The Speaker has no authority to demand that a letter be 
produced. Subsequently however, the minister on his own 
initiative voluntarily provided the letter to me. I have compared 
the letter to Hansard and can advise the Assembly that the 
Hansard record is not a quotation. This affirms my decision that 
the minister is not required to table the second letter. 
 
I want to close by cautioning ministers on their choice of words 
when referring to documents. The Minister of Agriculture left 
the impression that he was quoting from a letter. I request that 
in the future, ministers make it very clear to the House when 
they are quoting from a document. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 279 to 290 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 279 through to 290 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 36 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 36 — The 
Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly am pleased 
to be able to enter into the debate on Bill No. 36. The Bill is an 
amendment to The Agricultural Safety Net Act, which basically 
changes or allows this government to change the old NISA (Net 
Income Stabilization Account) program, if I use that term, 
because it is coming to an end under the agricultural policy 
framework into the new NISA. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that would imply — and that is what the 
minister said during the second reading debate, his second 
reading speech; he said that’s the purpose of this amendment — 
and that would imply that you’re taking a program and making 
some changes, some minor changes to it, but at the end of the 

day that the program would resemble the old program. Well, in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that certainly is not the case with the new 
NISA program. 
 
The only thing that is similar between the old program and the 
new program is the name. It in no way resembles the old 
program. It is completely different; it incorporates a number of 
new concepts that most producers aren’t familiar with. This 
program is being designed as it’s being implemented. 
 
At a recent conference, the SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) convention earlier this year, an official 
from the federal Department of Agriculture did a presentation 
on the new program and a number of answers to questions that 
were asked by delegates to the convention who were by and 
large, a majority of them were farmers. When this official was 
asked questions about certain aspects of the new NISA 
program, the official couldn’t answer because the answer was 
those are details that need to be worked out at a later date. 
 
And there is great concern, Mr. Speaker, in the farm community 
about the haste with which this whole program — the APF 
(agricultural policy framework) and particularly the business 
risk management portion of it, which NISA and crop insurance 
make up those two pillars of the APF — with the haste that both 
levels of government are showing to implement the program. 
As I’d indicated last March, there was a number of questions 
that are . . . were still no answers to, and I am assuming that we 
probably have very few more answers, Mr. Speaker, today. 
 
If one looks at some of the headlines in some of the papers in 
the last month or two dealing with this program, we have 
headlines that . . . such as “Ag ministers, industry warn of 
‘chaos’ without extension” to the current programs. “Confusion 
reigns over framework deadline” is another headline. Here’s an 
article that’s dealing with the launch of the new APF program, 
“Agricultural plan limps out of starting blocks.” The Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture insists the government to postpone 
the APF to allow more input from producers. Mr. Speaker, 
another headline, “Farmers resist Ottawa’s new ag plan.” 
 
Within our own province, our farm organizations have asked 
this minister to just slow down and make sure that the plan is 
developed and thought out and communicated to producers 
before they move ahead with it. But what does this government 
do, Mr. Speaker? They’re surging forward with a great deal of 
haste, in my opinion, to implement this new program, to go into 
an area that it seems no one is actually certain as to what the 
final product will look like because changes are being made as 
we move along. 
 
And what type of information is being presented to producers, 
Mr. Speaker? Well if you look at the Sask Ag and Food and 
Rural Revitalization Web site, Mr. Speaker, if you go there to 
find some information on the province’s position on this 
program, this APF program, what will you find? Well way 
down in the lower right-hand corner, you’ll find an icon that 
will lead you to the federal site. There is no provincial input 
into this program and that’s indicative, Mr. Speaker, of the way 
the whole program was developed. 
 
When the federal Minister of Agriculture went down this path 
of developing a new program, what did Saskatchewan do and 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

what did this Minister of Agriculture do? He said, well I’m not 
going to get involved in program design. He made up some 
excuses about funding and those sorts of things, but the net 
result was that the program was designed by other parties — the 
federal government, perhaps one or two provincial 
governments, but certainly not Saskatchewan. 
 
And then here in March, Mr. Speaker, this government decides 
that it’s time to sign on after the program is designed, and we’re 
going to just shove it through. The minister said at a news 
conference following the signing of the initial agreement of 
intent that it’s a done deal, so we may as well just have a few 
meetings and send out some information to farm producers to 
tell them what the new program is all about. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of any provincially organized 
information meetings or, as a matter of fact, any provincial 
information about the new program that has been sent out to 
producers. But what has been sent out to producers, Mr. 
Speaker, just this very week, is a nine-page package of 
information from the federal Minister of Agriculture. 
 
And it’s rather interesting, Mr. Speaker, to look at the timing of 
when this information was sent to producers. It’s entitled, 
Proposed Changes to the NISA Program, and it’s sent out, Mr. 
Speaker, in the middle of May in seeding time when farm 
producers are busy out on the land trying to get this year’s crop 
sowed. In many areas we’ve had a late spring, and do you think 
farmers are going to have time to sit down and read through 
nine pages of information about the new NISA program? 
 
You know what’s going to happen with this information, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s probably going to get piled up on a desk or a 
cupboard or some such place and other material’s going to get 
put on top of it. And I would venture to guess that there’ll be 
very few producers that’ll actually take the time because they 
just don’t have the time right now to go through this detailed 
information to try and grasp and understand what this so-called 
new NISA program is all about. 
 
And it’s not anything like the NISA program that we’ve had in 
the past, and in fact, it shouldn’t even be called NISA, Mr. 
Speaker. It should be called something else. It should be called 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) with a 
premium, CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) with a 
premium — take your choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from an e-mail that I 
received in the last few weeks from a farm producer at 
Qu’Appelle. And I quote: 
 

The importance of a sound and beneficial Risk 
Management agreement for Saskatchewan farmers is 
imperative. The present package is not sound nor of benefit 
to prairie producers. It was rushed in with tactics of 
intimidation, arm twisting, lack of producer organization 
input and severe time restraints. 
 
The farmers require a package that will truly be of 
assistance when needed. Remember this is a long term 
package, so let us get it right the first time. (Please) press 
for a delay of implementation by the provincial and federal 
departments of agriculture. 

Yours respectfully, Larry McCulloch 
 

of Qu’Appelle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think this e-mail certainly outlines the feeling amongst 
farm producers with regards to this new agricultural policy 
framework and in particular in the reshaping and the total 
dismantling of programs that they are familiar with, and the 
implementation of programs that farmers — many farmers — 
haven’t seen, don’t understand; they haven’t had time or 
information to really understand it and review the program, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I could just quote from a column by Kevin 
Hursch which I think will certainly predict the outcome of this 
haste that we are seeing, from not only this government, Mr. 
Speaker, but from the federal government. And I quote: 
 

As one farmer suggested this week, Saskatchewan should 
apply for . . . (a) call centre that will handle all the 
questions from farmers and accountants once this 
wonderful expanded NISA is foisted upon us. 
 
Vanclief and Serby may get lucky. Perhaps by the time this 
all gets ugly, they will no longer be our ministers of 
agriculture. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly think that this article certainly 
nails it down. Because as our farm producers understand and 
see the implications of this new program, Mr. Speaker, I think 
they will certainly not be happy and that there certainly will be 
a lot of discontent. And there will certainly be a lot of 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as suggested in this article, I think that probably the 
biggest benefit to this province would be a call centre to handle 
these questions that producers will have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are a number of my 
colleagues that would like to enter into the debate on this Bill, 
so at this time I would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

The Assembly resumed the debate on the proposed motion by 
the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Lorenz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you for the 
opportunity to speak on Bill No. 37, amendment to The Crop 
Insurance Act. Any changes made to The Crop Insurance Act 
are very important changes that need to be recognized and 
recognized in the sense of the new agricultural policy 
framework as well. It’s very vital to the producers of this 
province to have crop insurance coverage that gives them 
adequate coverage for the needs of producing their crops and 
for the needs of providing that whole economic opportunity 
through agriculture in this province as well. 
 
And any time changes are made, we need to look very closely at 
the type of changes that are made and how they’re going to 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

 

affect the coverage that it’s going to provide to the producers as 
well. 
 
And we look into the Bill and we see that there’s an addition of 
insurance against occurrence or non-occurrences of any climatic 
event designated in the regulation that has the potential to cause 
loss to an insurable crop. And I think that’s a very important 
issue that we need to take a look at and recognize — the value 
of having an identification of an occurrence or a non-occurrence 
— and we need to understand and appreciate the value of 
having that type of coverage in there. 
 
We need to have some, I guess, some background and some 
understanding of the purpose and the value of having that 
change placed into that level of coverage, of understanding 
what crop insurance meaning is, and identifying how that 
relationship of that level of coverage will affect the overall 
coverage of the producer as well. 
 
When we’re making some provisions in the sense of providing 
the use of new technology when establishing the yields for the 
corporation, it becomes very, I guess, essential to understand 
the type of technology that we’re going to be getting into and 
the type of value that we’re going to have in identifying the 
type of crops we’re growing and the production of those crops 
as well. 
 
If we’re using a remote sensing technology, and if it can 
identify the actual production of crops out there, and it also 
talks about . . . and any other method. Well when you talk about 
using any other method, it leaves that door pretty well wide 
open in the sense of how you can arbitrarily come in and make 
a decision on the type of technology or the type of calculation 
or the system or the methodology that you’re going to use going 
in there to establish those yields as well. 
 
And I think that’s a very significant point that needs to be 
addressed, and how we’re going to identify the usage of that 
privilege to go in and state that you’re going to arbitrarily use 
another form of calculating yields for that particular crop as 
well. 
 
The amendment also talks about giving the corporation the right 
to levy administration fees. Mr. Speaker, administration fees 
has always been part of the premium that the producer’s been 
paying. And over the years the Crop Insurance has always been 
very diligent in expressing the fact that they’ve been very 
efficient and running with a very minimal cost of administration 
in the corporation which is, you know, which we need to 
appreciate and we need to commend the corporation in being 
able to provide that. 
 
The privilege of having the ability to establish a separate fee for 
administration, there’s a real interest of understanding, you 
know, what the thinking, the methodology is going to be in the 
sense of how that fee is going to be established, and the purpose 
and the value of having that fee set separately, that you can go 
in there and start setting those fees. 
 
It may relate a little bit into another part of the amendment that 
is talked about here, is having the privilege and the opportunity 
to contract on with outside organizations or corporations to 
provide a service. And if it’s the service of administration, is 

that a direct downloading of those costs of administration that 
arbitrarily the corporation makes that decision on, not the 
producer? 
 
The minister did make comment on his opening remarks that 
producers pay an administration fee, which offsets the 
cost-sharing formula for the fees. At some point in the future, 
Saskatchewan farmers recommend this option. We have our 
legislation to be able . . . to enable this to happen. But we don’t 
see very often that that actually is the process that goes back to 
the producer; that the producer actually has the choice of the 
type of fee that they’re going to be paying for the program that 
they’ve signed into. 
 
Those are always kind words but in actual form of 
implementing that ability of giving choice and giving the 
strength to the producer to make a choice if they wish to have 
that fee or wish to have that style of administration, isn’t built 
into the program where they have that ability to go there as 
well. 
 
And I guess maybe the question that begs to maybe be asked as 
well is in the sense of where that alternate relationship of 
contract may lead. And if it’s in the sense of having purpose of 
going to other forms of providing insurance, I guess that 
obviously would be interesting to know and understand what 
the value of that process may be. 
 
The minister did speak on the sense of why hail insurance was 
removed from crop insurance, and he spoke in the sense of 
having direct competition against the line hail companies and 
that the interests of competing against the private sector was 
one of the reasons why they removed hail insurance from the 
crop insurance program. 
 
Is that an avenue that’s being explored right now in the sense of 
contracting on with other companies and providers of services 
as well? So we need to talk about and understand what is 
happening in that whole area of service, administrative services 
or other services that are being provided as well. 
 
We’ve seen what happens where crop insurance was related to 
the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program, that that 
whole program was cancelled. It was really the only safety net 
program that we had. And we’ve had a number of years, almost 
decades already, that we’ve been waiting for other programs to 
replace the revenue sharing insurance program which is very 
vital to, I guess, that whole agriculture economy, to have some 
stability, have a bottom line to that whole industry as well. 
 
Disaster relief program was another one that the province talked 
about an awful lot and this current government talked about an 
awful lot after the whole Crow rate was dismantled. And there 
was supposed to be dollars set aside through the 
federal-provincial sector that were going to look after these 
problems that we have when we have disasters. 
 
And we can definitely say there was a disaster last year in the 
whole farming economy. And there was . . . In the last two or 
three years, we’ve had areas of the province that have had huge 
disasters as well, and we haven’t had anything that really has 
addressed that whole area of concern and problem that we’ve 
got out there. 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

We need to design and we need to have a system and a program 
in place that is not a knee-jerk reaction, that is something that 
can be built over a period of time. There can be dollars put into 
that program, and those dollars are going to be real dollars that 
you can access in years of need when those disasters do occur 
in that respect as well. 
 
I guess as far as also having giving the privilege of adding 
additional fees to the program without not . . . with the program 
not relating to the loss of production. And that is one change 
that’s made in the amendments as well, is we’re asking to 
remove the clause for the loss of insured crops and replacing it 
with a rise from the contract of crop insurance. 
 
Well if you’re going to adjust premiums just to the fact that 
there’s a contract in place, it arbitrarily can be adjusted for a 
multitude of reasons. Normally you adjust your premiums 
according to the usage of a contract and the claims that have 
been processed through that contract, where this has a tendency 
to give you the understanding and the belief maybe that there is 
an ability with that type of a change, that you can go in there 
and make those changes and add those fees at any time that you 
wish to make that change. That doesn’t have to relate to the 
amount of usage to that contract through loss claims have gone 
over the past year in. 
 
So that’s another one that you’ve got to take with a bit of a 
grain of salt to understand on the sense of what’s the purpose of 
giving you that privilege within a contract that it’s not really 
tied to the activity of that contract over the period of time that 
it’s there as well. And I guess any time we see some signs that 
there are some changes made of this nature without having 
some relevance to the program itself and to the strength of the 
program and to building a better program for coverage over the 
years, I think we always need to ask that question of what’s 
happening there as well. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Also there’s a provision in here, and I guess it goes back to the 
relationship of establishing yields and the whole calculation and 
the methodology that’s being used and the way that calculation 
of coverages is being handled and is being proposed to be 
changed as well. I have had discussion with some of the 
producers out there that they’ve gone away from the actuary 
which the minister did allude to and speak to through estimates 
that they no longer use the actuaries to calculate coverages on 
past performance of yields. 
 
There is a new way of doing the calculation and we haven’t 
seen or heard on the way those numbers are put together right 
now and the methodology again that’s being used to do that 
calculation. And when you hear producers losing four bushels 
to the acre, which is huge coverage when you’re talking that 
type of coverage that you’re losing from your contract on just a 
system and the method that calculation is being put together, we 
need to understand that a little bit better and clearer in the sense 
of what’s happening with those crops. 
 
There’s also in that calculation, you’ve now found that . . . or 
you can see in there that your stubble coverage premiums and 
coverages are higher than your summerfallow crops. 
Summerfallow crops, normally they have a higher coverage but 

they also have a higher premium. But when you have a higher 
premium with less coverage that you’re getting off your 
summerfallow acres as well, you need to understand or we need 
to have somebody give us direction of what changes were made 
in the contractual form as well to really cause that to happen — 
that you can actually charge a premium at a higher rate than the 
coverage that you’re giving on the fact that it’s summerfallow 
and it’s not stubble. And I think we need to understand that as 
well and get some clarification of where that’s coming from 
with the changes that they’ve made. 
 
So I think there’s a number of concerns or a number of 
questions that we need to still bring forth and we need the 
minister to address those concerns and give us some 
clarification. And hopefully we can move on to create a better 
program and a more efficient program for our producers. So at 
this point I’ll adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 38 — The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With pleasure to 
speak to Bill 38, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act. 
Mr. Speaker, the whole system that this Act revolves around 
and the ability to loan money through the financial stability Act 
is a very important one. 
 
As a producer who is a member of a feeder association, has 
worked with feeder associations, and speaking to stakeholders 
in the industry, we have found that this is a very important part 
of the beef industry in Saskatchewan. The ability to finance 
cattle is always a concern, and this has been a very reliable 
source of financing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we know there’s a feeder program and a 
breeder program, and for the most part they have been very 
successfully run. As always there are some instances where 
individuals have defaulted and unfortunately that is a fact of 
life. So it’s important that some changes are made to The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act to protect the investment, to 
protect the taxpayers’ investment in this program, as we know 
that the taxpayer of the province could be liable for 25 per cent 
of the loss of a loan. 
 
So it’s important that this program continues. It’s very 
important to the future of the beef industry in Saskatchewan, 
that as we grow and develop the beef industry in Saskatchewan, 
that one of the big hurdles is financing the purchase of 
livestock. 
 
As we know many . . . There has been a number of feedlots 
formed and the community has backed these feedlots with 
financial investment. But at the end of the day, once the feedlot 
is up and ready to operate, there is a huge need for financing of 
livestock. And this goes a long ways to giving that feedlot, as 
an individual identity, the access to financing through this plan. 
And it’s an important aspect that this has taken place. 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

 

Of course we have to take into account, of course, the liability 
aspect and the protecting of the whole system. And the changes 
that have been made concerning the branding of the animals, as 
far as identification, and allowing feedlots to buy and sell from 
associate members is all very important. And we must keep in 
mind that we need to keep this financial package stable for the 
benefit of the whole province, into the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan Party Ag critic has been 
talking to the industry and will continue to do so into the future. 
And we will certainly look forward to other members who 
would like to speak on this piece of legislation because of the 
importance of it to the feeding industry in this province. 
 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 8 — The Youth 
Justice Administration Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to make comment on Bill No. 8, The 
Youth Justice Administration Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Corrections had put out a press 
release on April 1, 2003 outlining the need for this Act and also 
the government’s intention of dealing with the Act here in the 
province. 
 
One of the concerns that I have with the Act — and my main 
concern, Mr. Speaker — is in implementing this Act, we don’t 
seem to have the proper measures in the province, alternative 
measures, that we need in order to affect the Act properly. 
 
The Minister of Corrections has indicated that the province 
would look to community-based measures that would allow 
communities to basically take care of this kind of first offender 
of crime; but we see throughout our province one of the main 
omissions in the justice system and in a system to help our 
young people recover from crimes, is that we don’t have, Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t have an alcohol addictions centre for youth 
in the province. 
 
Now we had that at one time and we don’t have it now. Many, 
many of our youth, Mr. Speaker, are in trouble — of course for 
various reasons — but many of them carry with them severe 
addictions and unless we can address those kind of things, 
we’re not going to be getting too far in the number of young 
offenders declining. 
 
The number of young offenders is declining a little bit, Mr. 
Speaker, but Saskatchewan still has the highest rate of young 
offenders in custody in Canada. For every 10,000 youth in 
Saskatchewan, there are 36 young offenders in correctional 
facilities. Manitoba is the second highest with 28 out of 10,000 
in correctional facilities. Youth crime . . . Or the youth crime 
rate, rather, is a concern. As well, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
concern with the overrepresentation of Aboriginals in the youth 

correction system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the Aboriginal councils in Saskatchewan 
have been trying to implement some of their own measures to 
assist youth out of the world of crime and to have them come 
back into the community and to assist them with measures that 
will be meaningful to them. Deeper rooted problems affect 
many Aboriginal people, as well as other youth, and those 
deeper rooted problems need to be looked at. And to the credit 
of many of the Aboriginal communities in our province, they 
have a new way of addressing the troubles that youth are 
dealing with and, although they don’t always work, I believe 
they’re on the right track in looking at that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many questions that have not been 
addressed by the province. And I guess the federal government, 
I feel, is kind of pushing this on the province without the 
province being able to or having the resources at hand and in 
place right now that will assist this in being an effective Act. 
Some of the programs that need to be in place do not exist here 
in Saskatchewan. And I have mentioned one, Mr. Speaker, and 
that one that I think is really very important is a youth 
addictions treatment centre. 
 
And the other . . . The problem with this Act being 
implemented, Mr. Speaker, is communities. Communities have 
not had adequate time to prepare the resources and have not 
been able to have any assurance from the province that the 
province is going to be able to provide those resources, 
financial and human resources, to deal with troubled youth. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, programs do cost money and that is lacking in 
many communities. And as I mentioned, there isn’t an 
assurance by the province that that money is going to be 
forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears the Youth Criminal Justice Act is going 
to be tougher on youth involved in violent crime and that’s, I 
believe, a very good thing. When there are repeat offences and 
youth continue to do those offences, it’s very, I think, proper 
that that kind of violent crime and repeated crimes to prevent 
youth at risk from becoming . . . They’re trying to prevent youth 
at risk, rather, from becoming enmeshed in the justice system. 
But I think those violent crimes and repeated crimes need to be 
looked at in a different way and will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not going to go on at length with this. I 
wanted to mention one other issue that is prevalent in our 
province and it is linked to youth that are incarcerated, and it’s 
the problem of FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome). FAS awareness is 
becoming greater. 
 
Just a few weeks ago, Judge Sheila Whelan spoke at an FAS 
awareness conference held in Regina and she pointed out some 
very, very educational things that were necessary for society to 
know, and for provincial government and communities to 
know, in dealing with crimes that are committed by youth that 
have FAS. And I think we need to be sure that we look at and 
incorporate all of those, those suggestions that have come down 
from Judge Whelan, as well as from Mary Ellen Turpel-Lafond, 
to try to find a way to have meaningful rehabilitation for our 
youth. 
 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to adjourn debate on this Bill at this 
time so that we may continue to debate this very necessary Bill. 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 27 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 27 — The 
Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is one of the new pieces of legislation that just came down 
the last week or so, and is a fairly complex Bill. It deals with 
condominium property in this province, of which there is a 
growing amount, Mr. Speaker, and certainly is of benefit to 
those who have the opportunity to participate in a 
condominium. 
 
We see mainly the condominium projects, Mr. Speaker, going 
up in our urban centres where they provide good housing, Mr. 
Speaker, on a limited amount of actual dirt, you might say, a 
property size where you can have a more intense habitation than 
you would under normal residential circumstances, Mr. 
Speaker. A lot of these condominiums provide benefits to the 
individual owners or tenants that are different than the benefits 
provided by individual home ownership, Mr. Speaker — such 
as the person may not be required to deal with any of the 
outside duties or maintenance duties that would normally take 
place in an individual residence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But what this does is it makes considerable changes to an Act 
that we previously had put forward before this House in 1993. 
This is the first update on these. And there has been a number 
of issues that have arisen, problems that have shown to have 
been in place with the previous Act, Mr. Speaker. And there are 
a good many people across this province who believe that there 
was changes needed. And they have made proposals. And some 
of these proposals have found their way into this piece of 
legislation. 
 
It’s very important that the people who are condominium 
owners, who are property managers dealing with 
condominiums, have an opportunity to review this particular 
piece of legislation to determine whether or not the changes that 
are being brought forward accurately reflect the needs of people 
in condominiums. 
 
One of the main changes that are coming forward, Mr. Speaker, 
is a determination as to fees and assessments against property 
where they fit into the assessment of liens and caveats and 
mortgages on a particular piece of property. 
 
Right now if a condominium owner takes out a mortgage, let’s 
say, to purchase their condominium, obviously the financial 
institution is going to want to be the primary recipient of any 
returns from the disposal of that property up until such point in 
time as the mortgage is paid off. 
 

The proposal with this Act, Mr. Speaker, changes that 
relationship in allowing the condominium property, the entire 
corporation, to place their lien or caveat against the property in 
precedence to the financial institution. 
 
So let’s say a condominium sells for $100,000; a person gets a 
$75,000 mortgage against that particular property. And the 
condominium corporation then does some work, replaces the 
roof, does sidewalk curbing, street maintenance, and their 
parking lot, Mr. Speaker, and they have a $10,000 assessment 
placed against that condominium. That $10,000 will now, if not 
paid by the homeowner directly, by the condominium owner 
directly, will now be assessed against the value of that property. 
And that $10,000, should the property be sold, will take 
precedence over the mortgage. So the $10,000 would be paid 
first and then the mortgage would receive the remainder of the 
assets. 
 
And that’s not, not a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, because the rest of 
the owners of the condominium need to be protected from a 
delinquent owner as well. But what it does do is changes the 
relationship between a mortgage holder and the mortgagee, Mr. 
Speaker. It changes the relationship between a financial 
institution and the person seeking a mortgage for a 
condominium. 
 
It could come to the point, Mr. Speaker, if let’s say your . . . 
there needs to be a major, major reconstruction of your 
condominium project, as has happened in British Columbia, 
where the assessed fees and costs assigned to that individual 
unit raises up the debt on that particular property over and 
above its 100 per cent level, Mr. Speaker. So let’s say on the 
$100,000 you now have a total debt of $125,000. 
 
The financial institution is going to come back to that owner 
and say, we need more security. Either pay down your 
mortgage so that the debt is down to, let’s say, a 75 per cent 
level again — so in that case you’d have to pay $50,000 
immediately — or provide us with additional securities, 
whatever those may be, which might include a second mortgage 
as well if you had equity built up in your condominium which 
you may not do in some cases. 
 
So it’s going to change the relationship between the financial 
institutions and people who are seeking mortgages. It also 
provides, though, protection to all of the other condominium 
units in the particular unit that anyone may have. So there are 
certainly benefit there. 
 
But I think we need to learn and understand how that 
relationship is going to change and how the banks are going to 
. . . banks and other financial institutions, people who supply 
mortgages are going to look at these types of arrangements 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it may have an impact on how quickly future condominium 
developments take place because the banks are not going to be 
able to project ahead what those costs may be in a lot of cases. 
In some cases, they may be able to. But in a lot of cases, there 
are future costs that the banks are going to have to take into 
consideration. What they may do instead of providing someone 
with, say, 75 or 80 per cent of the finances necessary to 
purchase a condo may reduce that down to, say, 60 to 70 per 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

 

cent, so that that leaves a little more gap in there in case 
additional costs come forward and are charged against those 
unit holders. 
 
There are a number of other things as well, Mr. Speaker, when 
determining how assessment is done on condominiums, 
whether it’s done on the entire project and then distributed back 
on a unit factor basis determined perhaps by the number of 
bedrooms versus one unit versus another. There is a factor built 
in to the current Act that explains how this is determined. Or the 
corporation may have one unit is one unit factor for everyone, 
no matter what the condominium itself is like. 
 
This Act is changing that now so that it reflects more the 
individual value of the units rather than taking a unit factor as 
the basis for assessment. And so, two units side by side with the 
same floor plan, the same floor space may be assessed 
differently because of the way that the individual owner is 
dealing with their own property. You know, you can look at 
gold taps for your bathrooms, like Saddam Hussein had, versus 
pewter or cast metal, Mr. Speaker, and they have a different 
value. And that will be reflected then in the value of the unit. 
That’ll be reflected in the value of the assessment for tax 
purposes. That is another change as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
wasn’t in place before and is going to be a change, not 
necessarily better or worse, but certainly a change, Mr. Speaker, 
in how people will be viewing condominiums. 
 
And there are a good number of other areas, Mr. Speaker, that 
this Act is making changes. It deals with the areas of interest 
rates and how they can be charged on arrears and on 
assessments provided by the corporation to the individual unit 
owners. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think there needs to be a little more time 
taken here to get a response back from the condominium 
associations, from the people who deal with providing financial 
support for condominiums such as the financial institutions. So 
at this time I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 26 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into the debate under adjourned 
debates on Bill No. 26, The Income Tax Act . . . Amendment 
Act of 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as indicated by the minister when this Bill was 
introduced, we see the Bill, the revision to The Income Tax Act 
occurring each and every year. And as I’ve indicated before, as 
official opposition and I’m sure as people in Saskatchewan, 
we’re very pleased to see continued revisions to The Income 
Tax Act. 
 
I recall in 1999 during the election campaign that the official 
opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, had indicated that there 

was a need for income tax changes to become more competitive 
with the Western provinces, especially our neighbour to the 
west. 
 
And the decoupling of taxation took place where the taxes now 
are calculated not . . . The provincial tax, I might add, is not 
calculated on tax paid federally, but is now calculated on 
income. And those revisions were implemented over a period of 
time since 1999, and today we’re seeing the final revisions for 
2003 under The Income Tax Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the 11 per cent rate, and the 13 per cent 
middle rate, and the 15 per cent upper rate are a good move, and 
we’re moving in the right direction. However, Mr. Speaker, 
when we compare to a flat rate of 10 per cent in Alberta — that 
is 10 per cent across the board — we note that there have been 
examples of residents of Saskatchewan who have determined 
that they would like to sell an asset or to retire from a particular 
job, and in the end have purchased a residence in Alberta prior 
to year-end, prior to the calendar year-end, so that they would 
be able to be taxed as an Albertan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very simple calculation. If you look at 
your upper bracket and are looking at a sizeable return due to 
sale of an asset and you’re looking at not just a couple of 
hundred thousand dollars but a million or so dollars of asset, 
you can see the difference in income tax that you would pay if 
you were taxed at a 15 per cent rate in Saskatchewan or a 10 per 
cent in Alberta. 
 
And that is still of great concern I think to . . . should be of great 
concern to this government, and it is to us because we need to 
ensure that this province continues to grow. And as a result, 
there will have to be some additional changes made to The 
Income Tax Act over the years to become more competitive. 
 
One of the other concerns, Mr. Speaker, has been raised by 
many individuals. At the lower income tax area where we see 
that the exemption level in Saskatchewan is now at $8,000 
personal exemption for an adult, for an individual, but, Mr. 
Speaker, that still means that even someone at the minimum 
wage earning level who works, you know, a full eight hours a 
day at one or two minimum-wage-paying jobs, they’re still 
going to be taxed. They will still be paying income tax in 
Saskatchewan based on the fact that we only have an $8,000 
exemption. 
 
Now I know the minister has included indexing of those 
exemptions and they’ll grow. But in Alberta, already today, that 
number is well over $13,000 as far as a personal exemption. So 
when you look at an example of two individuals, two adults that 
are looking at a family income, both in Saskatchewan, each is 
paying tax above an $8,000 exemption. In Saskatchewan, that 
combined income of $26,000 plus would not be taxable. 
 
So we’re slipping further and further behind in the exemption 
levels. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, we have people that are 
looking pretty seriously at the rate of return on a job when they 
look at the income tax — not only the income tax rates as to 
where they would fall based on their income levels, whether 
they’ll be in the lower income bracket with an 11 per cent rate 
or middle income bracket at 13 per cent or an upper bracket at 
15 per cent. They do compare those things to the 10 per cent 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

rate in Alberta. They also look at the exemption level in Alberta 
of over $13,000, and here in Saskatchewan at $8,000. So those 
concerns are there. 
 
I know that the Bill tries to correct, I believe, a weakness, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. It did not clarify well enough the abilities for 
graduating students to obtain the post-secondary tax credit. And 
now the Bill has introduced sections that will clarify that and 
indeed, I believe, it was the intention of government all along 
that one person would be eligible for one tax credit. 
 
And the amendments that have been proposed under this Bill, 
Bill No. 26, clarify that so that at no time will there be, I 
believe, a misunderstanding that someone might be eligible for 
more than one tax credit. 
 
So I think those are positive steps, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And we’re taking a look at some of the other sections that have 
been proposed in the Act. I note that the comments made by the 
minister on May 12 at the introduction, he indicated that there 
was a need to address the small-business tax. Well I want to 
make it clear to the people of Saskatchewan as we look at this 
Bill, that these changes to the small-business tax rate are not for 
this current year — not for the year 2003. There has been some 
misunderstanding about the current rate and when the new, 
reduced rates would come into effect. 
 
The rate for small business in Saskatchewan — the 
small-business tax rate — is 6 per cent. It is 6 per cent in this 
year in its entire year. What has been proposed by the 
government is that effective January 1 of 2004, we will see that 
rate of 6 per cent reduced to 5.5 and then to a subsequent rate of 
5 per cent in the year 2005. So this is a long-term strategy to 
reduce the rate a very small amount. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the Saskatchewan Party opposition has made 
it very clear that we believe Saskatchewan has to have a distinct 
advantage over other provinces. And we’ve looked at how to 
grow this province and one of the things that we need to do . . . 
Because we recognize, people recognize that small business is 
the largest employer. It accounts for about 80 per cent of the 
jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, like it does all across 
Canada. Small businesses are the engines that drive this 
economy and what we need to do is ensure that Saskatchewan 
has an advantage. 
 
And our plan, Mr. Deputy Chair, is that that 6 per cent tax rate 
be reduced to zero. We need to have a clear advantage in this 
province to tell people who are currently in Saskatchewan and 
want to develop a small business or people who have moved 
from Saskatchewan, to say that Saskatchewan will have an 
advantage. And we need to reduce that to zero, not just to 5 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, there are a number of concerns of 
clarification that we require. Those will be able to be dealt with 
in Committee of the Whole when we have an opportunity to 
take each of the clauses separately and to move forward. So, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s no need to continue with debate in 
adjourned debates. We will allow the Bill to move forward to 

Committee of the Whole where we will have an opportunity to 
clarify some of the concerns raised by people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 21 — The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2003 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill No. 21, the superannuation 
amendment Act, is a very short Bill because it basically clarifies 
a couple of items. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to speak with the 
president of the Saskatchewan Government Superannuates 
Association to ask for any idea as to, from that association, as to 
whether or not, you know, the Bill addresses some of their 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, no question the need to ensure the 
superannuate the ability to reregister a new spouse — and I 
guess the definition there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, means that 
either through death of the superannuate’s spouse or through a 
marriage breakup, there is a new spouse that enters into the 
picture — what can the superannuate do to be able to . . . or 
enable them to be able to make the payments directly to a new 
spouse? 
 
And this section of the Act clarifies that and allows that person 
then to be registered through a registry system as the person 
now designate to reach . . . to receive the spouse’s allowance. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the concerns of course of many 
pensioners in Saskatchewan who belong to one of the plans that 
were indicated in this Bill, those defined benefit plans as you 
can see that the minister has made reference to . . . Sorry, not 
defined benefits. Defined pension benefits, I guess, is the 
correct way to look at it. There are over 7,900 pensioners that 
are going to be affected by this Act as of December 31, 2002, so 
that may have changed because this plan of course covers 
people that have been retired for a considerable length of time. 
 
One of the concerns expressed by the members of the 
Saskatchewan Government Superannuates Association is that 
the . . . many of the plans are not indexed. And as a result of the 
calculation of a pension 20 or 25 years ago, it’s a small amount 
of money. So because of not having indexing as part of their 
benefits, we’ve seen the eroding of the purchasing power of 
those pensioners. 
 
And one of the examples that was given is that if a spouse’s 
allowance, if a pension is calculated at $500, 60 per cent of that 
is only $300. And in many instances when a spouse is left after 
a superannuate passes away, the costs are still there. If it’s a 
rental of a property, if it’s an ownership, vehicle payments are 
still there, or the upkeep of a vehicle, the insurance — those 
kinds of costs are still there. So to fall from 100 per cent of a 
small amount of pension to suddenly 60 per cent puts extreme 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

 

difficulties . . . has placed spouses in extreme difficulties. 
 
And the lobby by many pensioners is, of course, is that that 60 
per cent is something that needs to be addressed. This Bill does 
not look at that . . . of those values, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
understand that. But one of the concerns raised by the 
pensioners is that there has to be a complete look at the 
pensions that are being paid to various superannuates of the 
various pension plans and to address the concerns being raised 
that in fact those calculations, because they did not have 
indexing, have fallen further and further behind. And there’s a 
need to address that. So the Minister of Finance I’m sure is 
being lobbied on a regular basis to look at those concerns, to 
address those concerns in the future. 
 
But the Act itself, no one has raised any concern about the 
actual amendments that have been proposed. They seem to be in 
order to address the concern to define spouse and define the 
replacement of a spouse by a child or children, as in the case if 
there are more than one child who is still under the age of 18. 
Those things are all clarified, and we can move this Bill on to 
committee, and clarify some of the technical concerns during 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 
Subvote (PS01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Today with me is Wynne Young, the Chair of the Public 
Service Commission. Diagonally across here, Rick McKillop, 
executive director, employee relations. Sitting beside Rick, 
Clare Isman, executive director of human resource 
development. And beside Wynne, Lynn Jacobson, director of 
corporate services. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
officials and thank you, Madam Minister, for providing us this 
opportunity today to delve into some of the questions 
surrounding the Public Service Commission. 
 
I begin with just a very basic first question of how many 
employees does the Public Service Commission have under it, 
full time and part time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much for that question. 
The permanent employees are 86, and there’s a variety of part 
time, casual, and labour service, bringing the full total to 113. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would have a 
question just with regards to how many of these employees are 
directly involved with classification, and how many 
classifications there are within the government and the public 

sector as a whole. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s an interesting answer to this 
question. Yes, within the public service itself there’s four staff 
that work on development of class plans and 10 who work on 
classification, reclassification. And government wide, at the 
management level, there’s 13 different classifications, and in 
scope there’s 14 different classifications. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would you, 
just for the rookies on the block, be kind enough to explain the 
difference between the in-scope and out-of-scope 
classifications? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Fifteen per cent would be managers or 
out of scope and 85 per cent would be considered employees or 
in scope. And that is as defined under The Trade Union Act 
with the definition of an employee, interpreting how people fall 
into those two different categories. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With regards 
to the 13 classifications that you mentioned that the government 
has, how long has this system been in place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I just wanted to be clear. In 1985 the 
out-of-scope plan was established. In 1998 the in-scope plan 
that we currently have was established. And in 2002, the CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) plan was established. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you for that answer, Madam 
Minister. With regards to the various classifications, the 13 of 
them, what is the demarcation for each of them? How are they 
measured and how are they measured specifically relative to 
other public service commissions in other provincial 
governments? And I’ll just let you go from there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In the junior manager area, that would 
be the classifications 1 to 5; in the manager’s category, that 
would be 6 and 7; directors, 8 and 9; executive directors, 10 and 
11; and assistant deputy ministers, 12A and 12B. 
 
The way that those are determined is really through four 
factors: skill, effort, responsibility, and working conditions. 
And under pay equity plans like the kind that applies to this 
government that would be a very common way of approaching 
it. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you for that answer. With regards to 
these classifications, both in the four part and how they’re 
measured and in the demarcation of them 1 through 5 and so on, 
how does this compare with what our federal counterparts 
would do with their bureaucracy? How many classifications 
would they have? And what would their measurement and do 
you . . . Further to that, would you have a liaison that, you 
know, checks with the way that it’s being done at the federal 
level? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don’t have the details of the federal 
plan here but we do know that the four criteria that I mentioned 
just a minute ago are basically the same ones used because the 
federal government went through pay equity as well and that is 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

a common way of approaching it. If you are interested in more 
detail on their plan we can get it for you. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Maybe the minister — thank you — could 
comment for me. In the development of the Saskatchewan plan, 
did you follow the federal government’s model or did you lead 
and it’s created in-house here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — These criteria again, I’ll just affirm, are 
comparable to other governments. And certainly the principles 
that underline all these other pay equity plans would have been 
applied to our process, but we did design our own and some of 
the differences between what Saskatchewan did and other 
places is we did it by policy, not by legislation. 
 
We negotiated along the way with the union representatives of 
the employees and, as well, we did a reclassification at the same 
time that we did the pay equity. So we didn’t just take pay 
equity criteria and apply them to outdated classifications. We 
also re-evaluated each job in the process. And as well, the 
process was gender neutral, so there was men as well as women 
whose pay rates were adjusted during the process because of 
reclassification being involved. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With regards 
to the 10 employees that work with the classification and 
reclassification, not in setting the classifications but in dealing 
with actual members of the civil service, how many cases a year 
would they look at, just in a general number? And what kind of 
workload per individual would those employees be facing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The division completed in the last . . . 
this’d be the last year — 2,083 classification reviews, 338 
classification appeals, and 3 reclassification challenges. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The next 
question I would have would be with regards to how many 
persons at the Public Service Commission are employed in 
recruitment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Between Saskatoon and Regina, there 
would be 17. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And from that, 
how many employees were hired last year through the system 
as a whole? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The ones that the Public Service would 
be involved in would be the permanent appointments; the 
non-permanent are done at a different level. But in the 
permanent appointments, there’s 895. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Madam Minister, for the long term, it’s my 
understanding that within the broader scope of the public . . . of 
the civil service in Saskatchewan, we have a demographic 
bubble that’s coming up, and I was wondering if you could 
outline what the long-term recruitment strategies that are being 
employed are to meet this challenge. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — A succession management framework 
is in place for government. And at the Public Service 
Commission level, they’re conducting an in-depth analysis of 
supply and demand for the senior management positions across 

executive government, identifying government-wide senior 
management succession needs, and developing 
recommendations wherever there is at-risk positions, in the 
sense of who is going to be coming forward to fill those. 
 
But at the department level, because there are human resource 
capacities at the department level as well, they’re initiating 
succession management activities to address succession needs 
for positions other than management, and as well a marketing 
strategy has been developed to fill those positions as well. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Have there 
been any studies done just specifically with regard to the 
demographic bubble, and you just outlined some of them? And 
I was wondering if there is a dollar figure put on meeting this 
challenge? How much money has been spent with regards to 
being able to meet the recruitment challenges and the retention 
challenges that we’re going to be facing over the next 10 or 15 
years? And with regards to the senior management, just if you 
could clarify for me again, that’s for positions classified as 8 
through 9, up to 12B? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, generally the cost of the work is 
being done within the ongoing resources of the different areas. 
There was a small amount of 30,000 on some consulting that 
occurred on the marketing strategy. And there would be some 
costs that are tied up in, if you want to call it modernization of 
the system, to do with being able to receive applications 
on-line, to be able to respond back on-line, to be able to update 
files on-line, that kind of thing. 
 
Because we found that more and more of the people who were 
wanting to access this type of information from the commission 
were wanting to access it on-line. So there has been, over the 
last couple of years, a transition from using paper-based 
bulletins to providing much more of the interaction on-line. 
And we are totally automating this whole system throughout 
government and within about a year or two it should be, the 
work should be pretty much completed. But it’s a fair 
substantial amount of work to get all of the personnel areas 
on-line. But that’s certainly our goal. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you 
explain for the Assembly, please, what liaison there’s been with 
the federal government and their initiatives to meet the same 
challenge, and how our provincial government is either 
mirroring, copying, or working with them, or are we out on our 
own? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Just to let you know that with the 
federal government, and in fact all the governments across 
Canada, a young public-servants youth network has been 
established so that I guess that people in that age group will 
have . . . start to build up the new network that will carry 
forward people who have chosen public service as a career and 
are working in those kinds of areas in governments right across 
Canada and with the federal government. 
 
The federal government does have a career assistance program 
which moves people around so that, on a fast-track basis, they 
get exposure to a number of different areas and are able to 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

 

enhance their management and . . . level skills that way. 
 
Any studies that different governments do are freely shared. 
Certainly the Chairs of the various public service commissions, 
or whatever particular structure each government has, meet 
regularly to share that information. They share reports. So I 
think people just work quite collaboratively in this whole area. 
 
And provincially we also have one special initiative which is 
the Aboriginal initiative which helps to try to get more people at 
the management level, to have a more representative workforce. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to 
return now to . . . with regards to the employees of the Public 
Service Commission. I’ve accounted directly, thanks to your 
answers, for 23 of the 86 employees — those in classification, 
re-classification, and employment and recruitment. 
 
I was wondering if you could go through the other job outlines 
which exist there, and spell them out as they may be? Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I was not able to break down for you 
the permanent versus the labour service, casual and part time, 
but for the total of 116 . . . And I think the previous figure I 
gave you is 113 employees, but there’s three vacancies so it’s 
116. And in administration there would be 16.5. In human 
resource information services — which is a lot of the 
management of information and information technology — 
there’s 18.5. In employee relations — and that of course is the 
labour relations, classifications, anything to do with dealing 
with a grievance, things like that — there would be 19. In the 
human resource development area — and that would be 
classification, organizational development, training and 
development, the EAP, the employee assistance program — 
there’s 46.4 there. 
 
And then the Aboriginal internship and management 
development program, although these employees don’t work 
specifically on Public Service Commission work, they’re 
accounted for in this budget and that’s 16.5 people. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With regards 
to the . . . it’s the human resource at 46.5 persons, could you 
give me an outline of just what the responsibilities of that aspect 
of the Public Service Commission are, what duties they would 
have, and what their mission statement would be? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The objective of that area is to provide 
staffing standards and means to evaluate applications to 
facilitate recruitment and selection of public service employees, 
to apply standard classification criteria to jobs in the public 
service, to provide human resource planning in organizational 
development services, to provide employee and family 
assistance counselling, workplace diversity programs, and 
leadership in the transition of human resource management 
functions across the public service. And then, that’s their 
objectives. 
 
And in terms of actual program delivery, the program provides 
recruitment and selection services to government, including the 
development of criteria against which candidates will be 
evaluated. The program evaluates and classifies public service 

jobs against established criteria. It provides leadership and 
counselling services to government employees and their 
families in support of corporate wellness. The program 
coordinates a government-wide workplace diversity program to 
enhance diversity within the public service. 
 
Human resource planning and organizational development 
services are provided to support government strategic plans. 
Leadership and support is provided to departments throughout 
the transition of human resource management functions across 
the public service. So it’s quite a wide range of activities in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Just with 
regards to the answer that you’ve provided, and this would be 
the subsection of the Public Service Commission that would 
have been directly responsible last year for the 895 hirings, 
which you provided before, and the 2,083 reclassification and 
the 883 appeals and the 3 reclassification appeals. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That would be correct. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With regards 
to that, then could you tell me how the ratio for the number of 
cases relative to the number of employees stacks up relative to 
other public service commissions provincially in the country, 
and also at the federal level? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Strange you should ask that question 
because we asked the same question last year ourselves and 
found out that we are fairly lean in terms of the number of 
people that we have compared to other jurisdictions doing these 
kinds of work. 
 
We don’t actually have the study with us, but we did compare 
very favourably to other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Just from 
some quick figuring, I get here on an average, I see that we 
have a ratio of one employee in this section to 72 cases. And I 
would just wonder, relative to the classification structure that 
you outlined before — 1 through 5, all the way up to you know 
12A and 12B — for covering this kind of caseload in this 
human resource aspect of this, where would the majority of 
those employees fall relative to that classification system? 
 
Would that be 6 or 7, 8 through 9? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, if we could just get a 
clarification on that question. Were you asking about the 
number of classifications compared to the number of people 
who do classification? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, if 
you could maybe just repeat your question. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — My question is . . . relates to . . . we have 46 
and a half employees in that human resource department. And I 
want to know what their, as employees, classification falls 
under, on an average, you know. Or you know, you’ve got 46 
people here. Are most of them classified as 10 or 11, or 8 or 9? 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Out of that 46, about 12 would be 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

professional staff and they would be at the 4, 5 level and out of 
scope. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. Sorry, if I could just ask for 
some further clarification. The remainder then would be . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The remainder are in scope and would 
be in the 5 to 9 range. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. With regards to the 
classification from 5 to 9 for the in-scope employees, they’re 
evaluated relative to — you said there’s four criteria — skill, 
effort, responsibility, and work conditions. Could you break 
down for me how that equates into actual tasks that need to be 
performed on an ongoing day-to-day or week-by-week basis? 
 
(16:15) 
 
And the reason that I’m putting this question forth, Madam 
Minister, is just from the information that you’ve provided to us 
today, it seems to me that we have a ratio of . . . For every 
employee hired in this human resource department, they have 
an average around 72 tasks to perform for the year with regards 
to classification, the appeals, and the hirings. And I just 
wondered if you can — relative to those skill, effort, 
responsibility, and work conditions — determine if . . . or just 
outline why the status quo is acceptable. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, we’ll try to get this a little more 
focused here. We’ve got 12 who are in staffing specifically; 10 
who are in the classification area; 3 in the employee assistance; 
5 in the organizational development, learning, and planning; 3 
in the diversity and the Aboriginal management internship 
program. 
 
And of those 12 that are in staffing, there would be . . . they’d 
be involved in the 900 staffing actions that occur in a year. Of 
the 10 in classification, they would be involved in the over 
2,000 classification exercises that go on in the year. So just as 
far as ratios go, I think that would change the view of the ratios. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Yes, it does. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
Thank you for that clarification. 
 
I would have a very generic question, so there won’t be a 
detailed digging this time, just about the relationship of the 
Public Service Commission relative to the other departments. 
And if you could outline it in the broadest context on how, 
when individuals enter the civil service, how they are hired, and 
then from that what the relationship on an ongoing basis is with 
the Public Service Commission if they’re in the department of, 
say, Justice just as an example. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Everybody sort of has their share of 
work at different levels of the process. But the Public Service 
Commission writ large is the employer’s representative in the 
whole process of hiring, labour relations, policy, procedure. All 
permanent hiring for the government again . . . and an earlier 
question I differentiated between permanent and 
non-permanent. And one of the main roles of the Public Service 
Commission is to maintain the independence of the Public 
Service Commission. 
 

That’s why there’s a board of commissioners who are 
responsible for policy within the Public Service Commission in 
terms of independence of hiring, the principles on which hiring 
is based, and to ensure a professional civil service, and then to 
administer all the various things that are agreed to in the 
collective bargaining agreement — you know, the grievance 
process, the assistance programs, things that are system-wide. 
 
Individual managers are more responsible for making sure the 
jobs within their area are classified at the right level, that they 
get the right kind of people to do them in consultation with the 
Public Service Commission and to administer the day-to-day 
management, supervision within the workplace, to do things 
like the training plans. The Public Service Commission would 
be at a consultative and advisory level. The individual 
departments would look at what their training needs were for 
their individual employees. The Public Service Commission 
would be setting policy, for example, on diversity. At the 
departmental level they would be looking at how they could 
achieve their contribution to a representative workforce in the 
government. 
 
So again, the Public Service Commission has the overarching 
responsibility but modern management theory has it that 
well-paid managers have a fair degree of both responsibility and 
accountability in administering at the departmental level. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you for that overview, Madam 
Minister. I’d like to turn now . . . Just with regards to what 
you’ve said as acting as an umbrella organization and from the 
outline of what you said, the Public Service Commission does 
retain the responsibility of workplace environment for 
employees. 
 
And I’d like to turn now with regards to the sexual harassment 
policies of the Public Service Commission. And my first 
question regarding this is: when did the zero policy for sexual 
harassment within our public service come into existence? And 
could we have a definition of what that zero tolerance meant 
initially when it first came into existence and what it meant up 
to the end of the last fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well we’ve got the whole history for 
you here. In ’82 was the first time this appeared in the collective 
agreement and that would have been negotiated then with the 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union) and it applied only within the framework of the 
employees covered by SGEU. 
 
In 1987, it became part of government-wide policy to deal with 
harassment, but in ’93 . . . sexual harassment specifically in ’87. 
 
In ’93 the harassment policy changed to include sexual, racial, 
harassment of disabled. And so there was an expanded 
definition and that was included in changes to the occupational 
health and safety code which then took it to all workplaces, not 
merely government. 
 
And then in 2000, within government again, there was . . . 
Within the occupational health and safety code, it was expanded 
even further to be places where people would identify, I think it 
would be fair to say, what they believed to be the harassment 
that they were experiencing, and was made consistent with the 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code on the basis of race, creed, 
religion, colour, sex, sexual orientation, family status, marital 
status, disability, age, nationality, ancestry, place of origin, or 
receipt of public assistance. 
 
So it’s been a gradual process of broadening what that means. 
And under the previously existing policy, I’ll read you the 
definition: 
 

Harassment in the workplace will not be tolerated. The 
abuse of one’s authority or position to intimidate, coerce or 
harass is forbidden. Harassment constitutes a disciplinary 
infraction that shall be dealt with through appropriate 
measures. 
 
(And) this policy does not limit or constrain the employer’s 
right to manage the workplace. For example, work 
assignments, operational reviews, performance reviews, 
coaching, work evaluation and disciplinary measures taken 
by a manager or supervisor, in good faith for valid reasons, 
do not constitute harassment in the workplace. These 
supervisory and management actions must remain 
respectful of the individual. This policy will not, under any 
circumstances, be used to impede the supervisory 
relationship, nor is it intended to inhibit normal social 
interaction in the workplace. 

 
So as you can see there’s quite a bit of scope for interpretation 
in there but yet it gives some pretty clear direction as well. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Madam Minister, if you could possibly 
clarify — thank you for that quote — was the name of that 
outline zero tolerance, because I didn’t hear that terminology 
within what you just quoted to me, or else I missed it and I’d 
like clarification. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think where the zero tolerance notion 
came from was more from the justice system when there was a 
provision put in that when there was cases of domestic abuse 
and violence, that whether or not the person who was the victim 
in the particular situation desired it, the police would still take 
action on an instance, in fact were required to take action. 
 
And so this phrase, although commonly used, was not actually 
in the policy itself. And so one of the changes that was made 
was to make it clear that the intent as reflected in things like the 
changes to the justice Act and certainly in people’s view being 
the intent of why you would have a policy like this, those 
specific words were not embedded in the policy. So one of the 
changes that occurred recently was to specifically embed those 
words in the policy. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Madam Minister, it was my understanding 
when we sat in question period here a month or so ago that it 
was the government’s position that zero tolerance was the 
policy for the government of the day on sexual harassment. 
 
I would ask you if you could outline the changes that have been 
made so that, as you’ve said now, this doesn’t appear that this 
was the case, semantically anyways. And I’d like you to take 
the opportunity to outline what the changes have been so that 
this terminology is clear first and foremost to the Assembly. 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it’s best reflected in point 1 of 
the summary of the recommendations of the review team. And 
the new paragraph that will be in a prominent place within the 
policy document and all relevant literature is, and I quote: 
 

The government has a zero tolerance policy towards 
harassment in the workplace. No reported incident of 
harassment will go unaddressed. Allegations of harassment 
will be taken most seriously, and if substantiated, will be 
addressed through appropriate corrective action which 
reinforces the policy and ensures the harassment does not 
continue. 

 
And I would argue that that is the spirit of the original 
document but not stated in such plain language. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I 
commend you for that clarification. 
 
I would have some questions now with regards to the Public 
Service Commission and their taking action to prevent sexual 
harassment. I have a document here which is just a publication 
from the Public Service Commission. And I would ask just, first 
and foremost, how many general awareness workshops did the 
Public Service Commission facilitate or initiate in the last fiscal 
year, and if the minister wouldn’t mind, for the fiscal year prior 
to that as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I think we’ve got a good start 
here, although I would not be able to give you workshops 
because the Public Service Commission themselves do not 
actually run these workshops. They do have a Web site that 
posts the policy. 
 
Employees are informed of the policy through the occupational 
health and safety committees because that’s a responsibility of 
the occupational health and safety committees. And 
departments are responsible for the actual implementation. 
 
And in the policy there is a section that directs people where to 
go for information or help. It says: to your supervisor, your 
human resource branch, a member of your occupational health 
and safety committee, a local union official, SGEU if you’re a 
member, CUPE if you’re a member, the Human Rights 
Commission, the employee and family assistance program, the 
occupational health and safety division of the Department of 
Labour, the police. 
 
And so it does direct people to a number of places they can go 
if they believe that either they are experiencing this or 
somebody else is experiencing this and they wish to report it. 
But it would be done again through the occupational health and 
safety committees and departments. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Madam Minister, I’ll ask again, just with 
regards to the total number of employees that would be 
protected by the Public Service Commission in all departments, 
total number of civil servants that we have, could you give me a 
round number, even to the thousand, how many that is, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Ten thousand would be the sort of 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 2003 

 

ongoing and 12,000 when there’s peaks of employment. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, the dissemination of this information — what has 
been looked at so that with regards to the workshops that are 
put on, that we know that employees and employers have an 
understanding of this issue — what was the dollar figure 
associated with it? 
 
And further to that, what has been the initiative of the Public 
Service Commission to look at what the numbers for 
harassment cases are relative to other institutions of similar 
sizes? In Saskatchewan, I would say for example the University 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess I’ll answer this in two parts. 
One is that although I don’t have interjurisdictional 
comparisons, I do know that the total number of complaints 
dealt with in the last year were 11; and with an employee body 
of that size, that would not seem to be an extraordinary number. 
 
The second thing I would say is that at the time The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act occurred the changes, there 
was a rollout of workshops, but we don’t have those figures 
because that was ’93 and we don’t . . . We, I presume, could 
track back and find it but there was a whole rollout of 
workshops. What we’re hoping to get to in the process we’ve 
committed to, following the work that was done recently, is to 
find a way to again bring up the awareness level. 
 
But my own view — and I am speaking of my own view, but 
certainly we’ve discussed this — that as we move into our 
automated system, we should also be able to have some on-line 
opportunities for employees to go through a process, answer 
questions, and thereby verify that they’ve completed a section 
of awareness or training. 
 
And that would then be automatically recorded so that we 
would know who had actually gone through the required 
awareness, at least of the existence of the policy. If not an 
in-depth understanding of all the possible ways one might look 
at the issue, there would at least be that understanding that there 
are rules and that they have to be followed. 
 
And I do believe that an automated system gives you much 
greater capacity to do this than a paper-based system which 
would require hours of management to know who had done 
what. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. Chair. I’m 
glad and I have — to see that you are addressing this serious 
issue — I have no doubt that on a personal level you take this 
with the utmost seriousness. But I do have grave concerns with 
the way that the government has been handling this. 
 
Over the last nine years, there have been only eight confirmed 
cases of sexual harassment, and this is provided by the 
information given from written questions which I put in the 
House earlier this year. That is 1 per cent of 1 per cent of the 
employee base, just from the figures that you have given me. 
 
Even by your own admission, last year there were 11 supposed 
cases out of 10,000. And from the answer that I have from the 

written questions, there was one was confirmed. 
 
It begs the question, and . . . that there is an inadequacy here. 
When we have stats coming from the federal government 
stating specifically that up to one out of four women in society 
are sexually harassed at some place — and often this occurs at 
work — that there is a huge discrepancy between the numbers 
your department is providing today and possibly the reality 
which exists in the workplace. 
 
I hope that it is . . . I hope that it is addressed in the most serious 
of natures. And I would ask what fiscal commitments are being 
put forth to address this with, and in the terms of studying this 
relative to other institutions of similar sizes, and what results 
base is expected from the implementation of the 
recommendations from the new report? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think we’ve got a bit of an apples and 
oranges situation going on here. The numbers that we give you 
are formal complaints, so that means that all attempts at 
resolution have failed, whereas the federal numbers are a matter 
of an employee survey. So it’s . . . theirs is an opinion-based 
survey whereas ours is a matter of a complaint-based record 
keeping. And that’s very different. 
 
There may well have been many more instances that are 
revolved . . . or that are resolved through a managed discussion 
between the two parties — a mediation — and those do not 
reach the level of a formal complaint, therefore aren’t reflected 
in those numbers. So I think what you’ve got is two different 
kinds of numbers. 
 
And in terms of the resources to pay for this, again it is 
management’s responsibility as part of their managerial duties 
to do that. It’s what they’re compensated for. And in some 
workplaces, through their occupational health and safety 
committees, this information is posted on the bulletin boards. 
It’s quite available, it’s very visible, so there’s not a necessity to 
spend a ton of money essentially to convey this information. 
 
It’s part of things like WHMIS (workplace hazardous materials 
information system), the occupational health and safety things 
you have to be careful about, protection from chemicals and 
cleaning products and workplace hazards, and this is another 
workplace hazard. So there aren’t totally separate and distinct 
programs for every single thing that can happen to you in the 
workplace, but it is a clearly identified part of a larger body of 
policy. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Madam Minister, I thank you for that 
answer but I would again ask what are going to be the 
measurements of criteria for this? I asked the following written 
questions with regards to the 2001-2002 fiscal year of how 
many sexual harassment prevention program public education 
workshops were conducted within the Department of 
Environment, and there were three Respectful Workplace 
seminars conducted. 
 
But we know from what’s come out in the news this year, there 
were six female employees at one of these . . . in this particular 
department that had suffered sexual harassment for a number of 
years. So the question is going to be again, what are going to 
the criteria for measuring the success of this? 



May 21, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

 

And secondly, when you said there were a number of 
resolutions probably which occurred which never get calculated 
into the figures that you’ve put forth, what is being suggested to 
start to track these so that we really have an understanding of 
this issue in the workplace? It’s a two-part question, and . . . 
thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, thanks for the question. In the 
report, one of the things that was an outcome of this report was 
directing that departments include the initiative as part of their 
annual human resource plans, and once being formally included 
in the human resource plans they then would be accountable for 
measurements and reporting. And so the requirement for it to be 
included formally in the human resource plans will then create 
an outcome of measurement and reporting. 
 
(16:45) 
 
But we do take your comment very seriously and helpfully, that 
we should look at whether we should find a better way to 
capture the level of incidence even if it’s not at the level of a 
formal complaint. So I’ll thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I do have a 
number of concerns even with regards to the document which I 
was able to pick up at the Public Service Commission. 
 
The document is entitled, Taking Action to Prevent Sexual 
Harassment. It has a . . . and it’s part of a sexual harassment 
prevention program. It has amongst it the outline of five 
different categories: a general awareness workshop, a 
manager/supervisor workshop, and a train-the-facilitator 
workshop, along with consultation and public education. 
 
What I am very concerned about is that, although this is 
published, and relative to the answers I’ve got back from 
written questions, there’s no way to track . . . or there hasn’t 
been sufficient tracking on whether these have ever been done. 
And what this . . . causes me great concern is when we have a 
few months ago very public statements that this government is 
in a position that they believe in a zero tolerance policy, yet 
from this Public Service Commission we see that there hasn’t 
been this accountability relative to their own guidelines. 
 
And I’d like to know, and feel free to embellish, just how this is 
going to be addressed. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I think the protection is in the 
requirement that it formally be included in the human resource 
plans. And I think I did share with the member just a few 
moments earlier my own view that once we are able to deliver 
more of our training on-line on an individualized way to 
employees and new employees, we will have a better way to 
track who has actually received which kinds of training and 
awareness and who has done the orientation that’s required in 
terms of being familiar with government policy. 
 
And you know, to not put too fine a point on it and to not get 
argumentative at this time of the day, the fact is is that there are 
many policies in government both related to interaction with 
co-workers and to the actual work you’re doing. And 
sometimes different things will come to the forefront depending 
on whether the issue is a public issue of a service provided or 

whether it’s a workplace issue of relationships, interactions, and 
not every issue is going to be top of mind at all moments, no 
matter what you do, because nobody can keep everything top of 
mind all the time. 
 
And so our goal is to make people as aware as possible, to have 
it in the formal human resource plans, to require then 
measurements and reporting, and as we sophisticate the systems 
to have more accountability through the technology. Because it 
would be very difficult at this point to manage this well through 
an entirely paper-based system when you’ve got people coming 
and going and changing jobs and changing levels. 
 
But I think it would be fair to say that people know that this is 
not acceptable and that what we’re going to do is work to close 
the gap between knowing it’s not acceptable and being able to 
confirm that in fact the intention is being fulfilled. And again, 
we have new tools available today that we didn’t have when 
this began. 
 
But, you know, society and the public service and society in 
general operates a little bit on the honour principle. You can’t 
make a law that covers every aspect of human behaviour and, to 
a degree, people have to adopt some social standards and 
internalize them without being policed constantly. So I would 
say that I think a little bit of honour system is required in these 
situations, as well as accountability. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Minister. As this is my 
last question for the day, I would first of all like to thank you 
for your answers this afternoon and thank your officials for 
participating in this process. 
 
My final question has to do with regards to the way that sexual 
harassment will be dealt with by the minister when we have 
confirmed cases that have gone all the way through the process. 
We had a situation this spring where a bureaucrat made a poor 
decision . . . or it’s been assured to this House that it was an 
uninfluenced decision. We’ll see if that paper trail ever pops up, 
but we’ll take that as it is. 
 
What are going to be the changes for the next time so that we 
don’t have these questions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As affirmed by myself and, I might say, 
as supported by your leader — I have the quote but not with me 
— we want to continue to have a separation between the 
professional public service role and the policy role of policy 
makers, the elected officials. And so what we’ve tried to do is 
give much stronger policy direction and much stronger supports 
at the level of the professional public service to make this 
happen. 
 
But we still do not intend to interfere directly in these 
processes. This is the job of the managers. It is the job of the 
public service, and if we have failed to provide clarity and 
direction, it’s our job to fix this. But certainly it would be my 
hope that 99.999 times out of 100, you would not have to 
overturn decisions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:54. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  Stewart.....................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1127 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1128 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................1128 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen...........................................................................................................................................................................1128 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1138 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1138 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1129 
 Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
 National Aboriginal Awareness Week 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
 Emergency Medical Services Week 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1130 
 Wilkie Student Provincial Winner of the Great Canadian Geography Challenge 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
 Volunteer Honoured With Sterling Award 
  Jones.........................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
 Conference on Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1131 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1132 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1132 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1132 
 Operation of Justice System 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1133 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1133 
 Regina Correctional Centre 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1135 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1136 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Efforts to Trace and Eradicate Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1136 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1136 
 Saskatchewan Forest Centre 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1137 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1137 
 



 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Quoting Letters 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1138 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1139 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1139 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 36 — The Agricultural Safety Net Amendment Act, 2003 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1139 
 Bill No. 37 — The Crop Insurance Amendment Act, 2003 
  Lorenz ......................................................................................................................................................................................1140 
 Bill No. 38 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2003 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1142 
 Bill No. 8 — The Youth Justice Administration Act 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1143 
 Bill No. 27 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2003 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1144 
 Bill No. 26 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2003 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1145 
 Bill No. 21 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2003 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1146 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Public Service Commission — Vote 33 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1147 
 


	Regina Correctional Centre
	Regina Correctional Centre

