















































Hansard: April 15, 2003


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 579 
 April 15, 2003 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition regarding Crop Insurance Corporation’s 
announcement that 2003 premiums charged to farmers will 
increase by up to 52 per cent and further. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse the 
2003 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from Lucky 
Lake, Demaine, and Beechy, and I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today on behalf of people from my constituency who are really 
concerned about the high cost of education tax for property 
owners. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Kelvington, Wynyard, and Quill Lake. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with pride to 
bring petitions on behalf of people concerned about the high 
cost of education property tax. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly urge the provincial government to take all 
possible action to cause a reduction in the education tax 
burden carried by Saskatchewan residents and employers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to present this on behalf of people of 
Wadena and Elfros. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
to stand again today on behalf of residents and constituents of 
the great Southwest and I present a petition in their regard, or 
on their behalf, in regard to the Crown grazing lease renewals 
and the government’s hesitation to renew those leases. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure current 
Crown land lessees maintain their first option to renew 

those leases. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers in the 
communities of Dollard, Eastend, and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
surprising lack of a hemodialysis unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to provide the people of Moose Jaw and 
district with a hemodialysis unit for their community. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed all by citizens from the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of the people of my 
constituency that are very concerned about the condition of 
Highway 47. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
47 South in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the folks of the city of Estevan as 
well as people that live at Boundary dam resort whose children 
travel on the school bus and they have grave concerns. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
another petition to present on behalf of constituents who are 
concerned with Highway 22, particularly that section between 
Junction 6 and Junction 20. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
22 in order to order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Earl Grey 
and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the Crown 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

land leases. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure Crown 
land lessees maintain their first option to renew those 
leases. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from my 
hometown of Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning a reduction in the education tax; 
 
A petition concerning the provision of a hemodialysis unit 
for the people of Moose Jaw and district; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 12, 13, 18, 19, and 27. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 26 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: will the flood at the McArthur 
River uranium mine have a negative impact on the 
revenues of the provincial government due to lost royalties 
and other factors this fiscal year; if so, what will be the 
impact in terms of dollars and in terms of projected 
provincial economic growth in the current year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, today I am very pleased to draw to your attention and 
to the attention of all members of the Assembly, a school group 
that’s very near and dear to my heart. With us today we have 15 
grade 8 students from the school in Bruno — I might add, Mr. 
Speaker, some of Saskatchewan’s brightest and best. And 
accompanying these students are their teacher, Mr. Jeff 
Marshak, and chaperones, Dan Picouye and Alain Tremel. 
 
I’m hoping that you have a great time today visiting the 
Legislative Assembly, and I’m hoping that you enjoy question 
period, as much of it as you get to watch. And I’m looking very 
forward to meeting with you a little bit later, I guess it’s around 
2:30. 
 
I’d ask all the members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the other members of this 
legislature, two families of home-schoolers seated in your 
gallery. And they’re doing a unit, as I believe it’s called, on 
government and how it works. And we’re glad to have them 
here. I met with them earlier on to try to explain to them what 
was all going to be happening, but I’m not sure if that was 
adequate or not. 
 
From Rosthern we have Brenda Stickel and her two students, 
Austin and Lisa; and here from Regina, Patty Dilliston and her 
two students, Nicole and Kimberly. 
 
Would the members join me in welcoming them to our 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Energy Performance Contracting Service 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this government believes strongly in our Crown 
corporations and the benefits that they bring to all the people of 
this province. But today, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a 
joint venture between Saskatchewan Power Corporation and 
Honeywell Limited to increase the energy efficiency of large 
electrical consumers in our province, such as schools, municipal 
government facilities, provincial government facilities, and 
industrial facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s called the energy performance contracting service and it 
provides our larger customers with a plan to reduce energy 
consumption. And it guarantees, Mr. Speaker, that the full cost 
of implementing the energy efficiency measures will be covered 
through energy savings, usually over an 8- to 10-year period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, energy performance contracting has generated $21 
million in economic activity over the last three years in 
Saskatchewan, and it’s provided work for approximately 70 
electrical and mechanical contractors. It’s also guaranteeing 
savings in energy at about 20 per cent in the average facility, 
Mr. Speaker, and greenhouse gas reductions in the same range. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s just one example of the fact that we have a 
vision for this province — a plan for Saskatchewan. Our Crown 
corporations and the services they deliver are central to that 
plan, Mr. Speaker, and we’re not prepared, Mr. Speaker, for the 
Saskatchewan Party plan which is to do away with those 
Crowns. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Quebec Election Results 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take 
this opportunity to congratulate first minister-elect Jean Charest 
and his colleagues on a very impressive election in Quebec 
yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — With 76 out of 125 seats, Jean Charest’s 
Liberal Party will form the next majority government in 
Quebec. The Parti Québécois were reduced to 45 seats and the 
ADQ (Action Démocratique du Québec) picked up only 4. 
 
What’s even more interesting, Mr. Speaker, is the breakdown of 
the popular vote. Quebecers voted overwhelmingly for change 
by giving Jean Charest and his party 46 per cent of the popular 
vote. The PQ (Parti Québécois) received just 33 per cent and 
the ADQ just over 18 per cent. I can’t help but notice that these 
numbers are very similar to those conducted in a recent 
province-wide poll here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while serving as a Member of Parliament I had the 
privilege of observing Mr. Charest in the House of Commons. 
At that time he was the leader of a two-member caucus and 
there was a great deal of speculation and uncertainty about his 
political future. It became obvious, though, Mr. Speaker, that 
Mr. Charest was a very determined and savvy individual and 
one only needs to look at his recent political victory to see why. 
 
In a province that for over a decade has been burdened by a 
social democratic government that has also toyed with the idea 
of separatism, Mr. Charest’s majority government was won on a 
platform that embraced good government within Canada. 
 
I ask all members of the House to join with me in 
congratulating Mr. Charest on this recent victory. We wish him 
and his colleagues all the best as they prepare to move Quebec 
forward. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment Future Forum 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The modern day 
economic realities of Saskatoon and Saskatchewan now include 
information technology, ag-biotech, renewable energy, 
environmental technology, and tourism. To showcase our varied 
opportunities, Saskatoon last week was host to an Investment 
Future Forum, the first of its kind in Saskatchewan. 
 
It brought together interested investors, 22 expanding business 
ventures, and well-known speakers. By the way, Mr. Speaker, 
the event was co-sponsored by CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and Industry and Resources, the 
two organizations the opposition says should stay out of 
business. 
 
How successful was the forum? Well, two high-tech companies 
took advantage of the gathering to announce new research 
developments at Innovation Place which will further the 
horizons of human and animal medical science, bring more 
high-tech, high-paying jobs to Saskatchewan, and further the 
ongoing co-operation between the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) and the tenants of Innovation Place. 
 
Triage Therapeutics Inc., managed by Winnipeg’s Lombard 
Life Sciences, will further research into promising spinal cord 
and brain injury drug developments. Pyxis Genomics Canada, 
Inc. announced an acceleration of its animal health product 

platform which is developing new treatments and prevention 
strategies for human and animal infections. These companies 
choose Saskatchewan because the scientific and technical 
expertise is here, the investment dollars are available, and 
because our future is wide open, Mr. Speaker. 
 

St. Gabriel School Drama Performance 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, April 11, I had the opportunity and pleasure of 
attending a play put on by the students of St. Gabriel School in 
Biggar. The play was an adaptation of Mark Twain’s classic, 
Tom Sawyer. 
 
I’d like to do a little bragging and mention that my son, 
Marshall Weekes, along with Brittney Bergen, played a shared 
role as Tom Sawyer, and my daughter, Alex Weekes, played as 
a town resident, put on a great performance along with 27 
young actors from St. Gabriel’s. Those 27 were Kiley Sarvas, 
Elyse Beckett, Tiffany Peters, Ashley Carruthers, Erika Ries, 
Samantha Keith, Sean Redlick, Nathan Walker, Chance 
Parenteau, Clarke Taylor, Jonathan Sehn, Nausha Muc, Cole 
Oesch, Jarrett Moore, Cody Flasch, Lauren deBussac, Jessica 
Zimmer, Brody Crozier, Cheryl Oesch, Shannon Jiricka, 
Bronwyn Nestegaard-Paul, Blaire Hoppe, Tamara Nahorney, 
Felicia Smith, Ashley Ries, Karlee Dielsen, and Courtney 
Hardman. 
 
Their performances were enhanced with the behind-the-scenes 
support of the stage crew: Sarah Tavanetz, Sarah Zimmer, Ezra 
Meszaros, Lonnie Redlick, Danielle Desrosiers, and Jaylynn 
Smith; costumes by Kirby Sarvas and Caitlin Pickett; and props 
by Mrs. Rita Sutherland and Mrs. Cindy Weekes. 
 
(13:45) 
 
I would like to congratulate the director, Mrs. Lorraine Heather, 
and assistant director, Kendra Lanigan, as well as all those 
mentioned above for their splendid performance of Tom 
Sawyer. And I’m sure Mark Twain would have been very proud 
of their adaptation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Curlers Win National Title 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not long ago the 
2003 National Aboriginal Mixed Curling Championships were 
held in Winnipeg, Mr. Speaker. This annual event, now called 
the Chuck Neepin Memorial Bonspiel, was organized by 
Norman Meade and was attended by 48 teams from across the 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in keeping with Saskatchewan curlers’ current hot 
streak, a team primarily from Saskatchewan won the event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winning team was skipped by Marshall Bear 
from Little Pine. The third was Maria Moore from The Pas, 
Manitoba. The lead was Emerald Strongarm from Kawacatoose. 
Now the second, the second was the MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from Cumberland House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

Mr. McCall: — How fitting that the member for this House, 
from Cumberland House, knows how to get some good rocks to 
where it counts — in the house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Marshall Bear rink defeated two-time 
Canadian senior men’s curling champion Ken Grove in the 
final. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members of this House will join me in 
congratulating all the curlers who took part in this event, and 
especially our Saskatchewan team members. I’m sure members 
will join me in saying a great big egosi, egosi to these fine 
curlers. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Great Weekend for Canadian Sports 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it was a great weekend for Canadian sports. We heard 
from the member of Swift Current yesterday about Mike Weir’s 
super achievement in winning the Masters. And in addition, Mr. 
Speaker, Paul Tracy won the Grand Prix of Long Beach which 
was his third kart victory of the year. Also Randy Ferby won 
the gold medal in men’s world curling in Winnipeg. 
 
Even the USA (United States of America) women’s curling 
team, Mr. Speaker, who won the curling gold medal, had a 
Canadian flavour as two members of that rink were from 
Canada, and I believe one was originally from Saskatoon. 
 
Closer to home, Mr. Speaker, the Assiniboia Southern Rebels 
were winners of the Keystone Cup held in Portage la Prairie. 
They finished the round robin play with a four-one record and 
went on to defeat Spruce Grove Regals 5-2 in the gold medal 
game. This was the Southern Rebels’ second Keystone Cup 
victory in three years. 
 
A special thanks to coach Chic Volsky and his coaching staff, 
all of the managers, parents, and supporters of the Rebels for an 
excellent and rewarding season. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating all of 
these superb Canadian athletes and in particular the Assiniboia 
Southern Rebels for their outstanding accomplishments. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Electrostatic Precipitators at Boundary Dam 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Spring is here; 
we’re all eager to get outside and revel in our province’s 
wonderful natural resources. And thanks to a multi-million 
dollar SaskPower project nearing completion at the Boundary 
dam power station, when residents of Estevan are out at their 
local parks and recreational facilities this spring, they’ll get 
added bonus of enjoying cleaner air. 
 
I’m pleased to tell members of this House that a five-year, 

multi-million dollar project to equip all six boiler units at 
SaskPower’s Boundary dam power station with advanced 
emissions controls unit has passed another milestone. 
 
Five of the six electrostatic precipitators to be installed are now 
in service. These electrostatic precipitators will remove more 
than 99 per cent of particulate emissions from the stacks at the 
Boundary dam power station. The work to date has already had 
a significant and positive effect on local air quality, but without 
affecting the reliability of the Boundary dam power station. 
 
SaskPower and Saskatchewan Environment announced this 
ambitious project in May 1998. It was expanded last summer to 
include an electrostatic precipitator for unit six. When the 
electrostatic precipitator project is complete in July, Boundary 
dam will meet the latest federal-provincial regulations. 
 
I ask the members of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
SaskPower on this project at Boundary dam, as well as its other 
initiatives to preserve our environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister of ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) almost blew a gasket trying to 
portray, trying to portray the costs of the new land titles system, 
the new NDP (New Democratic Party) land titles system as 
anything but $107 million. He was squealing and baying in this 
Assembly that indeed the costs were not $107 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well his own officials not long ago, a few weeks ago, were at 
the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention and they made a bit of a presentation to the 
delegates at the SUMA convention. And they had a slide in that 
presentation called, what’s the real cost. And then it goes on to 
say, where does the $107 million come from. And they 
highlighted, they highlight the fact there’s $77 million in 
approved borrowing from the taxpayers, 18 million in operating 
grants from the taxpayers, and $12 million in equity from the 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that yesterday he misled 
the public? And will he apologize to Saskatchewan taxpayers 
for blowing 107 million on the land titles system and then 
misleading the public about the actual figure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, I’m 
operating on all cylinders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to say to that member opposite that 
nobody had to go to the SUMA convention to learn about the 
costs of ISC because I had a press conference along with the 
president of ISC some time ago, and the member was there. 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

 

And what did we do at that press conference? We talked about 
all of the costs associated with the ISC, Mr. Speaker. We talked 
about all of the costs and we did so in an honest and 
straightforward way. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the costs of the 
construction of that system were audited by the Provincial 
Auditor, and they were found to be $60.5 million for 
construction. The member knows that. 
 
The 30 million in costs that they say were to construct this 
system, Mr. Speaker, were dividends paid to the Government of 
Saskatchewan which would have been paid in any event as the 
member should know, Mr. Speaker. And in suggesting 
otherwise and suggesting that that’s part of the cost of the 
system, that member is not being completely truthful, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, these are his own 
officials’ numbers that were presented to SUMA. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you can believe it, if you can believe it, 
what the minister just said, is he highlighted as a difference the 
$31 million that the new system has had to pay to the 
government in dividend — that’s what he’s just highlighted as a 
difference. The old system paid the same dividend, Mr. 
Speaker. Did the two cancel each other out? The cost is $107 
million to the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. And more to the point, 
more to the point . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, more to the point, with the previous 
system the users paid for the costs of the land titles system and 
it even made a bit of a profit, as the minister alluded to. It made 
another 11 million or so that it gave back to the taxpayers in the 
General Revenue Fund.  
 
And now, due to the NDP genius on this file, Mr. Speaker, the 
government has now written off that dividend it used to get on 
behalf of taxpayers and it’s increased the cost to the users of the 
system by $4.3 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How in the world can the minister justify this for a system that 
still isn’t working? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the member just made the 
point I was making yesterday and again today. If the old system 
paid the $31 million in cost in any event, Mr. Speaker, how 
could that possibly be a cost of the new system, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s how ridiculous the argument is. And 
the problem here, Mr. Speaker, is if that member doesn’t know 
the difference between capital cost of construction and 
operating cost and dividends, there’s not much I can say to help 
that member, Mr. Speaker. 

But I do want to say that when that member says it was for a 
system that does not work, Mr. Speaker, he is denigrating the 
dedicated men and women at the Information Services 
Corporation — who are doing what, Mr. Speaker? They’re 
making that system work and it is working well, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s working very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s 
words — and he’s starting to ramp it up a little again — but the 
minister’s words are cold comfort to people like Corey Demassi 
of Regina. 
 
In 1999, Corey won a $4,000 settlement in Small Claims Court 
from another man named Jason Robertson. To ensure Corey got 
paid, he placed a writ of execution against Jason Robertson’s 
house. But when Robertson sold his house in December 2001 
and moved to Ontario, the NDP’s fancy new $107 million land 
titles system didn’t pick it up; it didn’t pick up the writ of 
execution. So Corey Demassi was out $4,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP’s $107 million land titles system 
works, why didn’t it pick up a simple writ of execution? Why 
did it cost Corey Demassi $4,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the other day 
someone was on the radio and John Gormley was saying how 
scandalous it was that the new system was picking up too many 
writs of execution. Now this member is saying, well the new 
system isn’t picking up enough writs of execution. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the system of picking up 
writs of execution or not picking them up has nothing to do 
with the Information Services Corporation. We have had a 
system for the general registration of writs of execution in this 
province for 60 years and that has not been brought about by 
the ISC, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say also, Mr. Speaker, that what that 
Saskatchewan Party always does is they always go after the 
Crown corporations and the people that work in the Crown 
corporations — never referring to the hundreds of thousands of 
transactions that are properly done on behalf of the people but, 
Mr. Speaker, always criticizing because what do they want to 
do? Sell off the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, yes; yes, it’s true. It’s 
true the Saskatchewan Party and, more importantly, the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan have this crazy notion that 
when you budget $20 million on an automation project and you 
wind up spending $107 million on the project, they have this 
crazy notion that it should work, Mr. Speaker. That is what the 
people of the province believe. 
 
Now the reason Corey never got his $4,000 even after Jason 
Robertson sold his house is that the NDP’s $107 million land 
titles system couldn’t tell that Jason Edward Robertson, the 
name that appeared on the title to the house, is the full name of 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

Jason Robertson, the name of the man on the writ of execution. 
 
The NDP spent all of this money on a system that doesn’t work, 
Mr. Speaker. Now Corey Demassi is out $4,000 because of 
ISC’s mistake and yet the NDP is refusing to compensate him. 
Will the minister direct ISC to do the right thing? Will he pay 
Corey Demassi for the mistake its land titles system has made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want the people of the 
province to know that what that member said, and what that 
Saskatchewan Party said, about the cost of the system is not 
true. I want them to know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I also want the people of the province to know that on 
April 11, Mr. Speaker, it was less than one day to put a title 
through the new system, Mr. Speaker — and that Saskatchewan 
Party says the system isn’t working. Under the old system, Mr. 
Speaker, it sometimes took a month or more to put a title 
through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about 90 per cent of the transactions at land titles 
are now done electronically. And do you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? People can do them from their businesses and their 
homes — a feature not available in any other province, not 
available in Alberta. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party used to say we should have adopted 
Alberta’s system. Guess what, Mr. Speaker? They’re putting 
out a request for proposals to try to build the system more 
similar to Saskatchewan’s system. The Saskatchewan Party will 
not admit that, Mr. Speaker, but that is the truth because it’s a 
good system and it’s working, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — . . . ISC for months on behalf of two of my 
constituents, John and Verna Sawchuck of Coleville. 
Apparently there was a federal writ of execution issued against 
another John Sawchuck for money he owed to Canada Customs 
and Revenue. However this federal writ was attached to the 
land title of John and Verna Sawchuck of Coleville who had 
nothing to do with that debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP spent $107 million developing this new 
land titles system and it can’t tell the difference between two 
people with the same name. Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP say 
its new land titles system is working when it can’t tell the 
difference between two people with the same name? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we hear 
misinformation about the cost to construct the system. 
 
But I want to say to the House, the first questioner says a writ of 
execution didn’t attach and it should have attached. The second 
one says, a writ of execution did attach and shouldn’t have 
attached. And then they asked the question, Mr. Speaker: why 
doesn’t the computer know the difference between two people? 
 
(14:00) 

Well I guess I would say, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the computer 
had never met the two people. Because what the computer does, 
Mr. Speaker, is it looks at the names, and if the name is the 
same as someone with a writ of execution against the name, 
then, Mr. Speaker, the writ of execution will attach. 
 
And what do you do about that, Mr. Speaker? You sign an 
affidavit saying you’re not that person. You can sign that at any 
office or your lawyer’s office. There’s no fee to register that 
affidavit. They take the writ off. 
 
And do you know how long the system’s worked that way, Mr. 
Speaker? For 60 years. So it’s time to wake up and smell the 
coffee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is ridiculous. If you 
just happen to have the same name as someone who owes 
money, you’re going to get nailed for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — If you just happen to have the same name as 
someone who owes money, you’re going to get nailed for 
hundreds of dollars in legal fees to clear liens and caveats and 
writs of execution against your property. Is that fair? 
 
John and Verna Sawchuck were forced to pay $325 in legal fees 
to clear this writ against their property. I wrote to ISC on their 
behalf to see if they would be reimbursed for this cost. The 
answer was a flat no. 
 
My question to the minister: does the minister think it’s fair that 
John and Verna Sawchuck of Coleville should pay for ISC’s 
mistake? Will he order ISC to reimburse the Sawchucks for this 
expense? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a computer can no 
more tell the difference between one John Smith and another 
John Smith than it can tell the difference between the 
Saskatchewan Party and Stockwell Day and the Canadian 
Alliance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the fact of the matter is, the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, that this question could have been raised 
many times under the old land titles system where this is a 
commonplace occurrence. And one of the responsibilities of 
any lawyer doing a real estate transaction, Mr. Speaker, is to 
initially do a general registration search, which is available also 
under the new system, to see if there are any writs attaching 
against the same name as your client, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Apparently in this case that was not done. It can be done. If 
there is someone with a similar name and a writ of execution, it 
can easily be removed, in much the same way as the opposition 
will be removed in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, although the minister 
didn’t answer the question, he did make it clear why the 
Coleville rural poll in the Kindersley by-election recently 
garnered the NDP exactly zero votes. And there will be plenty 
more where that came from, Mr. Speaker, if they get the won 
tons to drop the writ. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems other government agencies are able to tell 
the difference between two people of the same name. John and 
Verna Sawchuck were able to quickly get a letter from Canada 
Customs and Revenue Agency stating that Revenue Canada had 
no claim against them. Apparently Revenue Canada can tell the 
difference between two people with the same name, but the 
NDP’s $107 million gong show land titles system can’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even after the Sawchucks produced this letter, ISC 
still wouldn’t remove the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Members, I’d 
just ask members to hold their voices down a bit so that the 
question can be more accurately heard. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, even 
after the Sawchucks produced this letter, ISC still wouldn’t 
remove the claim against their property. In fact, ISC said it was 
required by law to execute this claim against every John 
Sawchuck in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what sense does that make? Why is ISC going 
after every person in Saskatchewan who happens to have the 
same name as someone with a claim against their property? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I tried to explain to 
both of the members that, yes this kind of problem does arise in 
any land registration system. I tried to explain, Mr. Speaker, 
that this sort of problem has always existed in the land titles 
system. 
 
But I want to explain to the members — not that it will make 
any difference, Mr. Speaker — that any title holder who has a 
writ attached to their title incorrectly can have that writ 
removed through the simple use of an affidavit. It’s the same 
system that’s always been in place. The application for 
discharge is free and the affidavit can be signed by any 
commissioner of oaths. This is a service operated at all ISC 
offices as well, free of charge. 
 
And my only other comment, Mr. Speaker, is having listened to 
the member, I’m very sorry that I could not vote in the 
Kindersley by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the minister responsible for ISC. The NDP’s 
$107 million land title system is also failing municipal councils 
who are responsible for keeping track of land title transfers to 
update their tax rolls. 
 

Mr. Speaker, ISC is responsible for providing information on 
changes in land titles to SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) and SAMA passes the information on to 
the municipality in the form of a change-of-ownership notice. 
Now ISC does provide the municipality with information on 
who bought the land and who sold the land, but the NDP’s $107 
million land titles system doesn’t provide a legal land 
description so there is no way for the municipalities to know 
which piece of land has changed owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is the municipality supposed to know what 
piece of land requires title transfer if the NDP’s $107 million 
land titles system doesn’t give them a legal land description? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know the 
Saskatchewan Party over there believes that if they say often 
enough that they don’t want to sell off the Crown corporations, 
that people will believe it. And if they say often enough that 
they’re not aligned with the Canadian Alliance, that people will 
believe it. And apparently they think — notwithstanding what 
the Provincial Auditor says — that if they say often enough that 
something cost $107 million to build, that people will believe it. 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, there are some people who will swallow 
the line of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
But what I want to say to the member opposite over there is, 
one of the things that she should realize is that when we 
restructured the land titles fees over the opposition of that 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, we did so taking into 
consideration the concerns of small towns, villages, and people 
with property in rural Saskatchewan to lower the fees in rural 
Saskatchewan and also to take into account many of the 
concerns of small municipal governments, Mr. Speaker. And I 
regret that that member does not support her own constituents, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
that minister should realize is his own officials went 
globe-trotting to sell this system. Nobody will buy it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for months the RM (rural municipality) of Blucher 
has been trying to get the NDP’s failing $107 million land titles 
system to provide legal land description. Mr. Speaker, so if . . . 
so the minister will know — that is section, township, range, 
meridian on land ownership transfers. It’s a system that has 
worked for many, many decades in our province. 
 
In fact, the RM of Blucher has written to ISC seven times, Mr. 
Speaker, since January 20. And as of April 3, ISC has not 
responded to any of those seven letters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the NDP’s $107 million land titles system 
spent so much money that they can’t afford to buy stamps or is 
the NDP simply refusing to make any attempt to fix the serious 
flaws in its failing $107 million land titles system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to know . . . Well first 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

of all, to answer the question, if it is the case that someone has 
been corresponding with ISC and has not received a reply, I 
apologize for that. 
 
And I would want to reply in a very timely way because one of 
the things that Mark MacLeod, the president of ISC, and all the 
officials have been trying to do is to reply to people very 
quickly. And they’ve changed the turnaround time very much, 
Mr. Speaker, and customer service is the number one priority of 
ISC. That has been made very clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact I want the House to know that 80 per cent of the 
corrections required in the system have taken two days this 
year, down from six weeks last fall. Transactions are going 
through the system in one to three days this year. We’re trying 
to improve it, Mr. Speaker, because customer service is number 
one. And the system is working, thanks to the dedication of the 
people who work there. 
 
And I also want to add, just before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, that 
unlike the Saskatchewan Party, the land titles system under ISC 
does recognize names like Grant Schmidt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
we’ve learned today is something that we knew going into this, 
that the system isn’t working as it was billed. And the other 
thing that we’ve learned, Mr. Speaker, is this — that just a few 
weeks ago the minister’s own officials at ISC went to SUMA 
and they made a presentation called “Strength Through 
Diversity SUMA Convention 2003 Building With You . . . from 
the LAND Up.” 
 
And one of the slides says, what’s the real cost? And the very 
first line in that says, where does the $107 million come from, 
Mr. Speaker? And then it says, well it comes from 61.4 million 
borrowed against 77 million in availability, 18 million in 
operating grants, and 12 million in equity, for a total of 107 
million taxpayer dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to the minister: who’s right? Is he right or were his officials 
at SUMA right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the costs of the ISC 
have been so well hidden that we had a press conference in 
room 10 to review them. And apparently the ISC officials were 
at the SUMA convention saying what they are. And then the 
member stands up and says, we’re trying to hide something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. Nothing 
could be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. The member’s 
own question shows that the ISC, for which I am the minister in 
charge, went to SUMA — open and accountable — said, here’s 
all the costs. But what they did not do, Mr. Speaker, unlike the 
member opposite, is they did not represent costs of operation or 
dividends as being costs of construction of a system as that 
member has tried to do repeatedly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in that regard I’m very proud of the fact that ISC and my 
department and my office have been open and accountable, 
unlike that Saskatchewan Party over there. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I chatted with a lawyer 
from Tisdale, Saskatchewan by the name of Gordon Klimm. 
And he followed question period yesterday and he heard that 
minister profess all of the wonderful things about ISC. 
 
He heard him talk about a three-day turnaround, Mr. Speaker. 
And he in Tisdale, Saskatchewan, on behalf of clients, has been 
waiting now a full month for a transaction to be completed. He 
said, were it not for a sympathetic lender a deal on a farm 
mortgage would be in jeopardy, would have been put in 
jeopardy by this $107 million NDP land titles system. 
 
And his question through you, and to the minister, is this: in 
light of the fact that he’s waited a month for this transaction, in 
light of the fact that fees went up on Monday, what is the 
minister saying to his client? Is he saying that the three-day 
turnaround should apply to his client or will his client have to 
pay the new fees under the new structure, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
member — the member spoke to a lawyer in Tisdale — I had 
coffee with a lawyer in Saskatoon on Saturday who phoned me 
up because he wanted to tell me, Mr. Speaker, about his views 
of the ISC. I got together with the lawyer and talked about his 
views of the ISC. 
 
His views were somewhat different, Mr. Speaker. He told me 
that the ISC was working very well because he could perform 
real estate transactions on-line, seven days a week, 24 hours a 
day, Mr. Speaker, something that has never been available 
before. 
 
And have there been glitches in the system as we’ve tried to 
build the system? Yes, there have been glitches, Mr. Speaker. Is 
the system perfect? No, it’s not perfect, Mr. Speaker. But in the 
vast majority of cases is it working? Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
working well and, Mr. Speaker, under the old land titles system 
we had occasional problems as well. But this is a good system, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s state of the art, and it’s working, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s walk through this, Mr. 
Speaker. In 1996 the NDP decide that Saskatchewan, the last 
province to automate its land titles, should do that. And they put 
a budget figure on it of under $20 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well just a few short years later they’ve spent $107 million and 
the system is not working as billed. Moreover the old system 
and the old fees were enough not only to pay for the system 
itself, but to make a profit for the people of the province. But 
thanks to the sheer genius of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, thanks to 
their genius that surpasses frankly, that surpasses frankly even 
the boneheaded, multi-million dollar losses of the previous 
administration, thanks to their genius, Mr. Speaker, now the 
taxpayers are subsidizing the new NDP system by foregoing the 
dividend and users pay an extra $4.3 million. 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s only one thing left for the minister to do. 
Will he stand in his place and apologize on behalf of the NDP 
to the people of the province for this $107 million boondoggle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift 
Current would certainly know about the boneheaded previous 
administration since I believe he worked for them the whole 
time . . . (inaudible) . . . adviser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that he was one of 
the key advisers to that boneheaded administration. And what 
this tells the people of the province, if they’re listening, Mr. 
Speaker, is here we have someone — in assessing his credibility 
of what he says — here we have someone who gets up and says 
the Devine administration was a boneheaded administration; a 
boneheaded administration. I’m here to tell anybody listening, 
Mr. Speaker, that that member who just said that was a paid 
adviser of that administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — He comes in here and refers to it in that 
way, Mr. Speaker. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 
Everything else he says has the same amount of credibility as 
that statement coming from that member, which is zero, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order. I would like members just to come to order a little 
sooner. I think the time here is quite precious and it’s good to 
let off a little steam, but doesn’t have to be let off for the entire 
afternoon. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, it is my 
duty at this time to table the 2002 annual report from the 
Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of an open and accountable 
government and table written questions . . . responses to written 
questions no. 129 through 133. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 129, 130, 131, 132, 
133 have been submitted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Government Approach 
to Business Ventures 

 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the motion that we’re going to 

be . . . that I’m going to be moving, seconded by the member 
for Weyburn-Big Muddy, reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the current Premier and the 
cabinet for a continuing practice of covering up financial 
losses in its numerous business ventures such as SPUDCO 
and mega bingo despite numerous promises in the past to 
be more forthright over such losses. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there’s only two scandals mentioned in the 
motion, but we could have mentioned many, many more in that 
particular motion. The two that are mentioned are SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) and the 
mega bingo deal. 
 
And I’m sorry to see that the House Leader might not be 
staying for the whole debate because I think he’d be kind of 
interested in what we have to say about SPUDCO and I’ll make 
sure that we can send him over the Hansard of the debate 
because a lot of what I want to say revolves around his conduct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of what I want to say about the cover-up of 
scandal revolves around the conduct of the man who still sits as 
a House Leader to this cabinet, who the Premier retained in his 
cabinet after it was made clear by the Premier’s own inquiry 
that that minister, the member for P.A. (Prince Albert) 
Northcote, not only was responsible for the loss of 28 million 
taxpayers’ dollars but that he then went on, Mr. Speaker, to 
mislead about that cover-up for six long years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In what other walk of life can you imagine that a senior 
management member, a senior team member of a management 
board or any sort of an organization, could possibly squander 
$28 million and then not tell the truth about it and receive no 
punishment and not be fired by the Premier? In what other 
organization could that happen? In absolutely no other 
organization but this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
government that has completely lost its way. 
 
And it is reminiscent . . . You know, the minister of ISC was 
talking a little bit at the end of question period, and I was too, 
about the previous administration. Like all old and tired 
governments, when they get to the end of their mandate they 
lose their way, they lose their moral compass. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it has happened in spades on that side of the House. 
 
In fact you could argue it’s happened on that side of the House 
worse than it ever happened to the previous administration. 
Because the previous administration . . . I remember the 
members opposite talking about 6 and $7 million in GigaText. 
Well get the figures that we’re talking about today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re talking about $107 million in a failing land titles system. 
We’re talking about $28 million in SPUDCO in the motion, 
another $6 million lost in bingo. Two million blown in 
Australia on a ill-thought-out $80 million investment, it almost 
was, in Australia; $7.5 million in a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia, 
Mr. Speaker; another $2 million lost on tappedinto.com in 
Nashville, Tennessee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Put the numbers together, you’re well . . . you’re getting close 
to $200 million of scandal and of cover-up and of misplaced 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

priorities and of misspent taxpayers’ resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, on the SPUDCO issue, Mr. Speaker, the irony 
of the SPUDCO issue is that it went to cabinet. And the current 
minister of ISC, who is smiling wryly from his place, should 
remember this because he would have been at the cabinet table. 
It came to cabinet in the late 1990s. The minister of SPUDCO 
at the time, the minister of Sask Water . . . and he presented to 
the cabinet something that wasn’t true. He represented a deal to 
build storage sheds as a partnership but it was not a partnership, 
Mr. Speaker. And within weeks, not only the minister knew it, 
but the deputy minister to the premier knew it. The senior 
officials knew it. Certainly the ministers of the Crown would 
have known it. 
 
What did they do about it, Mr. Speaker? What did that minister 
of ISC do about it? What did the current Minister of CIC do 
about it? He became the Sask Water minister thereafter. What 
did they do about it? What did the current Deputy Premier do 
about it, whatever portfolio he might have had at the time? 
What did any of them do about it? 
 
Did they stand up at the next cabinet table and say, this isn’t 
right; this is the kind of thing we railed against only a few years 
ago; we’ve got to come clean? We better tell the truth; 
taxpayers’ money’s at stake; we’re misrepresenting the truth to 
taxpayers. Did any of them do that? No, they didn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. Not one of them. Look across the way. Not one of 
them — not one of them — stood in their place and said, this is 
wrong; we have not been telling the truth and we risk losing 
millions of dollars. 
 
And the end result, Mr. Speaker, said the taxpayers lost $28 
million and that a minister has been shown to have not been . . . 
not told the truth or had misled the public about the deal. 
 
And I think in the next election campaign, I’m pretty sure in the 
next election campaign as those members go door to door, I’m 
pretty sure people are going to ask them that question. I think 
they’re going to ask them, did you know about . . . you must 
have known about the deal, that SPUDCO deal, because we’ve 
seen the evidence. It’s all in the court documents, it’s all in the 
newspaper, it’s all in the media. You must have known about 
the deal. Did you do anything about it on our behalf? That’s 
what the taxpayers will ask. 
 
As taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan, did you stand up 
and say this isn’t right? And they’ll have to hang their heads 
and say, no, we didn’t stand up. They’ll have to hang their 
heads and say, no, we didn’t do the right thing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if there’s any justice, then they’ll walk back 
to their campaign headquarters on election night and prepare to 
concede to the Sask Party candidate that’s running in that 
constituency against them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we now know through the 
documents and through the information that has come forward 
on the SPUDCO file that there was one cabinet minister in 
particular that did express concern. 
 

I think Carol Teichrob came out in the media not long ago and 
she indicated that at the time she was on the board of Sask 
Water, Mr. Speaker, and she had grave concerns about the 
information she was getting from the then minister of Sask 
Water, the current Minister of Crown Investments Corporation, 
who, by the way, in this session has refused to answer any of 
the questions we’ve asked about SPUDCO — even though he 
played a key and central role in that scandal; even though he 
bears the responsibility for the greatest period of time 
throughout the scandal; even though he bears the responsibility 
for not pulling the plug on it when he could of. 
 
Now he’s not only not answering questions as to why he didn’t 
do that, he’s not answering any questions at all. They leave it to 
the Deputy Premier to answer questions. And he’s not even 
familiar with the file and so, not surprisingly, we don’t get any 
answers. 
 
But I believe she was the Vice-Chair on the Sask Water board, 
was Ms. Teichrob, at the time that that member was the minister 
for Sask Water. And she said she went to various members of 
the government and raised red flags about this deal. In 
particular she went to the member for P.A. Northcote, I believe, 
the man that’s responsible for this deal, the current House 
Leader, the current Intergovernmental Affairs minister. She 
went to him and she told him of her concerns. And so were her 
concerns taken seriously? No, they weren’t. She said as much 
— basically sent her off; sent her off and told her not to worry 
about it. 
 
I believe she also went to the premier of the day, Roy 
Romanow. I believe she also went to him and she told him of 
her concerns. And what did the premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan have to say about it? He just sent her away. He 
said, don’t worry about it; he said, don’t worry about it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question then for the current House 
Leader, and I hope some day for the then premier . . . I hope 
someone frankly puts a microphone in front of Premier Roy 
Romanow and finds out about his involvement in this deal 
because I have a feeling his involvement was significant. The 
documents seem to indicate that and there should be an 
accounting for this. 
 
It’s a serious issue. It does involve $28 million, but arguably 
more important than that, it involves the very, very basic 
principle of any government — this one included, although 
you’d never know it by how they act — that the truth matters; 
that you’ve got to be straight with Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I hope that soon, and very soon, the Premier of this 
province is asked some very . . . the former premier of this 
province is asked some very tough questions. We’ll continue to 
ask questions of these members here. We won’t get any 
answers. The minister responsible certainly won’t answer. He’s 
chosen to hide behind the Deputy Premier, which is a strange 
strategy because the Deputy Premier’s answers haven’t been 
very good either. But that’s the strategy they’ve chosen. 
 
So we won’t get very many answers in this Assembly, though 
we’ll keep asking questions. But we certainly hope that the 
Premier of the province . . . the former premier — the premier 
at the time, Roy Romanow — is asked some questions about 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

 

this file. 
 
(14:30) 
 
We know that somebody in the government in about 1998 
realized, realized that something was up. And they . . . 
somebody ordered a chartered accountant firm to do a study 
into this. And Ernst & Young was selected. I don’t know how 
they got it — that was maybe a tender or something — but 
Ernst & Young was chosen to do the work. 
 
So Ernst & Young did a great piece of work into the SPUDCO 
situation to find out, well what was going on. Somebody in the 
government must at least have been asking that — what is 
going on with SPUDCO? 
 
And Ernst & Young found out the answers to that and they 
found out a little bit more, Mr. Speaker. They found out the 
answers to the most burning question I think that we have now, 
looking back on it — and hopefully that the government had at 
the time — and that is: why in the world would we do this? 
Why wouldn’t we just come clean and tell people that the 
original deal that the member for P.A. Northcote told us about 
was not the case? Why wouldn’t we just come clean and tell the 
truth? 
 
That’s a question that they must have been asking, and it’s a 
question that Ernst & Young asked. Why the deception; why 
did you portray this partnership . . . or this storage shed deal as 
a partnership when it wasn’t a partnership with the private 
sector at all? 
 
And their answer was threefold, Mr. Speaker. The answer they 
found, right from Sask Water officials, threefold. The first one 
was that the government of the day, through this strategy, 
thought it could avoid — get this, Mr. Speaker — thought it 
could avoid its own union-only construction tendering policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look across the way at the erstwhile 
backbenchers of that party and I wonder what they think about 
this. And even some of the front-benchers who I’m sure were 
aware . . . unaware of it, those who have had to defend the 
government’s Crown construction tendering policy. Do you 
remember that, Mr. . . . We all know that particular policy, and 
we’ve had respectful disagreements about whether that policy is 
good for Saskatchewan or not. 
 
Members on the government side believe that it is; believe that 
it’s important to have union preference tendering in Crown 
construction work especially. Fair enough. We don’t happen to 
share that view. We think it distorts the market. We think it 
drives costs up, frankly. We have fought against that. And on 
that point, though, we can have a respectful disagreement. The 
members opposite can support union preference tendering from 
the Crown and we can oppose it. 
 
But, but, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy then of a government who 
would publicly defend this as the right thing to do, this union 
preference tendering, their hypocrisy then to go ahead and 
purposefully try to avoid that same tendering policy on the 
construction of these sheds by portraying there to be a large 51 
per cent private-sector partner, thereby annulling or exempting 
themselves, themselves, from the union-only preference 

tendering policy of their own government. 
 
Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. I cannot believe that there has not 
been more outrage from organized labour in the province when 
they found that out — that the NDP in this province, the party 
of labour, would set out on purpose, on purpose, to avoid its 
own union-only tendering policy, Mr. Speaker. You have to 
ask, why would they do that? 
 
Remember that this was the grand strategy of the member for 
P.A. Northcote, the current House Leader. This was his grand 
strategy. So why would he do this? Why would he approve of 
or conceive of a plan to avoid his own union tendering policy? 
Could it be that they could build the sheds for cheaper? Could 
that be the answer? Could it be that he knew that if he avoided 
that policy, he could build his storage sheds for less money? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, whatever the reason, whatever the reason, I 
hope somebody on that side will intervene in this debate and 
stand up and explain to this Assembly how they feel, honestly 
— how they honestly feel, Mr. Speaker, about the fact that their 
own government was out to avoid its own union-only tendering 
policy, a policy that it asks its backbenchers to defend with 
vigour. A policy that it defends itself with vigour in the media, 
the province of Saskatchewan and yet they wanted . . . they 
thought . . . they liked it so much that they wanted to get around 
it to build the sheds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, somebody needs to speak out about it. Somebody 
over there needs to speak out about it. 
 
So that was the first reason. The first reason was they wanted to 
avoid their own union tendering policy. Well, the second reason 
. . . and the Deputy Premier is chirping from his seat. And the 
Deputy Premier I encourage to stand up and answer these three 
questions as Ernst & Young did. 
 
But I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that there was another 
reason that they wanted to portray this. They wanted to deceive 
the people of the province and portray it as a . . . as something 
other than what it was. Well what they wanted to do, Mr. 
Speaker, is to trick the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
That’s what Ernst & Young says, for “the optics” of a deal that 
had a private partner when it . . . 
 
That is a direct quote — the optics, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the 
second reason. The first reason is they want to avoid their own 
union tender policy. And the second reason is for the optics. So 
Saskatchewan people will be tricked into believing that there’s 
a private partner when there’s no private partner. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a third reason that Ernst & Young 
. . . This isn’t the opposition, by the way, identifying these 
reasons. This is Ernst & Young who were hired by somebody 
deep within the government, hired by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, maybe even the former premier, we’re not sure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier will be interested to 
know that the third reason that they tried to set this up as a 
partnership when they knew it wasn’t, was what . . . was why, 
Mr. Speaker? To try to get around any international trade 
implications. To try to trick our trading partners — primarily 
the Americans, you would think, because we know how deep 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

and dark the anti-American stripe runs through that caucus. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder what would happen, I wonder what would have 
happened if the US (United States) would have got wind of this 
attempt at deception. And if the US, who are prone to sabre 
rattle when it comes to trade — we’ve all been on the business 
end of that, unfortunately — but, Mr. Speaker, I wonder, if the 
US would have found out about that and brought some sort of 
trade action, not only against our potatoes, but against the 
potatoes that are grown in Manitoba, in Alberta, in Prince 
Edward Island, there would have been some tall explaining to 
do by that Deputy Premier that chirps from his seat, and that 
member for Regina South that is . . . was chirping from his seat, 
Mr. Speaker. They’d have some explaining to do to the 
governments of those three provinces that would have been hurt 
by a trade action brought by the United States. Why? Because 
the NDP government decided to say something other than the 
truth. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. Speaker, that Ernst & Young 
report, that Ernst & Young report is given to the government in 
June 1998. Guess who gets his mitts on it in June of 1998, Mr. 
Speaker? Well the minister that started it all of course. The 
minister that conceived of this SPUDCO idea, the member for 
Prince Albert Northcote. He would have got his hands on this 
report where Ernst & Young state unequivocally that, here are 
the three reasons why we tried to trick you on this deal: one was 
to try to trick you on this deal, the optics; two, to try to avoid 
international trade implications; and three, to avoid our own 
union tendering policy. 
 
And so you wonder, Mr. Speaker, when that minister right 
there, that minister, the member for P.A. Northcote had a copy 
of that document, what did he do then? We’ve already 
established that two weeks after he went to cabinet with the first 
myth, the government knew all about it — the government 
knew all about it, Mr. Speaker — and they chose to do nothing. 
 
So they got another chance. They got another chance in June 
1998 when Ernst & Young gave them this new report that laid it 
all out. And they gave it to the minister, the current Minister of 
IGA (Intergovernmental Affairs), and that minister sitting right 
over there, the member from Meadow Lake. They gave them 
that information so they had a chance, they had a reprieve. 
 
They had a second chance to do the right thing, to say, we are 
putting a stop to this because this is wrong; we are going to put 
a stop to this. This represents the wasting of millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars, and more importantly it represents a 
deception of our trading partners, of our labour supporters, and 
most importantly of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So did they do that? Did they do that, Mr. Speaker? Did 
somebody put their foot down and say, this isn’t right? Or were 
they trying to get their member, their then member from 
Rosetown, elected — Mr. Wiens? Maybe that’s what they were 
trying to do. 
 
The question is this. Did anybody stand in their place, when 
they got that Ernst & Young report, and say, this is not right and 
we’re going to stop this; we’re going to take our lumps, we’re 
going to say we made a mistake, we made a mistake; the 

minister that misled the cabinet is going to be fired, and we’re 
going to say sorry, and we’re going to put a stop to it. 
 
I think the people of the province would have probably been 
pretty receptive to that. I think they’d have been still a little 
upset with the member for P.A. Northcote, as they are today, 
most assuredly. But after they fired the minister, and after they 
said we’re sorry that we lost all your money and we’ll never do 
it again, they might have gotten a little bit of credit for that. 
 
And you know, here’s the irony of it. Let’s go over the . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the Deputy Premier of the province, like a turkey at 
Thanksgiving, in a seat that’s destined to be lost in the next 
election, is grinning, Mr. Speaker. He’s grinning, he’s grinning 
when people in his riding and people across this province — 
and people across this province — have absolutely had enough 
of NDP deception and the loss of 28 million taxpayer dollars, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But he’s grinning, he’s grinning. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I wonder then if somebody in the cabinet . . . It’s 
probably not going to be the member for P.A. Northcote 
because he’s into this thing so deep by June of ’98, and he is 
into this thing so deep that there’s absolutely nothing he can do 
but try to continue with the deception, and pour more money at 
it. 
 
And I wonder how many trips he made to the then Sask Water 
minister’s office and said, you know what, you’ve got to keep 
pouring money into this thing because if it ever comes to light, 
we’re dead meat politically; you’ve got to keep pouring money 
into it. 
 
I wonder . . . I wonder how many urgent meetings the member 
for P.A. Northcote had with the minister of Sask Water at the 
time. But maybe there was somebody on the front benches . . . 
maybe there was somebody on the front benches that got a hold 
of this Ernst & Young report and brought it to caucus and 
showed it to some of the NDP backbench MLAs and said, you 
know what folks, here’s what we’ve done. We have a minister 
who’s deceived his cabinet colleagues about a deal; we have a 
minister who has continued the deception; we are losing 
millions and millions and millions and millions of dollars. And, 
Mr. Speaker, apparently the government strategy . . . faced with 
that prospect, the government strategy is to what — is to cover 
it up. 
 
So maybe that conversation happened. Maybe the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview — he’s relatively new, probably not him — 
but maybe the member for Dewdney, or the member for 
Meewasin, or Moose Jaw Wakamow, or Saskatoon Eastview, or 
maybe the member for Cumberland at the time, maybe the 
member for Regina South . . . He was in the caucus at the time 
and I think he would have been offended by the prospect of the 
government misleading Saskatchewan people for six years and 
losing $28 million. 
 
Was nobody in the caucus aware of this? And if the members of 
caucus were aware of it, did nobody stand up and say no to the 
minister sitting there, the member for P.A. Northcote, no to the 
minister of Sask Water at the time? Did anyone stand up and 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

 

say no to him — this isn’t acceptable? 
 
Well we know the answer to the question, Mr. Speaker. We 
know the answer to the question. The answer to the question is, 
no, nobody said anything. They all sat on their hands because if 
somebody would have said something, something would have 
been done. If somebody would have done something, 
something would have been done. But nothing was done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so a court case ensues, and wouldn’t you know it — 
wouldn’t you know it — bad luck for the NDP. As a result of 
the court case many, many documents that are filed in court 
become public. And in addition to that, somebody somewhere 
in Regina who has absolutely had enough of the Minister for 
IGA and the minister for Sask Water and the Deputy Premier 
sends in a brown envelope that very Ernst & Young study. 
 
And because of the court documents and the brown envelope, 
Mr. Speaker, where we received that study, the truth of this 
becomes known in 2002, in December. 
 
(14:45) 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I can hear — believe it or not — I can 
hear the minister, the member for P.A. Northcote, yipping from 
his chair, and I didn’t hear exactly what he said but he 
mentioned the word bonehead. 
 
And isn’t that irony of ironies, Mr. Speaker, that that minister, 
that minister who would deceive his colleagues and the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan and lose 28 million of the 
taxpayers’ dollars and then sit sanctimoniously in cabinet with a 
grin on his face, isn’t it ironic that he would be using the word 
bonehead, Mr. Speaker? Isn’t that ironic? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And he, Mr. Speaker, is apparently the best they 
have. Because the media, the media are dumbfounded after the 
Premier confirms that he won’t be fired for this debacle. So the 
media asked the Premier, well why in the world wouldn’t you 
fire him for all that he’s did? Why wouldn’t you fire that 
minister from your cabinet? 
 
You know what the Premier said? Well he’s the best I’ve got. I 
wonder how the Deputy Premier feels about that. I wonder how 
the Deputy Premier feels, knowing that that minister 
responsible for the worst political economic scandal in the 
history of the province is the best he’s got, Mr. Speaker. I 
wonder how the Deputy Premier feels. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there were so many opportunities for this 
government to do the right thing. There were so many 
opportunities for this government to do the right thing, but it sat 
on its hands. Well worse than that — worse than that — it 
poured millions more into this. It poured millions and millions 
more tax dollars into this project to cover it up. 
 
But the court case and the brown envelopes came, and in 
December of last year the truth came out. And it was quite a 
two-week session of the legislature we had in December. We 
watched the reactions of these members opposite as this truth 

came out. And as the depth of this scandal became apparent to 
the backbenches, it was interesting to watch them in question 
period. It was interesting to watch them after question period, 
with the Deputy Premier and the then minister of Sask Water 
and the then minister of Industry, I guess, trying to buck up 
their members, all the while fully ablazed themselves by a 
scandal the likes of which we haven’t seen, including the 1980s. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the information came out, and we asked 
question after question after question after question after 
question, and the answer we got is, it’s before the courts. It’s 
before the courts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well eventually, a few weeks later, after still more questions, 
the Premier — in Saskatoon I think — right out of the blue 
says, you know what? We’re going to have an inquiry. We’re 
going to have a probe. That’s what he says. And we’re going to 
make the probe public. And so, the official opposition 
congratulates the Premier for that. Encourages him to keep the 
terms of reference broad, but congratulates him for the probe. 
 
And two weeks later, the probe is given to him by his deputy 
minister, and the Premier releases it. Now the only problem 
with the probe is that he didn’t keep the terms of reference 
broad. He kept them very narrow. He kept them very narrow on 
those three questions from that Ernst & Young report. 
 
Now there were many other questions that haven’t been 
answered, and we’re going to continue to ask those questions. 
 
But the deputy minister to the Premier’s report said quite 
clearly . . . He handed over to the Premier his report that said, 
you know what? Here’s the deal, Mr. Premier. One of your 
senior ministers hasn’t been telling the truth. That’s what his 
report said. In a letter to one of those who bid on the 
construction of the sheds, that’s what the deputy minister’s 
report said. And it also confirmed that the taxpayers’ price for 
that little deception is $28 million. 
 
And we’ve already been over what happened as a result of that, 
Mr. Speaker. The accountability of the government opposite, 
the steps that were taken to address this . . . were what? They 
swapped Nanaimo bars at a new swearing-in ceremony, and the 
minister’s got a new portfolio. That’s the sum and the total of 
the action taken in the wake of a $28 million scandal that is the 
result of six years of deception of taxpayers, their own labour 
friends, and cabinet colleagues, Mr. Speaker. That is the sum 
and the total. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But you know, Mr. Speaker, the deputy 
minister’s report . . . And the Deputy Premier will want to pay 
attention to this since apparently he has to now answer all the 
questions because the minister responsible is either unable or 
unwilling to do it. So he’s got to answer some questions about 
Microgro, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do you remember Microgro, Mr. Speaker? Microgro was a seed 
growing business that was really begun at the encouragement of 
SPUDCO. SPUDCO said there’s a real business opportunity for 
you to get into the nuclear seed business. Why don’t you go 
ahead and do that, and we’re going to have a long-term paying 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

relationship with you, and you can expand your business, and 
everything will be fine. 
 
But by the time that agreement starts to get going, Mr. Speaker, 
by the time it starts to get going, SPUDCO’s already in trouble. 
SPUDCO’s axles are already pouring out grease. The thing’s 
losing money. It’s out of control. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and we know now that the minister of Sask 
Water at the time, the current member for Meadow Lake, at a 
board meeting, at a Sask Water board meeting, approves of a 
strategy, approves of a strategy to impact this company’s 
financial statements. There were some people that went 
bankrupt in that fiasco, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On one hand the government’s saying, why don’t you get into 
this business and then on the other hand, the minister personally 
approving a strategy, personally approving a strategy to impact 
the financial statements of this company, to bankrupt a 
Saskatchewan company. 
 
And the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow nods her head. 
She’s nodding her head, and that is arrogance and the attitude 
that’s going to result in this government getting an electoral 
horsewhupping in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Right there, right there . . . the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, that’s the attitude that’s going to result in their 
demise. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we should get back to Microgro. We should 
get back to Microgro. Believe it or not, believe it or not, the 
minister — the current minister of CIC and the then minister of 
Sask Water who sanctioned the strategy — is actually caught at 
a meeting in Saskatoon by the media. And the media put a 
microphone in his face and say, you know the Sask Party’s 
asking if it’s true that you financially . . . if you tried to impact 
the financial statements of a company to drive them under so 
you wouldn’t have any more long-term commitment to them 
from SPUDCO’s point of view. And the media asked him if 
that was true. 
 
And do you know what the minister said? Well no, absolutely 
that’s not true. In fact, the minister said, the minister said, we 
expedited payment to this group. We expedited a cheque when 
we got, like, about the third or fourth notice that they owed 
them money. That’s what the minister said. 
 
And the issue seemed to go away, but I think it’s going to come 
back, Mr. Speaker. I think that issue’s going to come back 
because a few days later on the front page of The StarPhoenix 
there is a special by a reporter named Jason Warick who’s done 
some pretty significant work on this SPUDCO file. And he does 
an in-depth story on Microgro and their relationship with the 
government of Saskatchewan and their relationship with that 
minister. And they interviewed the people from this company. 
And it’s pretty clear. It’s very, very clear that shortly after he 
authorized the strategy to impact the financial statements of 
Microgro, the payments that were due them by Sask Water 
slowed down and then stopped to the end of that year, to the 
end of ’98. And only in April of ’99, after I don’t know how 

many more letters and after it was too late for Microgro, did the 
minister authorize a cheque to be paid. 
 
So we’re left to conclude what? We’re left to conclude that it is 
precisely the fact of the case that this government, that minister, 
that also still sits on the front benches, set out on a purposeful 
strategy to damage a Saskatchewan company so that they 
wouldn’t have to pay them, so they wouldn’t have to pay their 
bills, Mr. Speaker. And for that he too should have been fired 
over the SPUDCO scandal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But nobody gets fired. Nobody pays any prices. 
What about the bingo scandal? That’s also part of the motion 
today. I’m sure the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy will want 
to talk a little bit about that. But isn’t that interesting. Aren’t the 
parallels interesting between SPUDCO? 
 
Here’s another situation, another situation where there is no 
business plan for an investment in mega bingo linking bingos 
across the province. And, most alarmingly, there’s no cabinet 
approval for this plan. So off they go, off they go, Mr. Speaker, 
without a cabinet approval and a business plan. Off the NDP go 
and they invest in this grandiose scheme to linked bingos. And I 
don’t want to take all the content for the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, but of course the sad news for taxpayers 
is, is that the end of the story is this. The end of the story is that 
we as the taxpayers, thanks to the NDP, lose another $6.2 
million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when it became apparent . . . No and now 
we have a Premier by the way who in the wake of SPUDCO 
says, you know, this wasn’t acceptable. I’m not going to hold 
any of my cabinet to account, but this whole SPUDCO thing 
was not acceptable, he says. And I am going to ask for a higher 
level of accountability now in the wake of SPUDCO. Things 
are going to change. That’s what the Premier of the province 
said. 
 
So the bingo scandal comes along, and we find out, Mr. 
Speaker, we find out that they learned absolutely nothing from 
SPUDCO. We find out that there would have been several 
opportunities — you would presume, if the cabinet ministers 
had a clue of what was going on at SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) and if they didn’t have a clue 
they should have — several opportunities to put a stop to that 
madness and to come clean, and to come clean, Mr. Speaker, 
before the taxpayers lost $6.2 million. 
 
But did they do that? No, they probably sought the counsel of 
the member for P.A. Northcote. They probably sought the 
counsel of the current Minister of IGA who said, you know 
what? I’ve done this before, and here’s how we do it. Here’s 
how we do it. I got away with $28 million. I’ve done this 
before. Don’t say a word. Don’t say a word to the taxpayers, 
and we’ll get through this. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers have seen through both of 
these things. The taxpayers have seen through that. The 
taxpayers have seen through investments in dot-coms in 
Atlanta, Georgia. The taxpayers have seen through investments 
in Chile and Mexico. The taxpayers have seen through the land 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

 

titles debacle which the Minister of Industry stood up to defend 
today. 
 
And let’s just very quickly touch on that because it does relate 
directly to the kind of scandal we’re talking about in the 
motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Information Services Corporation story is a compelling 
story. It’s tragic, and it’s sad for the taxpayers, but it’s fairly 
compelling because remember this, that in 1996 the government 
of the day set out to automate land titles in Saskatchewan, 
something that we needed to do. We were the last province in 
the Dominion to do that, and the Saskatchewan Party 
completely agrees that that was the . . . (inaudible) . . . and the 
right thing to do at the time. 
 
And they . . . We’ve got the cabinet item. They even cost out 
automating the land titles. It was $19.7 million in that cabinet 
document. That was the cost to automate land titles in the 
province of Saskatchewan in 1996, but something happened 
along the way. And we know that Janice MacKinnon was 
concerned about it. On December 14, 2000, she got concerned 
with what happened along the way. Remember the plan. We’ll 
get our land titles automated for $19.7 million. And I don’t 
know. I can’t get into heads of the cabinet at that time. Frankly, 
I don’t want to go there; it’d be a pretty scary place. But I’m 
sure, Mr. Speaker, but I’m pretty sure, Mr. Speaker, that what 
they would have done was checked out prices from other 
jurisdictions maybe. If we buy Manitoba’s or Alberta’s and 
bring it back here and modify it for Saskatchewan, we’re 
probably looking at about 19.7, $20 million. 
 
But something happened on the way from common sense to 
NDP insanity. And it’s highlighted a little bit, it’s highlighted a 
little bit by Janice MacKinnon in this memo, “Request for 
Information Regarding Saskatchewan Information Services 
Corporation . . .” December 14, 2000. And I’d like to read some 
of it for you, if you don’t mind, Mr. Speaker: 
 

During the . . . (CIC) Board’s review of Information 
Services Corporation’s . . . Performance Management 
Document on December 8, 2000, I expressed my concern 
about the lack of details in ISC’s Document, but more 
importantly the direction ISC seems to be heading. 
 
When the province decided to proceed with the LAND 
project, it agreed not only to automate the land titles . . . but 
also to establish a Crown corporation . . . to carry out the 
task . . . 

 
There, that’s what happened on the way from common sense to 
insanity. The old 1970s shag-rug, lava-lamp solution of a 
Crown corporation for everything in the province reared its ugly 
head, and that’s the decision that they made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — But Ms. MacKinnon goes on, Mr. Speaker. Ms. 
MacKinnon in her memo goes on. It says: 
 

This decision was made on the presumption that all aspects 

of the venture would be profitable, based upon the 
commercial business case presented for developing, 
marketing, administering the province’s land titles and 
geomatics . . . 

 
This apparent expansion is of concern (she says) as there 
are no concrete opportunities for significant new revenue 
from sources beyond Land and Geomatics . . . SaskTel has 
the provincial mandate for the development of commercial 
e-commerce. 

 
Here’s the spectre of this. The minister, minister MacKinnon of 
the day is saying, you know what? ISC is getting so out of hand 
that it’s starting to compete with other Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s 500 per cent over budget. It’s 500 per cent over 
budget. The system doesn’t work, and they’re competing with 
themselves. But other than that, it’s a pretty good idea, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here’s their other concerns: 
 

Government information technology projects are tendered 
on a competitive basis, providing no preferential treatment 
of Crown entities; 
 
The economic goal of growing the private information 
technologies sector may be put at risk with further 
expansion of the government in this area; and 
 
The Information Technology Office is responsible for 
co-ordinating and managing the (IT) needs . . . of . . . 
government. 

 
So those are the concerns that Ms. MacKinnon outlined at the 
time. She outlined some other very important concerns about 
deals like SPUDCO and deals like the bingo scandal and other 
deals we heard about today like ethanol. What does she say 
about them? She says: 
 

This government . . . (Mr. Calvert et al. . . . I beg your 
pardon, the Premier et al.) are returning to the 1970s — to 
the tried and the failed policies of the 1970s that have been 
rejected absolutely everywhere in the free world. 
 

That’s what Janice MacKinnon says. 
 
The member for Elphinstone’s looking surprised, but he ought 
not to be. It was minister MacKinnon. It was Ms. MacKinnon 
that said those words. In fact, she said she could no longer abide 
to hang out with a bunch of — and I’m paraphrasing a bit — 
she could no longer abide to hang out with a bunch of 
wheeler-dealers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well who are the wheeler-dealers on the government side? And 
I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is a lot easier to wheel 
and deal with someone else’s money, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve 
seen from the NDP. But I wonder who are the wheeler-dealers 
over there? I think most of them gone. 
 
The current Minister of CIC, he’s a wheeler-dealer. He doesn’t 
like to micromanage, he doesn’t like to answer questions, but he 
likes to wheel and he likes to deal, Mr. Speaker. And he’s here. 
He’s here. I don’t see any longer the member for P.A. 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

Northcote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member not to make any 
reference to the absence or presence of members in the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for that. I apologize for 
that reference and I’ll be much more careful. Mr. Speaker, I see 
some across the way that perhaps fall under the category that 
Ms. MacKinnon called wheeler-dealer . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I don’t think the Minister of Environment 
is a wheeler-dealer. I’m not sure he would have been in that 
circle of wheeler-dealers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker, I think he found out about 
the wheeler-dealing, the wheely, the wheeling and the dealing. I 
think he found out about it and what did he do about it, Mr. 
Speaker? He did absolutely nothing. I think the Minister of 
Environment knew about the deception at SPUDCO, was aware 
of what was happening with the bingo scandal, knew about the 
Information Services Corporation debacle. I think he knew of 
all of those things and he chose to do nothing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you this. They made their 
choice; they have made their choice. They have chosen quite 
wrongly to get involved in almost every sector of the economy, 
to risk money that’s not their own, to risk involuntary 
shareholders’ money, tax dollars. That’s a choice they have 
made. And it has let down the great promise and potential of 
this province, greater than any other single policy that any other 
government pursued. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said time and time again, to the 
extent that previous governments made the same choice they 
also let down the people of the province. But there will be a 
new choice very, very soon, coming up in the next election. 
And people are already making that choice. We’ve seen the 
polling of late, and they are going to choose, Mr. Speaker, a 
path that does not betray the promise of Saskatchewan, that 
understands that our greatest asset is the people, is our business 
sector, is our entrepreneurs. And if we just get out of their way 
they will grow the province. 
 
If we provide honest government, if we get our labour 
regulations right, our labour legislation right, our regulations 
right, if we stop competing with them with their own money, if 
we start telling them the truth and stop wasting money, that they 
will grow the province. The people will grow the province by 
100,000 more of their compatriots in the next 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government, the NDP have made their choice. 
They made their choice in favour of government intervention. 
On the SPUDCO file they made their choice to stay silent, to 
deceive. They made their choice to mislead. All of those 
chances over five years to come clean and they made their 
choice to deceive. They made their choice on the bingo scandal 
to try to cover it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they made their choice to invest taxpayers’ dollars 
almost anywhere but the province of Saskatchewan. They made 
their choice to invest in Newcastle over Nipawin. They made 
their choice to invest in Atlanta, Georgia instead of Admiral, 
Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, they made their choice to 

invest in Chile, in Mexico instead of Humboldt and Moose Jaw, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now we’re only a few short months away from the people 
of this province who will make their own choice. And they will 
make the choice to be sure, Mr. Speaker, to change the 
Government of Saskatchewan, to change its approach to the 
economy, and to grow Saskatchewan in a way we have not seen 
since 1905, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But the first thing we’ve got to do — the first 
thing we got to do, Mr. Speaker — is clean up the mess. The 
Saskatchewan Party in government is going to have to clean up 
the mess. It’s going to be a big job for the member for 
Rosetown. It’s going to be a big job for the Saskatchewan Party. 
But we are committed to the job. We are committed to it. We 
are committed to clean up the mess. 
 
What we have to do before we could start cleaning it up is 
recognize where the messes are, and that’s what this motion’s 
about today. We’re recognizing at least where two of the 
messes are and we’ll put them on the list of things that we’re 
going to fix up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the current Premier and 
cabinet for its continuing practice of covering up financial 
losses in its numerous business ventures such as SPUDCO 
and mega bingo despite numerous promises in the past to 
be more forthright over such losses. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great honour to stand 
today and speak to the motion that was forwarded by the 
member from Swift Current which reads: that this Assembly 
condemns the current Premier and cabinet for a continuing 
practice of covering up financial losses in its numerous business 
ventures such as SPUDCO and mega bingo despite numerous 
promises in the past to be more forthright over such losses. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is very obvious to the people of 
Saskatchewan that their promise of being more forthright 
certainly hasn’t come true. And as they continue to do day after 
day in this legislature, we find out of the cover-ups that they 
have initiated. We keep believing that some day that we will 
wake up and this will be a thing of the past and we won’t keep 
uncovering these initiatives. 
 
But again . . . and, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, it makes us 
very, very concerned because the only way we ever find out 
about this misspending is if we uncover it or someone happens 
to pass us a brown envelope or sends us an e-mail or gives us 
some kind of a message and tells us what the NDP are really up 
to because they believe in this province and they’re concerned 
about the people of this province and the taxpayers and the First 
Nations people that rely . . . especially when I’m speaking about 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

 

mega bingo, Mr. Speaker, because the dollars from mega bingo 
were to go directly to charities, to the people of this province, 
and to First Nations people to improve their lifestyle. And this 
government chose to cover that up for over two years, even 
when they knew full well that their scheme had failed and that 
they have lost 6.2 million taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the annual report when they actually finally 
shut down mega bingo, there is one line . . . two lines, I 
apologize: 
 

The mega bingo program is an interlinked bingo game that 
can be played simultaneously at more than one bingo hall. 
The mega bingo program was discontinued effective June 
2001 and costs of discontinuing the program were expensed 
during the year. 

 
Cost. No, no reference to the amount of money. And I looked 
through the annual reports, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there is no 
reference to what this actually ever did cost. And at the end of 
the day, when they lost 6.2 million taxpayers’ dollars, there’s 
still no indication to the people of this province what this 
government lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they did this with no business plan, no cabinet 
approval, no ministerial approval, no due diligence. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask the members opposite how they can justify this 
expenditure. 
 
This government chose to do nothing to reveal to the people 
what they had done. They did nothing to help the bingo 
operators that they put in jeopardy. They went out . . . And I 
have to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that day after day in this 
House as we questioned the minister of Liquor and Gaming, 
first of all he told us that this was initiated by the bingo 
operators, then he told us that there was a committee, an 
advisory committee. Then he told us that there was no cost to 
charities. Then he told us that he was protecting charities and 
communities by this initiative, and then he told us that he had 
approval. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this simply is not the case. We have found 
out by reading, by speaking to people, that none of these issues 
were in fact the truth. Mr. Speaker, this was initiated by Liquor 
and Gaming. It was a failed venture from day one and we have 
yet, we have yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have an answer from 
this minister or any other member of the NDP Party about what 
really went on with mega bingo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a failed venture and as the member from 
Swift Current has just spoke about the failed ventures of the 
NDP, that somehow they think $6.2 million is small in 
comparison to what some of their other losses are. And I guess 
I’d have to agree with that. 
 
When you have a $28 million loss in SPUDCO and the member 
opposite, the Minister of CIC tells the people of Saskatchewan 
this is a success story; when we have a $107 million loss in ISC 
and the Minister of Justice stands in the House today and 
somehow says that we, nor the people of Saskatchewan, know 
what we’re talking about, that they really didn’t lose $107 
million . . . And yet his officials claim otherwise. His officials 
gave a presentation saying that the cost was $107 million. 

Again even today, in light of this fact, we have this minister still 
trying to deceive the people of the province by saying we don’t 
understand, the people of the province don’t understand, that 
somehow this was not the amount that was spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again the people of Saskatchewan want to know 
who gave authorization for the mega bingo project. Mr. 
Speaker, if we look back to 1997 when this was originally 
initiated, it was the minister, the now Minister of CIC that was 
in charge of Liquor and Gaming at that time. Did this minister 
stand in the House last week when we asked these questions 
and say, I was the one that gave authorization? Or did he give 
authorization? Or did no one give authorization? 
 
The minister of Liquor and Gaming today tells us that they gave 
approval in the concept. But then after the fact, when the $6.2 
million was tendered according to them, did they give approval 
for the $6.2 million? Or is there someone that worked in Liquor 
and Gaming at that time who was given the authority to expend 
$6.2 million — taxpayers’ money — with no business plan, no 
cabinet approval, no ministerial approval, and no due diligence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:15) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — And the members opposite have absolutely no 
regard for this loss. This is money, Mr. Speaker, that was to go 
to charities and was to go to First Nations people. And I can 
think of a lot of reasons — a lot of reasons — a lot of ways that 
that money could have been used. 
 
And I am sure that if you asked people across this province . . . 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, there was a farm, home, and leisure show 
in Weyburn on the weekend. And people were coming up to me 
and saying, I drive over the highways in this constituency day 
after day and put up with that and this NDP government that is 
supposed to represent me spends $6.2 million on a failed bingo 
scheme — and I am supposed to put up with driving on 
highways like this? It is not acceptable. 
 
I have people saying, this could have been used for hospitals; it 
could have been used for education. We have a school in our 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, called the Mini Go School. It is for 
kids that need some help before they go to school to help them 
get integrated into society. And last year, last year, we needed 
money. We needed $50,000 to help those kids so we could have 
more students in that program and, Mr. Speaker, it took months 
of trying and looking for money for that. 
 
And yet, this government, the NDP, takes $6.2 million on top of 
all the other failed ventures that we have talked about today and 
spent it and have absolutely no regards. 
 
And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, we find out last week also that 
the Community Initiatives Fund, $7 million was taken out of the 
Community Initiatives Fund. And what was the explanation 
from the department? The explanation was, communities don’t 
need it. They have so much money that we didn’t need to give 
this money to Community Initiatives Fund. And yet at the same 
time we have a list eight pages long that the member from 
Wood River produced showing communities that wanted this 
money, that needed this money, and were denied. And those are 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

only the ones that applied. Never mind all the other initiatives 
out there that communities could use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is appalling to see what this government is 
doing and how they have no regard for the people of this 
province and the money — the hard-earned taxpayers’ money 
— that they are squandering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bingo hall operators in this province were told 
that this was a good deal for them. They were told that they 
should get into this. And originally there was a three-year 
contract promised to the bingo hall operators of this province 
because many of them, Mr. Speaker, many of them had to put 
money upfront. 
 
And as we spoke about on Friday, we talked about the 
Kindersley Lions Club who it cost almost $2,400 to get into the 
failed bingo scheme — money that they cannot recoup. But 
they went into that believing that they had three years to 
recapture that capital. However after they got into the scheme, 
the government came along and changed the contract to a 
one-year contract. And then before the one-year contract was 
up, they cancelled the contract altogether with absolutely no 
regard for the communities that they had got involved in the 
first place and that they had encouraged to go into the bingo 
scheme because they said it was going to work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, if we want to go back a few years 
when the NDP got into the VLTs (video lottery terminal) and 
they started the spiral downward for communities where they 
could not realize the same dollars that they could raise for 
charities and, Mr. Speaker, at that time the NDP in 1995 — this 
same government — they went to communities and they 
promised them, they promised them in 1995 that they would 
return 10 per cent of all VLT revenue to communities; that they 
would be able to, the communities would be able to decide how 
to spend that 10 per cent. It never happened. 
 
One more example of a failed promise of this NDP because 
promises mean absolutely nothing to the NDP government. It’s 
all a bunch of rhetoric; it’s put on paper; they have absolutely 
no intention of carrying through on their promises. 
 
The other promise that they made at that time, Mr. Speaker, was 
that they would cut back VLTs from 4,000 to 3,600. Mr. 
Speaker, they did follow through on that but not for very long. 
We have now turned the page again and we’re going back up to 
4,000 VLTs in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just to give you a comparison. In 
Saskatchewan we have about 1 million people and we have 
4,000 VLTs. In Alberta, in Alberta we have 3 million people 
and we have 6,000 VLTs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
do the numbers. If we did the same as Alberta, we’d have much 
less number of VLTs than we have, much less. Because they 
have 2,000 VLTs per million people; we have 4,000 VLTs for 1 
million people. 
 
And yet when we had the study done on gambling and problem 
gambling in this province, Mr. Speaker, it was shown that VLTs 
are the most addictive form of gambling that there is. And yet 
what does this government do, what does the NDP government 
do? They add more VLTs, not take them away. 

And, Mr. Speaker, what did the Premier say about VLTs? What 
was the Premier’s stand on gambling? Mr. Speaker, he was 
opposed to gambling in this province, he was opposed to it. And 
what did the Premier say when we increased the VLTs from 
3,600 to 4,000? He sat in his chair and said nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this NDP government is addicted 
to gambling. They are addicted more than any of the people that 
are out there gambling. It is this NDP government . . . This year 
alone, $200 million from VLT revenue alone taken out of 
communities and there is absolutely no commitment by this 
government to return that 10 per cent that they promised in 
1995. 
 
And even today, now they’re taking the money away that was 
put in the CIF (Community Initiatives Fund) fund because 
communities don’t need it. Well I challenge this NDP 
government, the members of this NDP government to go out 
into Saskatchewan — Regina, Saskatoon, Yorkton, P.A., 
Weyburn, any rural community — and ask them if they do not 
have any need for money out of the Community Initiatives 
Fund. And I can guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that you will find 
that the answer is they would welcome some money that would 
be returned to them so that they could decide how they could 
use it in their communities. 
 
Instead of what we see today, even with the Community 
Initiatives Fund the way it is, Mr. Speaker, the NDP party, or 
the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, they decide how the dollars 
are going to be spent, not the communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was . . . At the time that mega bingo was 
started in Saskatchewan, when the concept was initiated back in 
1997 or 1996, we wonder, did this NDP government have a 
preconceived notion of what they wanted and set up a tender 
process or an RFP (request for proposal) process so that only 
certain parties would be able to fulfill it. 
 
Or did they ever stop and think, Mr. Speaker, about looking to 
other jurisdictions that had already a system in place where they 
could link bingos, for instance, the province of Alberta. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Alberta has a satellite system. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the information that I have is that it would be 
about 10 per cent, 10 per cent of the cost that this government 
spent on their mega bingo scheme. 
 
And the other thing that’s different about Saskatchewan’s mega 
bingo is that, in Alberta, it is 100 per cent privately owned. 
What a novel concept. Instead of risking 6.2 million taxpayers’ 
dollars on a failed scheme, they could have initiated this, put it 
in a private sector, allowed a private business to go ahead with 
it if they thought it would work, use a satellite system at a tenth 
the cost. And, Mr. Speaker, today in Alberta, this system is still 
in place and still working and still generating dollars for 
charities in the province of Alberta. 
 
In Saskatchewan, not only did we not make money for charities 
in this province, but communities . . . charities lost money 
because they put money in to start the bingo and they also lost 
money, Mr. Speaker. And we lost, for the taxpayers at large, 
$6.2 million — $6.2 million. And somehow the members of the 
NDP think that this doesn’t matter; it’s just a good deal. 
 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

 

You know we heard from the minister over and over again how, 
you know, they did it on behalf of charities. Well what the 
charities in this province say, don’t do us any more favours; 
please don’t do us any more favours. They want this 
government to allow them to run the bingo halls, which is what 
they know how to do. The bingo operators know how to run 
bingo halls. 
 
The responsibility of Liquor and Gaming is not to be in the 
business of running business halls. It is to regulate under the 
Criminal Code section 207 and to ensure that bingo halls are 
run appropriately under the regulation and under the Criminal 
Code. And they are to inspect bingo halls. But they are not — 
they are not — to be in the business of running bingo halls. 
 
And we see this time and time again, Mr. Speaker, where this 
government decides that somehow they know better and they 
have to get involved directly with business. We seen it in 
SPUDCO and we all know what happened to SPUDCO, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We seen how they took a growing potato industry in this 
province . . . We seen how they took Microgro, an initiative of 
two individuals in this province — one of which is from my 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy — and they caused them 
to fail. They deliberately caused them to fail. And somehow 
they think that this is acceptable. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not 
acceptable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when the time came, Mr. Speaker, when the 
time came to shut down the mega bingo, they did this without 
the approval and consultation of the bingo hall operators. They 
were given no option; they were shut down. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this to the very people that they went to and they encouraged to 
go into this, into the bingo scheme. They shut them down 
without any of . . . without them having the option, without 
having a decision made ahead of time. 
 
They formed a committee after the fact, an advisory committee 
after the bingo scheme failed. I think that was a little bit late to 
decide to have a committee to discuss the issue with. 
 
If this government, Mr. Speaker, would have taken the initiative 
before they started mega bingo to talk to the bingo hall 
operators and ask them if they thought that this would work, to 
talk to the charities across this province about what could work, 
but they failed to do that. They went ahead with this scheme, 
Mr. Speaker, without the involvement and the expertise of the 
people that had been the drivers of creating and making dollars 
for charity in this province who had a system that worked. 
 
And because of this NDP and bringing VLTs into the province, 
they were seeing their dollars that they used to make for charity 
were going down. And they were looking for a way, but they 
were not consulted about whether this was the deal that would 
work to help them increase dollars for charities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again we keep seeing how this government, once they get 
involved in deals, in ventures, they continue to lose taxpayers’ 
dollars. We have SPUDCO; we have $107 million in ISC; the 
whole SHIN (Saskatchewan Health Information Network) 
project, which I believe the last time I checked was at $80 
million and we’ve yet to figure out what in the world SHIN is 

doing. We haven’t heard the NDP give us an update on what 
SHIN is doing. Yet they’ve spent $80 million. And the Minister 
of Health, Mr. Speaker, says . . . I believe she’s saying that it 
works. 
 
Well we would like a report from the Minister of Health about 
what — or the Minister of Learning, my apologies, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Learning — and about where we’re at 
with SHIN and whether it actually works. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the dollars that have been lost in 
Channel Lake, in Australia ventures, in dot-coms, in SecurTek, 
and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. And yet we have no apology 
from this government. They sit in their seats day after day and 
somehow think it is okay that this is what happened. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the ways that this $6.2 million 
could have been spent, along with all the other millions of 
dollars that the member from Swift Current spoke about today, 
how they could have been spent to the betterment of the people 
of this province. 
 
We have the mayors . . . I was watching, Mr. Speaker, last 
evening the city of Regina. And they’re in this huge debate over 
how they are going to meet expenditures in the city of Regina 
— whether they’re going to have to increase the mill rate or 
whether they’re going to take money out of reserves or whether 
they’re going to have to cut expenditures — and I believe it’s 
for just over $1 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And we had the mayors throughout this whole province that are 
contemplating how they are going to meet their budget 
responsibilities. These mayors came to this government, they 
came to this government and they asked for them to consider 
that they needed more dollars. Because they went along with 
this government when times were tough and they needed to cut 
back and they realized that we needed to get the deficit under 
control in this province, Mr. Speaker, and the mayors were 
willing to go along with this. 
 
And now when times are better, Mr. Speaker, what does this 
government do? 4.9 million for all of the major cities in this 
province — less than what they spent on mega bingo without 
any plan, without ministerial approval, without cabinet 
approval, without any due diligence. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we still do not know to this day, after six 
days of questioning in this legislature, the minister responsible 
for Liquor and Gaming has failed to answer the simple 
question: who gave approval for the expenditure of $6.2 
million? And we will not quit asking that question until there is 
an answer, Mr. Speaker, and the people of this province will not 
quit asking until there is an answer. 
 
And when the members of the NDP go out to campaign in the 
next election and they’re on the doorstep, I’m sure that many of 
them are going to get the question: who gave approval to the 
mega bingo scheme? Were you part of the scheme; did you — 
they’ll ask the member that’s on their doorstep — did you know 
about this scheme; were you sitting at the cabinet table when 
this was discussed, when the concept was discussed according 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

to the minister of Liquor and Gaming, the concept? 
 
And somehow, somehow we’re supposed to believe that this 
government was so incompetent that they gave approval for a 
concept without any dollars attached to it. If that is the case, Mr. 
Speaker, it is a very, very, very sad commentary on this 
government, that they would approve the concept of mega 
bingo without any regard for the dollars that were going to be 
spent on it. 
 
If that is the case, that is even worse, I believe, in the minds of 
the people of this province, that they have a government that is 
supposed to be guarding the best interests of their tax dollars 
and they approve a concept, Mr. Speaker, without any regard 
for the amount of dollars. And I guess it begs the question: 
could this then come in at $10 million? Could mega bingo have 
cost $20 million? 
 
And I guess, according to the NDP, because they approved the 
concept that any dollar amount was acceptable, Mr. Speaker, it 
is a very sad commentary about this government, that they have 
so little regard, Mr. Speaker, so little regard for the tax dollars 
of this province, that they spent $6.2 million without even 
having it approved — that they just turned the decision over to 
someone else. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I make the point that there is not been an 
answer in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, about who actually gave 
that approval. Was it indeed the minister of Liquor and Gaming 
at that time who is now the Minister of CIC? Or was the 
responsibility delegated to someone that worked in 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming at that time, in 1998, when 
the final approval was given? Was $6.2 million, the expenditure 
of $6.2 million turned over to someone that worked in Liquor 
and Gaming? And if so, Mr. Speaker, who was that person? 
Was that person held responsible, Mr. Speaker, for losing $6.2 
million of taxpayers’ money? 
 
Was that person, whoever they are, held accountable? Because 
it is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that no minister was held 
accountable. No minister was held accountable for the loss of 
$6.2 million. So the question that the people of this province 
want to know is, who was held accountable? Who was held 
accountable for the loss of $6.2 million? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I look at . . . This is the same government, 
the same NDP government that last year tried to hide 90 per 
cent increase to seniors in this province to try and balance their 
budget. Not much different than what they’re doing now, this 
year, with CIF where they’re taking $7 million out of CIF and 
putting it into the General Revenue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we see the same scenario where they tried to 
hide 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker — 90 per cent charged to seniors. 
It is absolutely appalling. And then they stood behind that for 
day after day after day after day in this legislature and the 
member, the member for Regina Wascana Plain at that time, 
Mr. Speaker, said to the legislature and the people of this 
province, we put in 90 per cent because it’s the right thing to 
do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was not the member from Regina Wascana 
Plain. I have to apologize. It was . . . it is now the Minister of 

Transportation, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Regina Qu’Appelle. And he stood in this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, and he said, it’s the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker, to 
charge the seniors of this province 90 per cent of their dollars in 
fees for nursing homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we go back to the mega bingo scandal and 
somehow, Mr. Speaker, the NDP believe and try to tell us it 
somehow doesn’t matter, the $6.2 million. And I guess when 
you’ve lost $28 million on SPUDCO, and spent 107 million on 
ISC, maybe $6.2 million doesn’t sound like very much. But it is 
a lot of money to the people of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just to put it into perspective, that is three 
times — almost three times — the amount of money that the 
whole Dutch Lerat, SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority) scandal was about. And that initiated an 
investigation, Mr. Speaker, a criminal investigation because of 
the loss of $2.1 million. And now we have a loss of $6.2 million 
in the same department, Mr. Speaker, and somehow it doesn’t 
matter. The NDP thinks it’s . . . think that it is inconsequential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also one-quarter of the loss that was realized 
in SPUDCO. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that SPUDCO is a 
huge, huge issue in the minds of the people across this province 
because $28 million would go a long way to improving the 
lifestyles of many people in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is just to put it into a bit of perspective 
so that people in this province, and maybe the NDP, just maybe 
the NDP, will realize how serious it is to lose $6.2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people across this province, and I have to say the 
media as well, have been very, very outraged about this whole 
scandal. And I’d just to read a few of the headings from the 
paper in the last few days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
“Government mum on okayed bingo deal.” “Mega bingo deal 
didn’t get cabinet okay.” “Osika admits to lack of business 
plan.” “Bingo contract questioned.” “We’re all losers at bingo 
in Saskatchewan.” “Opponents slam bingo boondoggle.” 
“Bingo research was limited.” “New Democrats and bingo seem 
to go hand in hand.” “Opposition drills government over bingo 
software deal.” “Osika won’t say who gave final approval.” 
 
And the lists go on, Mr. Speaker. Those are but a few of the 
articles that have been in the papers. And I’m sure that the 
members opposite have read the articles and have heard the 
outrage of the people in this province, Mr. Speaker, about the 
failure of this government to be responsible for their 
hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, directly relating to gambling dollars that are 
generated in this province is the whole initiative about 
responsibility and providing services for addictions in the 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, there is great need for an in-patient 
treatment centre in Saskatchewan. And I realize that there has 
been one now started by the First Nations in this province. 
However, there is not one anywhere else in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I recently spoke with an addictions 
counsellor who told me that it took up to five weeks. Mr. 
Speaker, we could have used the dollars from mega bingo to 
start an in-patient treatment centre in the province of 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have talked about Alberta and how they 
had a plan there that was totally private driven; it would have 
been much less cost and it would not have been any cost to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, there are 
many, many ways that this money could have been used. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again the whole issue around the RFP that 
was put out and how it was awarded still are huge questions in 
the minds of the members on this side of the House and 
certainly in the minds of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And with the linked bingo RFP, the successful party also had to 
have a cash and paper management system. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this is something that Wascana Gaming was into, was part of, 
and there’s huge questions around how this whole initiative 
actually ended up being awarded to Wascana Gaming because 
of their close ties with the NDP government and what really 
transpired in this whole issue. 
 
Was the low bid actually approved, Mr. Speaker? Were the bids 
given to Liquor and Gaming? And who actually gave approval 
from Liquor and Gaming for them? Were the bids for the 
software and the hardware, were they separated? And how were 
they actually awarded? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a huge . . . more issues and 
questions around the whole issue of Wascana Gaming now 
receiving dollars — somewheres up to $500,000 in the last two 
years — also from this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the whole question comes back to $6.2 
million being awarded by this government and there was 
absolutely — apparently, from the words of the minister — no 
ceiling put on what could be spent in order to achieve their 
goals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government continues — even today as 
we speak about the failed ventures of this NDP government — 
continue to prop up the idea that losing $6.2 million, with no 
business plan, no cabinet approval, no ministerial approval, is 
somehow acceptable. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the NDP 
need to consider apologizing — firstly to the charities of this 
province who put their trust and their stake in this program; 
they need to apologize to the First Nations people of this 
province who rely on these dollars for their programs; and they 
need to apologize to the taxpayers at large in this province 
because they caused them to lose $6.2 million that could have 
been used for many, many other reasons. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want the NDP to know, Mr. Speaker, that 
they are going to have to answer for who gave approval to this. 
The people of Saskatchewan are demanding that they be held 
accountable and that they have an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are almost becoming 
immune to the continual loss of taxpayers’ dollars by this 
government. It’s almost like oh, they lost another $6 million. 
It’s like old home week. It’s nothing new. And it’s a very, very 
sad commentary, Mr. Speaker, about the legacy of this 
government that has lost so many millions of dollars on failed 
ventures in this province that people aren’t even really paying 

attention any more because it’s common day. It is scandalous to 
think that a government, that a government, can lose $6.2 
million; that the members of the government don’t seem to be 
concerned; that the minister refuses to answer the questions 
around how it was lost. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we move today that the people of this 
province are going to have an opportunity on election day to 
hold this government accountable. And they are going to have 
to answer to the people of Saskatchewan about how they 
allowed this to happen and how they allowed it to be covered 
up for over two years with absolutely no mention that this had 
ever happened until it was raised by the opposition in this 
province. 
 
Today — today, Mr. Speaker — this still would not be, still 
would not be revealed if the opposition had not questioned this. 
One line, one line in the annual report, with absolutely no 
reference to the amount of money — no reference to the amount 
of money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government will be held accountable on 
election day because they failed to . . . because they have turned 
a blind eye and they have failed the people of this province. 
They have covered it up time and time again. And it begs the 
question, Mr. Speaker — and I’m sure this is in the minds of 
most people in this province — what else is this government, 
what else is this government covering up that we have yet to 
find out? 
 
(15:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our commitment to the people of this 
province when we become government, which will be very 
soon, after the next election when we become government, Mr. 
Speaker, we will find out what happened. We will uncover 
these misspent expenditures and we will reveal to the people of 
the province what this NDP government was really up to. 
 
And I . . . sadly to say, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there’s going 
to be much more uncovered than what we know today. Sadly to 
say, there have been millions of dollars misspent that we know 
of. How many more million have been misspent as well? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now read in closing again our motion — that this 
Assembly condemns the current Premier and cabinet for a 
continuing practice of covering up financial losses in its 
numerous business ventures such as SPUDCO and mega bingo 
despite numerous promises in the past to be more forthright 
over such losses. 
 
I second the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I feel a bit amazed. At 
moments I feel I don’t know what to say. The antics, the 
hysterics, the ranting, the extreme behaviour — I’m not sure 
whether I’m watching a Shakespearean comedy or tragedy. 
 
I don’t know if you remember A Midsummer Nights Dream. 
There was a character in there, Bottom, who thinks he’s all 
things to all people. And one night he’s transformed with this 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

ass’s head and he has a bizarre dream and I’m . . . Quite an 
entertaining guy. But I mean the grade 8s loved him. 
 
Or was I watching the Iraqi information officer in front of the 
Palestinian hotel denying the state of reality . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Got willpower and I am here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks — and they’ll be 
brief and to the point and I won’t repeat myself — I will be 
moving an amendment. I will be moving an amendment and I’ll 
explain why this amendment in a few minutes. 
 
And it will say, that after the word, Assembly, be deleted and 
replaced with the following: commend the current Premier and 
the cabinet for the continuing practice of supporting business 
ventures that achieve economic diversification and community 
development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is why really I am excited to move this 
as an amendment. When I was doing my graduate work in the 
University of Saskatchewan in the mid-90s and we were talking 
about change . . . and I’m really enthralled by this side of the 
House because we really are looking forward to change. And 
how do we make change happen in this great province? Well 
there was a story, and that was, what is the similarities between 
a jet, a jumbo jet and a supertanker? Well the key difference is 
this: neither one has rear-view mirrors. They have a job to do, 
and they’re going forward to do it. 
 
But there is an underlining technology planning, careful 
planning of what we have to do to get from point A to point B. 
We know the experience. We’ve learned from the experience. 
But we are moving forward, and that’s what this is all about. 
We are moving forward, and we have a plan to do that. And 
that’s what this is all about. 
 
And I was very excited to be elected in 2001 because we are 
moving forward, and I saw that with our Premier, that we have 
a plan, and people are moving forward. And I hear what’s going 
on today, and I think, are we stuck in the pre-1999 election 
mode? Have we not got past that time? We are still talking 
about the ’90s. And you know, when you look back in a 
rear-view mirror, you can’t just pick where you stop. 
 
And I was interested in hearing the member speak about going 
back to 1905. Well there was a chunk of time in there, the 
1980s. And I don’t know if we’re going to go into selective 
memory about what we want to talk about, what we don’t want 
to talk about. We don’t want to talk about the ’80s, but we want 
to talk about the ’90s. We want to quote so-and-so. We don’t 
want to quote so-and-so. 
 
Our plan is the future. Our plan is the future, and I’m very 
excited about that, and I’m happy to be here on this side of the 
House. And we will be on this side of the House for many years 
to come because people are listening to us, and we resonate 
with what their hopes, what their plans are for the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I go any further, I want to paint the 
landscape. What’s happening in Saskatchewan today? We have 
our vision, but you can’t really explain a vision unless you tell 
what is the landscape out there right now. And it is not a group 
of negative people. It is not a bunch of people complaining. 

That’s not what we hear. We hear of things happening. People 
are excited about the future here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what happened . . . well let’s take a look at the end of the 
year, the end of the year 2002. Well, Mr. Speaker, in fact 
actually, it’s 11 months now. But at that time, we had seven 
months of consecutive, solid, job growth over last year’s 
figures. All right? We had the highest number ever of people 
working November and a 5.3 per cent increase in employment. 
Employment was up in both agriculture and non-agricultural 
sectors compared to the year before. This is really good news. 
 
In November 2002, employment gains were seen in full-time 
employment up by 15,000, part-time employment up by 9,200. 
Now this is really important. We see these trends are 
continuing. And we don’t hear about this every day. It’s like 
this doesn’t exist. All right? We need to be talking about the 
positive things. This is what people are talking about. 
Saskatchewan has the third-lowest unemployment rate in 
Canada. Retail sales in Saskatchewan during September 2002 
totalled over $700 million, an increase of over 5 per cent 
compared to the year before. Saskatchewan department store 
sales were increased by 6.7 per cent to $63 million. Mr. 
Speaker, in October manufacturing shipments in Saskatchewan 
increased by over 6 per cent. New capital investment is 
expected to grow by over 5 per cent this year. In October 2002 
the value of residential building permits totalled $28 million, an 
increase of 74 per cent compared to the year before. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago, we had a member’s 
statement talking about record housing permits being issued. 
Housing starts in Saskatchewan, urban centres, increased by 23 
per cent. Saskatchewan natural gas production has increased, 
and so has our potash sales. Our average weekly earnings for all 
industries since September 2002 increased by over 1 per cent, 
and this is very good news. And new motor vehicle sales have 
increased. New business incorporations are increasing, and so is 
tourism. 
 
Partnership for Prosperity, what’s our year one progress 
report? Well we are on track or have met the planned 16 targets. 
Our Synchrotron Institute has been established. And land sales 
in 2002 are the highest in five years. And a greenprint for 
ethanol production is on track. 
 
Now I could go through a whole list here, Mr. Speaker, but I do 
want to talk about what I think is the best jewel, the best thing 
we have going for us right now. It’s our Future is Wide Open 
campaign. This is an extensive three-year marketing campaign 
that is aimed at improving Saskatchewan’s image. And this is 
what our plan is. This is our vision. Saskatchewan is a great 
place to live, learn, work, and play and do business. And it’s 
part of our provincial government’s commitment to improving 
attitudes about our province and promoting business and 
investment in Saskatchewan. And it is working. This is an 
important campaign. 
 
Now what are some of our visions, Mr. Speaker? Well I’ll just 
go through some of them. They’re very important, and I think 
they illustrate our commitment to people here in Saskatchewan 
and to business and to development here, community 
development in our province. 
 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, now this may start to sound like the budget 
speech because in a sense that’s our tool, our plan for making 
things happen this year. But, Mr. Speaker, our vision is a 
modern, competitive, economic infrastructure that supports 
unlimited growth and creates the opportunities of the future. 
 
Now how are we doing this, Mr. Speaker? Well we’ve heard a 
lot of talk about CommunityNet, and that’s our province’s 
gateway to the future providing high-speed internet access to 
schools, libraries, health facilities, individuals, and communities 
across the province. Highways, we’ve invested almost about $1 
billion in our highways system, ensuring that transportation 
network is capable of supporting the movement of goods in and 
out of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken a balanced approach, and we see 
the Sask Party is taking an extreme approach. They talk about 
extremes. And the extreme . . . and that’s hard. They are hard 
when it comes to these issues. But we are taking a balanced 
approach. We are giving tax cuts that protect investments in 
infrastructure — a very, very common sense approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a vision that our Crown corporations will 
help to build a growing economy. The Crowns are very critical 
to this. They do a lot of work here in the province to support the 
businesses here. We spent over $1 billion for businesses in this 
province. Crowns buy from over 12,000 Saskatchewan 
suppliers of goods and services. Over 600 local dealers and 
brokers throughout the province partner with the Crowns to 
provide telecom, natural gas, and insurance services. And 
Crowns invest over $400 million every year to expand and 
improve their service networks, creating thousands of 
construction jobs. This is very important. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most of the half-billion-dollar annual payroll 
of Crown employees is spent in their communities throughout 
this province. This is a critical piece, Mr. Speaker, because we 
know, we know the Sask Party’s plan — and they have said it 
many times over — is to attack the Crowns and prepare them 
for sale when the price is right. And this would be most 
unfortunate for the people of Saskatchewan. This extreme 
approach to the economy that they talk about will not go to help 
our province grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that is very important are the cultural 
industries. We’ve done a lot of work here in supporting that 
industry because we know that is the voice of the people here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year we introduced The Status of the Artist legislation 
which recognizes the contribution of cultural workers that they 
make to the enrichment of our society. The Saskatchewan film 
employment tax credit, since the tax credit was implemented, 
production volumes have reached over $140 million in this 
province. And of course our sound stage here in Regina. We 
continue to support the Saskatchewan Arts Board with over 
$3.7 million a year, and this is the oldest arms-length funding 
agency of its kind in North America. The Saskatchewan arts 
stabilization program provides large art institutions with 
working capital in recognition of the high level of 
organizational management and governance they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, very important aspect. And, Mr. Speaker, as well, we 
support through the lottery system, Sask Culture, with over $8 
million a year in cultural funding, and the Western 
Development Museum of $2.4 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again our vision, our vision of the Wide Open 
Future campaign is a safe, modern, efficient transportation 
system. The plan is the largest . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would just ask the member to 
try to relate his remarks more to the nature of the motion before 
us which deals with finances and business ventures. And so I 
would ask the member to confine his remarks to that aspect. 
There’s not yet an amendment before the floor, so I would ask 
the member to stick to the topic. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll restate 
my amendment that I would be adding, and that would be, after 
the word, Assembly, be deleted and replaced with the following 
words: commend the current Premier and cabinet for a 
continuing practice of supporting business ventures that achieve 
economic diversification and community development in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I would think that the transportation system would 
relate to that in terms of economic diversification. So this will 
be our largest investment for transportation system. And as well 
again, this is a balanced approach to sustainable investment for 
our future economic and community development. Mr. Speaker, 
of course we’ve talked a lot about our . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Why is the 
member from Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce a guest, 
please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
member for allowing me to interrupt his speech. 
 
And to you and through you to all members of this House, I 
would like to introduce a person that is no stranger to this 
House. He was the member for Rosetown-Elrose in 1975, and 
he is now my Member of Parliament for Souris-Moose 
Mountain, Mr. Roy Bailey. And I’d like to ask all members to 
join me in welcoming Roy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:00) 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Government Approach 
to Business Ventures 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Our vision on this landscape of jobs, jobs, jobs 
is a world-class research creating new jobs, new jobs, high-end 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

jobs and opportunities. This is very important as we approach 
our centennial. 
 
Well there’s three or four things that we’re doing here. One is 
continuing support for Innovation Place at the University of 
Saskatchewan, one of the leading university-based research 
parks in North America, home to more than 115 companies and 
research organizations that employ 2,000 people, Mr. Speaker, 
and contribute more than $245 million a year to the provincial 
economy. 
 
Here in Regina, we continue support for the Regina Research 
Park at the University of Regina which is rapidly becoming one 
of Canada’s leading research centres for the study of climate 
change and as it relates to the energy industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I already mentioned this as well, so I’ll try not 
to repeat myself, but the Canadian Light Source synchrotron — 
very important investment here in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well speaking to the amendment, we have a 
historic expansion of mining and mineral exploration happening 
here in this province right now. Our vision is for thousands of 
new jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan people, created 
through a policy of targeted, sustainable tax changes and 
regulation reforms. This is made possible through a 10-year 
royalty holiday for new precious and base metal mines, a rebate 
of tax on fuel used to generate power in remote locations and on 
fuel used for off-road mineral exploration activities, and 
incentives to encourage grassroot, mineral exploration by 
individual prospectors and exploration companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is very exciting to see the things that have 
happened with this. And again we’ve heard members’ 
statements to this effect these past few days. Mr. Speaker. This 
speaks to a balanced, common-sense approach that our 
government is taking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, but I think that what I want 
to do is talk about our vision for fair, competitive taxes for 
small businesses to encourage new jobs. And we’ve heard about 
this recently in our budget — how we plan to encourage and 
think and listen to small businesses, the kind of things that they 
need. These will be targeted tax cuts that encourage investment 
and jobs, particularly the small business corporate tax rate, and 
it’s being reduced in rates, and this is very, very exciting stuff. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the Sask Party 
and their extreme position. And yesterday I raised a point about 
how they look across the country and think about how do they 
relate to different political parties. 
 
And today we heard them talking about the Quebec Liberals 
and how they would tie themselves to the Quebec Liberals. But 
I was a little shocked yesterday when they wouldn’t tie 
themselves to the BC (British Columbia) Liberals. And that was 
a different story yesterday, but we’ve seen the kind of things 
that are happening in BC. And here they are, yes, today they 
were a Quebec Liberal but not a BC Liberal. 
 
But here I just want to read this piece here. First the 
Saskatchewan Party latched on to the BC plan and the 
Saskatchewan Party leader declared in a speech to the North 

Saskatoon Business Association: 
 

One initiative that I believe holds tremendous value for 
Saskatchewan is a project launched by Premier Campbell 
called the Core Services Review. 
 

He went on to say: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government will launch a similar 
Core Services Review in this province within 30 days of 
taking office. 

 
And this is quite alarming because we know that that’s causing 
a lot of problems and in fact it sounds like the United Nations 
body, the International Labour Organization, has condemned 
this core services review on a couple of occasions, particularly 
how they treat the public service employees and as well as how 
they treat women. 
 
So I do have a lot of concerns about the extreme behaviour, the 
extreme rhetoric, these extreme ideas — because I don’t think I 
would call them plans — that are coming out of the 
Saskatchewan Party, and we hear them daily. And I think we 
need to take a more reasoned, a more common sense, a more 
balanced approach as we approach the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see this happening on this side of the House. The 
government is very interested in hearing what people have to 
say. We will take those chances. We will support the people 
here in this province and we have done that and we will 
continue to do that. 
 
We have built plans. We have the infrastructure. We understand 
what needs to be done. But what alarms me is what happens on 
the other side of the House with, for example, the hysterics, the 
ranting that went on earlier today. That really shows how 
one-level or shallow some of their thinking is. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude by reading once again my 
amendment. I move: 
 

That all words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and 
replaced with the following (and I quote): 

 
commend the current Premier and cabinet for a continuing 
practice of supporting business ventures that achieve 
economic diversification and community development in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I move that, and seconded by the member from Regina 
Northeast. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. It gives me great pride to second the motion moved by 
my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. And I 
can’t help but fully support the amendment. 
 
What this amendment does is actually point out the real thrust 
of the debate here this afternoon. And that thrust of the debate is 
about building the economy here in Saskatchewan, about 
building our province, about the different ideas or the different 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

 

perspectives on how that can be done. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we have for a number of years now 
proven the ability that, in order to build the province and build 
it successfully and build our economy, building our society, you 
must have a plan. A plan that clearly outlines the strengths of 
our province, that works with what we have and builds on those 
strengths, and it, I suppose, Mr. Speaker, could be best 
compared to building the pillars of support, the strength of our 
economy. And those pillars are numerous. We have individual 
initiative with individual investment and individual 
entrepreneurs working in this province and doing so very 
successfully. 
 
We’ve also recognized, and a long time ago recognized by our 
forefathers and the leaders in this province, that there was a 
need for the public sector to play a meaningful role. And that 
could best be done in the service areas such as providing 
electricity, natural gas, telephones, and those types of services 
that could be best provided by the public endeavours. And 
thusly was created the Crown corporations to serve that need, to 
serve the Saskatchewan people with the abilities to have the 
service, to enjoy that service at a very competitive cost — 
competitive costs so that they could compete in the commercial 
marketplace, compete not only interprovincially and nationally, 
but compete globally. 
 
In order to enjoy those strengths and those pillars, another 
significant pillar of our society and of our economy is the pillars 
of a workforce — the working men and women of 
Saskatchewan that provide the labour that creates the return of 
value for the investment. And it is proven over and over again it 
is essential that we maintain in Saskatchewan a strong, skilled, 
well-trained workforce. 
 
That all fits in with the plan, Mr. Speaker, a plan that just 
doesn’t happen — unlike the suggestions of the members 
opposite. The member from Swift Current today, who 
suggested that the way to success in our province was to have 
unbridled free enterprise without any plan that we would . . . 
that the government’s responsibility would simply be to sit back 
and let the unbridled free enterprise take over, that they would 
provide the prosperity for our province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, time and history have proven in 
Saskatchewan, that simply doesn’t work. You have to have a 
plan. And that’s what makes me so proud of being a part of this 
government. We have demonstrated that plan. We have 
demonstrated that a plan works. We have demonstrated — 
unlike the opposition — a slogan doesn’t work. You need a 
plan and that’s been laid out very competently both in the 
Throne Speech and in our budget speech. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party have had their 
slogan for a while, saying they have a plan . . . and they have a 
plan. But they have failed to release and divulge that plan to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, they do have a plan. And I believe 
they have a reason for not divulging it to the public because 
they know that once Saskatchewan people take a close look at 
their plan, they won’t like it and they’ll reject it out of hand. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that that plan is not one that would fit 

with the norm or with the history of Saskatchewan. I believe 
that plan is not a plan to build Saskatchewan, not a plan to build 
Saskatchewan at all like our government in the past, for nearly 
the last 44 years or so, has built this province. 
 
Their plan is to tear this province down. Their plan is to tear 
away the very infrastructure, the very pillars that support our 
economy and support our province and support our citizenship 
within this province. They do not want to build on that; they 
want to tear it down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend my colleague, the member 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld, for the thoughtfulness he put into his 
amendment because it certainly broadens the depth; it broadens 
and deepens the discussion and the debate to take place here 
today. 
 
As I touched on earlier, Mr. Speaker, the need to maintain a 
solid, well-trained, skilled, well-equipped workforce to meet the 
needs of our investors and the needs to develop the province 
here in Saskatchewan . . . With that, Mr. Speaker, and to 
support that workforce, we need to have rules and regulations 
that will ensure and protect the working men and women of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many of those rules and regulations in place. But one 
that I think that all men and women in Saskatchewan really 
appreciate is the Workers’ Compensation, the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, that in the event of an unfortunate injury, 
a working person is . . . has a degree of comfort in the security 
of knowledge that they will not lose out on income, income that 
will provide them the ability to continue to keep a roof over 
their heads and the heads of their family, keep food on the table, 
and continue to support their families. They will not be left 
destitute. There is something out there to protect them in the 
event of an unfortunate industry . . . industrial accident in the 
workplace. 
 
But I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, when I was reviewing the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone and his comments in the 
Throne Speech on March 24 were, and I will quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We’ll also look at reviewing the mandate of . . . Workers’ 
Compensation Board to ensure that the Workers’ 
Compensation Board is not only serving injured workers 
efficiently and effectively, but also . . . fully accountable to 
the employer as well . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that immediately makes me wonder, what 
does the Sask Party mean by fully accountable to the 
employers? Does it mean that the . . . Saskatchewan will 
implement the Canadian Federation of Independent Business’s 
Saskatchewan section wish list for workers’ compensation? 
Does it mean that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Does it mean that the Saskatchewan Party would endorse as a 
part of their plan — the plan they don’t want to reveal to the 
people of Saskatchewan — endorse the fact that they believe 
that injured workers should lose benefits, should have a drop 
from 90 per cent of net income to 75 per cent? Is that part of the 
Sask Party plan for injured workers? I believe it might be. 
 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

Is it also part of the Sask Party plan for injured workers and for 
the working men and women of Saskatchewan to let private 
insurance companies sell compensation coverage? Is it? Is that 
part of their plan? 
 
Is it also part of the Sask Party plan to abolish the Worker’s 
Advocate office that was set up nearly 30 years ago? It has been 
working very well, serving the needs of injured workers. Is that 
part of their plan? 
 
Is it part of their plan to stop funding to occupational health and 
safety division? All workers’ compensation boards across 
Canada do. But is it part of the Sask Party plan to limit or 
reduce or eliminate that funding, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Is it part of the Sask Party’s plan to end annual cost-of-living 
indexing to those who are receiving workers’ compensation? Is 
that part of their plan? 
 
But most of all, Mr. Speaker, is it a part of the Sask Party plan 
to introduce, if they were ever government, to introduce a 
three-day waiting period — a three-day waiting period— a 
three-day waiting period for injured workers? When somebody 
is injured on a job site they and their family will have to go 
without income for three days. Is that part of the Sask Party 
plan? No wages on day one. No wages on day two. No wages 
on day three to feed their family, to clothe their family, to house 
their family. That is the penalty a working person in this 
province would have to pay for being injured on the job. Mr. 
Speaker, is that the plan that they won’t reveal to the people of 
Saskatchewan? I believe it is. 
 
(16:15) 
 
I believe that, Mr. Speaker, because I have studied oppositions 
and governments in various provinces and in the federal 
governments. And I have noticed that in virtually every 
legislature in this country, and in our national government, the 
opposition parties will offer constructive criticism. They will 
criticize. And that’s the job of opposition and rightfully so. But 
as part of that, they will offer constructive criticism. That’s true 
everywhere but in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan we do not 
get constructive criticism. We simply get ridicule and criticism 
from the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a part of the pillars that build our economy and 
support our economy and support our society here in 
Saskatchewan — and a very important part of that — is of 
course our Crown corporations. And it’s interesting what the 
Sask Party’s position has been on the Crown corporations and 
the future of Crown corporations under their government if they 
were ever to become a government. And that, that position has 
been almost a position in quicksand because it seems to move 
from day to day. 
 
It’s interesting that in 1999 in their election flyer, they had a 
part of their flyer, a commitment to Saskatchewan people that if 
they were ever to become government they would use binding 
provincial referenda where appropriate to settle the major issues 
such as the sale of Crown corporations. 
 
In the 1999 election they were saying that before they would 
sell a Crown corporation, they would go to the people with a 

referenda. They would ask the people’s permission first. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough in 2001 at their convention 
— and I take this particular quote right from their convention 
book — where it says, the headline is: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party Crown Corporation Resolutions 
 
CC9701 - The Sask Party’s policy of privatization is set out 
as follows: 
 
1. Privatization will be considered if it is demonstrated that 
continued government ownership is no longer in the best 
interest of . . . (Saskatchewan payers); 

 
Whoa. Two years later, they’re saying now they would make 
that decision. They would no longer ask the Saskatchewan 
people what they thought about the future of Crown 
corporations. A Sask Party government would take that 
responsibility on themselves and they would make that decision 
without consulting Saskatchewan people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to think that that position 
moves again when, on occasions, the Sask Party members have 
been known to say well no, they really wouldn’t, they wouldn’t 
sell off all the Crowns; they would cherry-pick; they would sell 
off the unprofitable Crowns, such as the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. They are on record of saying that one 
of the first things they would do as a government is sell off STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company). Well the very 
government Crown that last year moved over 750,000 parcels 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I find that very strange coming 
from those benches and from those opposition members who 
represent, for the most part, the bulk of the farmers in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the experience of 
farming and I have a number of relatives still involved in 
farming, and I know that in the critical times of seeding and 
particularly harvest when they have a machinery breakdown 
and they need the parts out of Regina or Saskatoon, they phone 
the dealer. The dealer will put those parts on the bus and they 
get them in town, get them back to their farm, overnight. They 
do that because STC provides that service. And those same 
members over there, who represent those farmers who use that 
service on a regular basis, are suggesting that they would sell it 
off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STC transports, last year, 350,000 passengers 
around Saskatchewan. Many of these people, Mr. Speaker, are 
seniors that would have no other way to get into town and to the 
cities here for medical appointments than using STC. Most of 
those same ridership are represented by those people in the 
opposition benches. And they say the seniors don’t need 
transportation; seniors can find their own way; we’ll sell off 
STC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations are a very, very valuable 
tool to supporting our Saskatchewan economy, to building our 
Saskatchewan economy, and they’re very important to 
providing the services that we enjoy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In any given year, Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations will 
return to the provincial government, to the general revenue 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

 

coffers, some 150 to 200, in some years, $250 million. That’s 
money, Mr. Speaker, that is earned in a competitive business, 
that is earned and paid back to the shareholders, the people of 
Saskatchewan, and paid into the General Revenue Fund. That 
money, Mr. Speaker, is used to provide services to taxpayers of 
this province. 
 
The same time, Mr. Speaker, it plays a very important part in 
the economies of Saskatchewan across the piece — the 
economies of our small towns and of course our cities. Half the 
jobs — half the jobs — in our Crown corporations are located 
in the small towns across this province. Towns like Yorkton and 
Kamsack and Canora and Saltcoats and Langenburg and a 
number of those same communities enjoy, enjoy having a 
Crown corporation employee in their community. 
 
In many cases, Mr. Speaker, that same Crown corporation is the 
local hockey coach or the baseball coach and very much 
involved in the operations in the town, perhaps on town council. 
The very same people that those members over there represent, 
and they say, sell it off; eliminate those jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are saying that the way to the future is to 
follow the lead of the Liberal government in BC. And the 
Leader of the Sask Party has been quoted as having said that 
one of the initiatives by the Gordon Campbell government in 
BC that he really thinks should be followed up on, and he 
would follow up on it, would be to establish a core review 
services committee, and it would follow the same lead and the 
same trends and I would imagine the same results of what has 
happened in BC. 
 
Well let’s look at what has happened in BC as a result of the 
Campbell plan so far: hospitals closed; nurses and other 
front-line workers laid off; schools closed; classroom sizes up 
and teachers laid off; and a 25 per cent cut to all public 
programs; 11,000 jobs lost in the public service; 23 per cent 
cutback to early childhood development programs; and a 
training wage that is $2 under the minimum wage for the first 
500 hours of work. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out 
that an employer is simply going to hire a new person for 499 
hours and then lay him off so that they can pay them $2 less 
than the minimum wage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of that, on top of that in BC, Gordon 
Campbell raised the gasoline tax by 3.5 cents a litre. Raised it 
by 3.5 cents a litre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the very same things that the Sask Party says they 
would do, we have seen in action in British Columbia. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the things that have been going on in British Columbia 
has even drove Gordon Campbell to drinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to harken back for a few moments to 
some comments made in this House in the last session. I 
remember very clearly, reiterated again today, but I remember 
very clearly the comments made by the member from Swift 
Current in the last session when he stood in his place and said, 
for the last 60 years Saskatchewan people have had it wrong; 
for the last 60 years, Saskatchewan people have been all wrong. 
 

For the most part of that 66 years — I believe about 44 of those 
66 years — Saskatchewan has been governed by a CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) or an NDP 
government. And the member stands up and says for the last 60 
years Saskatchewan people have had it wrong. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s astonishing to me that the member would stand up 
and say that for 60 years Saskatchewan people have had it 
wrong. 
 
But what was more astonishing was the resounding support he 
got from all of his colleagues on that side of the House. They all 
supported that statement, Mr. Speaker. They all supported that 
statement because the Sask Party is saying it was wrong; it was 
wrong to develop a rural electrification program that brought 
electricity to every small town and farm family across 
Saskatchewan — they said it was wrong. 
 
The Sask Party said it was wrong to develop a grid road system 
that would give every Saskatchewan person the ability to travel 
on an all-weather road. The Sask Party said, Mr. Speaker, it was 
wrong to develop a highway system that has more than twice 
the highway miles of Manitoba and Alberta put together. 
 
The Sask Party says it was wrong to develop an education 
system where every child could receive the best of training they 
need to meet the challenges of the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party says it was wrong to develop a 
medicare system that gives the best in health care services to 
everybody in Saskatchewan; a system where a family’s health 
does not depend on the family’s wealth. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know why the Sask Party is reluctant to 
release their program and their plan to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Because when they do, the Saskatchewan people 
will say that’s the wrong plan, and they will say that the Sask 
Party is the wrong party to govern Saskatchewan and they will 
defeat them resoundingly at the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
stand to . . . pleased, rather, to stand in my place today to 
support the motion put forward by the member from Swift 
Current and seconded by the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. Because, Mr. Speaker, this motion is exactly spelling 
out the truth. This motion reads: 
 

That the Assembly condemns (and yes, it should condemn) 
the current Premier and cabinet for a continuing practice of 
covering up financial losses in its numerous business 
ventures such as SPUDCO and mega bingo despite 
numerous promises in the past to be more forthright over 
such losses. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you would think, Mr. Speaker, that when an 
ex-member of that NDP cabinet — Janice MacKinnon is who 
I’m referring to — most likely went to that cabinet a number of 
times and pleaded with them to change their practices because 
their practices were destroying the economy of this province, 
that they would have listened. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t listen and Ms. MacKinnon did 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

the best thing, she did the right thing, and she quit that 
government, and she went out to work for the people of the 
province in a much more successful way than she could have 
ever done under this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we credit her for that. We credit her for that, 
Mr. Speaker, because she did, as I said, the right thing. She 
knew what she was doing. The members that were left in that 
cabinet from the Romanow regime, the few of them that could 
have stood by her did not stand by her. They left her hanging 
out to dry just like they’re leaving the member from Melville 
hanging out to dry right at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it quite amazes me that the member from Melville 
stands in this Assembly and he defends the mega bingo fiasco 
over and over again. He defends it every day that he stands in 
here and he’s trying to answer — although he’s not answering 
very well — to the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy on her 
questions. 
 
That member from Melville, a Reform member of the federal 
government — well the Reform Party of Canada rather — that 
member stands here today defending NDP socialist policies that 
interfere with private business, that cover up, when in fact 
they’re destroying private business and enterprise in this 
province. He stands there and he would cover up for this NDP 
government. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be quite 
interesting to see what happens to that member in the next 
provincial election. 
 
(16:30) 
 
It’s really hard to fathom that somebody with his philosophy, 
his ideas, and what he put forward prior to joining the NDP 
government, how in goodness’ name he can stand in this 
Assembly today and he can stand there defending the NDP who 
have covered up all of these financial losses that we have heard 
about so many times. 
 
The times that we’ve heard about these, Mr. Speaker, are mega 
times, too many times. Not only mega bingo, but many other, 
other risky ventures that this government has pumped millions 
and millions of taxpayers’ dollars into and have lost for the 
people of this province. It’s disgraceful, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
disgraceful. 
 
The people of this province need to have a government who is 
responsible, a government who hears them, a government who 
is speaking to them clearly about leaving private enterprise do 
business. 
 
They’re speaking to this NDP government and mark my words, 
Mr. Speaker, as these members touch on their constituencies, 
I’m sure they’re hearing over and over again about the fiascos 
that this government has put forward, have just been engaged 
in, and how they have in fact wasted many of the taxpayers’ 
dollars that are needed for things like the arts; that are needed 
for things like the sound stage; that are needed for things that 
are put forward by the Child Advocate in this, the recent report 
that was tabled today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you cannot waste millions and millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars through these risky, foolish adventures 

overseas and in Canada and expect to have money left over for 
the main services that the people of the province need. 
 
We cannot expect and they should not expect to have money for 
things like health and education and highways. We cannot 
expect that the social services needed in this province, some of 
them which the Child Advocate is speaking of in this very 
report, are going . . . The money is not going to be there, Mr. 
Speaker, as long as they continue the practice of their 
government, of the NDP government of this province. 
 
They insist and they keep insisting that they can get into 
business ventures when they know nothing about business. Mr. 
Speaker, this is truly a disgrace. 
 
When you look at the many, many press releases that have been 
put out, the many articles in the paper, the many, many letters 
that I know have been written to that NDP government as well 
as to the Saskatchewan Party opposition, of people who state 
clearly that their businesses have basically been thwarted and 
very unsuccessful because of measures the NDP government 
has taken — things like competing, competing in private 
enterprise in this province. How do we expect that the economy 
of the province, Mr. Speaker, is going to improve? We know, 
everyone knows, that small business generates revenue and 
income. We know that wealth creation is due to small- and 
medium-sized businesses. We know that. And we know that’s 
where the tax money comes in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know, and it should be clear to the members opposite at this 
time, that there is no way in God’s green earth that you can 
have the government thinking that they can be in business and 
have a successful economic climate in this province. It’s just 
not going to happen. 
 
What we do need, Mr. Speaker, is a Saskatchewan Party 
government who understands how very vitally important it is 
for a government to get out of the way of business, a 
government to stop risky ventures where they’re losing all kinds 
of money. 
 
We need to have a Saskatchewan Party government that 
appreciates and understands, Mr. Speaker, that we cannot have 
the services that are so direly needed by the people of this 
province — some of them as I mentioned that have been 
outlined by the Child Advocate, things like mental health 
services, Mr. Speaker. We have had a report, not very long ago, 
that denounces the mental health services that are being 
provided within not only our penal institutions, but mental 
health services for our youth in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not have the money for those things as 
long as we have an NDP government who doesn’t understand 
that you must have private enterprise going on in order to 
generate those tax revenues to make sure things like that 
happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do commend the Child Advocate on her report. 
I’m not going to go into the report because I want to stay on 
track with the motion put forward. But I must point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Child Advocate does talk about standards of 
care in residential custody facilities. 
 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

 

And here is the concern. Residential open and closed custody 
facilities operated by Corrections and Public Safety are not 
required to comply with the basic facility standards outlined in 
The Residential Services Act. Services at these facilities are 
provided in accordance with a set of policies. However, the 
existing policies have not been consistently applied across the 
facilities. 

 
Another mention that the Child Advocate makes, Mr. Speaker, 
is educational experiences of youth in custody facilities. She 
states here that there are concerns regarding how The Education 
Act is applied for youth who are attending an educational 
program in a secure custody facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many problems within the system. Those 
problems are due to the fact that there has not been due 
diligence and monitoring of how the system . . . services are 
going at this time. We cannot and will not have improvement in 
those areas as long as we have a government intent on blowing 
our tax money outside of this province and then covering up, 
Mr. Speaker; having the audacity with one issue after another to 
cover up for what they have done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is not only financially bankrupt 
but they are morally bankrupt. We talk . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
member here just a minute ago from . . . I believe it was . . . just 
a minute, I want to make sure that I have the correct member — 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld was speaking about . . . oh, I don’t 
know if it was Saskatoon Idylwyld. It was one of them across 
the way anyways, Mr. Speaker. He was talking about the 
Saskatchewan Party’s treatment of public service employees. 
My, my, my. 
 
This is really very interesting how that member could stand in 
this House and point across to members of the official 
opposition who are not in government at the time and accuse us 
of not treating public service employees properly. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think they’d better have a quick look in the mirror. 
How dare that member, how dare he stand in this legislature 
and talk about treatment of public service employees after the 
cover, the great big cover-up this NDP government has recently 
done regarding sexual harassment issues with public employees 
in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those public employees in Prince Albert, those 
women who were violated and whom this government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I take my word very 
seriously and when I say that I didn’t know about a report, I 
certainly do not appreciate the member getting up and implying 
a cover-up. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Is the member up for a point of 
order? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s a point of personal privilege. 
 
The Speaker: — I would advise the member if she wishes to 
bring up a point of personal privilege, it should be done through 
procedures that are identified in the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly. 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I will 
go on. The point I was making was that the public service 
employees in Prince Albert, as well as many around this 
province, have come to the Saskatchewan Party oppositions 
many time complaining about the treatment bestowed upon 
them, the rude treatment bestowed upon them, as well as other 
citizens of Saskatchewan, by the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have . . . Sometimes we tend to forget the 
NDP’s record of multi-million dollar losses in this province. 
My colleagues have outlined quite clearly the $28 million lost 
in the SPUDCO fiasco, the $100 million in ISC, the 10 . . . or 
$80 million in Australia, SHIN about $80 million. And there’s 
this public taxpayers’ money going into ethanol; we’re 
wondering about how that’s going to turn out exactly. The mega 
bingo situation with $6.2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes we tend to forget where this all started. 
I recall the Channel Lake issue that we debated in this 
legislature somewhere around 1996. Well there too, Mr. 
Speaker, was between 10 and $15 million of loss and another 
cover-up. 
 
And just recently within the last day or so we’ve heard about 
$10 million in a losing venture with Coachman Insurance, 
involving SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and the 
minister of SGI should be somewhat concerned about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not only bingo but we have many, many 
other, many other areas of concern in this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say now is the reason that this 
is such a shame, all of this is such a shame is because of this 
amount of money being spent, being wasted, being squandered 
when people of this province have to listen every time that there 
is a budget address from this Assembly. They sit and they 
watch their TVs and they’re waiting to hear if there is some of 
the hard-earned tax dollars that they have spent that the 
provincial government is using and should be using, I guess 
expeditiously and properly, to provide them with the services 
that they need for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t happened to the satisfaction of people 
of Saskatchewan because we have heard from seniors in this 
province the budget before this one, seniors in this province 
who have complained about an increase in their long-term care 
fees. Those members and people of Saskatchewan rightfully 
deserve to have services, deserve to have I guess you would say 
sensible fees, so that they can live in this province and get the 
care they need. 
 
We also hear, Mr. Speaker, about increased utility rates for 
seniors on fixed income. Those seniors are very unhappy and 
they’re even more unhappy when they hear about these fiascos 
going on, money-losing ventures, and cover-up on top of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of the money that’s been squandered 
and spent, one of the real grievous issues as far as I’m 
concerned is the fact that we don’t have yet in this province 
services provided — at least certainly not adequate services — 
for youth who need to have addiction services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had a report come down from a 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

committee of this legislature to deal with children involved in 
the sex trade and to try to provide alternatives. There were 49 
recommendations that came with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
those recommendations, a couple of them have certainly been 
implemented, although I’m not too sure on the status, for 
instance, of the safe house in Regina. I’m not at all sure that 
there have been many other measures taken. We do have 
legislation that I’m very happy to see that will certainly punish 
and warn johns about the fact that it’s a bit dangerous for them 
to be taking advantage and violating young people on the 
streets. 
 
Those things were good; those things were a way that 
government acted properly. But, Mr. Speaker, we have many 
other issues in this province surrounding the needs of youth. We 
have educational issues, we have issues with needs like I 
mentioned of addiction centres. We have issues about safe 
houses being needed throughout the province. We have issues 
about different kinds of monies that could be spent for 
recreation facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had White Spruce at Yorkton as a drug and 
alcohol treatment centre for youth in this province. This was no 
doubt a very costly venture but, Mr. Speaker, it was working. 
There were youth that left White Spruce, after counselling for 
them and their parents and their families, that went home and 
started a new life. Well, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP 
government, White Spruce was closed down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, oftentimes when this NDP government has to 
answer to their budget, what they would constantly say is, well 
what do you expect; there’s just not enough money for 
everything. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s priorities that count here 
now, and it’s good management and common sense. And part 
of that good management and that common sense would be for 
the government to understand what their role is in society today. 
Their role is not to get into business; their role is not to take 
taxpayers’ money and risk it all and lose it all in ventures 
overseas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister across the way there from Yorkton is 
talking, chirping away here at me. He’s the minister that has 
been responsible just in this most recent budget for increasing 
crop insurance rates 52 per cent. Well just recently, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I have had letters, many letters from my constituents 
who are very, very upset about this. They talk about the waste 
of taxpayers’ dollars, and they tell us in those letters that they 
are not happy and that they can hardly wait for an election. And 
they’re wondering why that minister has no compassion for 
farmers. They’re wondering if that minister doesn’t understand 
the situation going on in rural Saskatchewan. And I guess 
they’ve deducted, actually many years ago, that that is not the 
case. They don’t have any compassion. They don’t have any 
caring or understanding for what happens. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The nightmarish waste, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the province 
of Saskatchewan, the people of this province have experienced, 
just goes beyond explanation. People cannot understand how 
the NDP does not learn, why they can’t understand that this is 
enough. Enough is enough of that. Ms. MacKinnon understood 
that. Ms. MacKinnon left that crew over there, and she did the 

right thing. She moved on. She definitely moved on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I think of the kind of 
monies that have been squandered by this government, one can 
only imagine how prosperous the province could have been. 
How very much we could have been in this province on our 
way to prosperity had there been a different government in 
place here that did not squander, would not squander taxpayers’ 
dollars. One cannot imagine what the losses to the people of 
this province have caused in anguish and misery. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have time and time and time again 
seen the same thing over and over. And the people of this 
province are sitting there, and they’re saying, why is this 
happening? Just the other day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I went to 
one community in my constituency, to a town council meeting. 
These people are asking to be considered for some approval of 
their Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure grant in order to 
improve their water facilities. Well, there’s just not enough 
money. There’s not enough money. Why? Because this 
government is not putting the kind of money into it that they’ve 
actually promised to the people of the province they’re going to 
do. 
 
And so one there are . . . one community after the other who 
have been set aside, who have been sidelined because this 
government chooses to spend our taxpayers’ dollars overseas, 
wasting and losing money, and then covering it up. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many, many, many questions. 
There are many, many headlines, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one after 
the other. “Government accused of cover-up in the potato 
industry” “SPUDCO accused of hiding sale of GM potatoes,” 
“Serby admits government failed to follow due diligence.” We 
have loads of those. “SGI pumps $9 million into Ontario 
insurance firm — another loss,” “MacKinnon lashes out at 
NDP.” 
 
Over and over, many of the same sort of headlines that we have 
heard time after time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of these 
indicating that this government, this NDP government, is in big 
trouble. More than big trouble, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re 
running for the hills right now. They’re continuing covering up, 
and we will find out most likely about more cover-ups. 
 
We see the front benches here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we 
look at each one of those, many of those who most likely do 
know of more cover-ups. Well I’d advise them today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to do the honourable thing, to try to save their 
hides — at least a little — and start divulging to the public what 
else is out there that is going to cause them shame. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not support the amendment as put 
forward by the NDP, but I am proud to support the motion that 
has been put forward by our member from Swift Current. And I 
shall take my place this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and would 
certainly invite any of the members across if they’d like to fill 
up the time right now with their reply to their own amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
this afternoon to enter into this debate. And, Mr. Speaker, I 



April 15, 2003 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

 

want to talk a little bit about the debate that the members 
opposite are having. 
 
They talk about investment loss. And the captains of industry 
over there talk about how that this government is covering up 
losses in investments. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk 
about some of the investments that this government’s made and 
the benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 1992 to 2002 the Crown 
corporations returned to this province $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker 
— $1.2 billion. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the course of 
investing in this province to build an economy, to expand the 
base of industry in this province, there have been some 
investments that haven’t realized the return that we would have 
liked them to return. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, any corporation in North America 
doesn’t get 100 per cent return on their investments, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They take risks you wouldn’t bet. And in some 
you’re going to make good returns, and in some you may make 
marginal returns, and in others you may have difficulty getting 
a return, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But as a whole in the investment, you want to make money 
across your entire investment portfolio. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this government has made $1.2 billion through its 
Crown corporations to return to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about some 
of the investments they keep talking about outside 
Saskatchewan. If we want to just look at investment in North 
America or — pardon me — outside North American, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The Crowns are $100 million ahead, returned 
$100 million to the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If we’re 
looking just outside of Canada, they’ve returned $84 million to 
this province for reinvestment in hospitals, in health care, and 
education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And if we’re looking outside of 
Saskatchewan, they’ve returned $89 million to this province to 
reinvest in the things we need for our children. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what this is about. It’s about 
investing to build an economy within Saskatchewan, and it’s 
about investing for the people of Saskatchewan to continue to 
build a prosperous province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they want to talk about negativity, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I want to read just an article written on 
February 26, 2003 about the Sask Party and how they portray 
things. And it says, I quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

And last week, the Saskatchewan Party’s release on Spudco 
fell just shy of fabrication. At issue was a quote attributed 
to Crown Investments Corp. Minister Maynard Sonntag 
made June 13, 2000 during budget estimates debate. The 
Saskatchewan Party release quoted Sonntag as saying: 
“With respect to Con-Force in the construction of . . . 
buildings, they were jointly owned. The ownership was 
Con-Force 51 per cent and ourselves 49 per cent. 
 
Here’s what Sonntag actually said (Mr. Deputy Speaker) 
according to Hansard: “First of all, with respect to 
Con-Force in the construction of the buildings, they were 

jointly owned but they were entirely debt-financed and 
SaskWater, the Spudco division of SaskWater subsequently 
bought Con-Force out.” 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

Not only did the Opposition completely reconstruct 
Sonntag’s quote, but it did so to make the point that there 
needed to be a special (investigation) legislative 
investigation of Sonntag for “lying to the Legislature.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, this reporter goes on to say: 
 

That’s not just irresponsible . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members, there were 
words said that I could not make out clearly. But if the member 
did in his quotation or in his statement, use words that were 
unparliamentary, I would ask him to just simply withdraw those 
remarks. But I ask members to calm down so I can hear what’s 
going on in here. 
 
Mr. Yates: — This was a direct quote, and I’m sorry if 
anything offended the members. But, Mr. Speaker, I just want 
to finish off . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . a quote by Murray 
Mandryk in the newspaper article February 26, 2003; a direct 
quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. We just, I think, 
should refrain from trying to do things indirectly and making 
implications. Even if they are direct quotes, it’s probably not 
the best idea to use language that is unparliamentary even if 
some other people are using it in other places because the idea 
here is, members, that members are immune from prosecution, 
we in this legislature. It’s supported by our concept — and very 
treasured concept — of freedom of speech, and we ought to not 
abuse those freedoms. So that is why I ask the member to 
withdraw that statement. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the statement and 
apologize to the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude my remarks as the hour is 
wrapping up with some references to the Sask Party policy 
manual, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
referring to the Saskatchewan Party health care resolution. In 
HE9705 it says: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party will explore partnerships in the 
health care field with private sector providers to address the 
issue of waiting lists . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, I go on to talk about Saskatchewan Party Crown 
corporations resolutions. Resolution CC9701 says: 
 

Privatization will be considered if it is demonstrated that 
continued government ownership is no longer in the best 
interest of taxpayers. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

Privatization of a Crown utility will be accomplished 
through an initial public share offering made available first 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2003 

 

to residents of Saskatchewan (Mr. Speaker). 
 
Mr. Speaker, they go on to support many, many things that the 
people of Saskatchewan aren’t aware of their positions on, Mr. 
Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to just talk about one other 
thing. Mr. Speaker, the “. . . Saskatchewan Party government 
will support the subcontracting of appropriate government 
agency services to private sector businesses.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important in the debates in 
the weeks ahead that the members opposite let the people of 
Saskatchewan know what they stand for prior to an election. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to expose what they stand 
for. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, looking at the hour and the time of day, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move at this time we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Stewart.......................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................579 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................579 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................580 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................580 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................580 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................580 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................601 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Energy Performance Contracting Service 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................580 
 Quebec Election Results 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................580 
 Investment Future Forum 
  Jones...........................................................................................................................................................................................581 
 St. Gabriel School Drama Performance 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................581 
 Saskatchewan Curlers Win National Title 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................581 
 Great Weekend for Canadian Sports 
  Huyghebaert..............................................................................................................................................................................582 
 Electrostatic Precipitators at Boundary Dam 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................582 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Information Services Corporation 
  Wall ....................................................................................................................................................................................582, 586 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................582 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................584 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................585 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................587 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................587 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................587 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Government Approach to Business Ventures 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................587 
  Bakken .......................................................................................................................................................................................594 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................599 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................602 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................605 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................608 
 


